Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Emmeline Blanche Wells

I journeyed from my home in Massachusetts to Nauvoo, Illinois, with a company of Latter-day Saints. Among them was the late Jacob Gates and his wife. Sister Gates talked a great deal about the Prophet Joseph, and when she saw that I was specially interested in him, she promised me that she would introduce me to him on our arrival in Nauvoo.

As we neared our destination, the Elders were full of enthusiasm at the thought of seeing the Prophet again. But not once in all the conversation did I hear a description of his personal appearance. I had not formed any idea of him, except of his wonderful power.

At last the boat reached the upper landing, and a crowd of people came to the bank of the river. As we stepped ashore. I could see one person who towered above the others; in fact. I did not see distinctly any others. His majestic bearing, so entirely different from anyone I had ever seen (and I had seen many superior men), was more than a surprise. It was as if I beheld a vision; I seemed to be lifted off my feet, to be as it were walking in the air, and paying no heed whatever to those around me. I made my way through the crowd. Then I saw this man whom I had noticed, because of his lofty appearance, shaking hands with all the people, men, women and children. Before I was aware of it he came to me, and when he took my hand, I was simply electrified—thrilled through and through to the tips of my fingers, and every part of my body, as if some magic elixir had given me new life and vitality. I am sure that for a few minutes I was not conscious of motion. I think I stood still. I did not want to speak, or be spoken to. I was overwhelmed with indefinable emotion.

Sister Gates came to me and said, "I'll introduce you to the Prophet Joseph now. He is here."

I replied, "I don't want to be introduced to him."

She was astonished, and said curtly, "Why, you told me how desirous you were of meeting him."

I answered, "Yes, but I've seen him and he spoke to me."

"But he didn't know who you were."

I replied, "I know that, but it doesn't matter."

Sister Gates walked away without another word of explanation. I was in reality too full for utterance. I think had I been formally presented to the Prophet, I should have fallen down at his feet. The one thought that filled my soul was, I have seen the Prophet of God. He has taken me by the hand. This testimony has never left me in all the "perils by the way." For many years, I felt it too sacred an experience even to mention.

I heard him preach all his last sermons and frequently met him and shook hands with him. I always felt in my inmost soul that he was indeed a man unlike all others.

In the Prophet, I recognized the great spiritual power that brought joy and comfort to the Saints; and withal he had that strong comradeship that made such a bond of brotherliness with those who were his companions in civil and military life, and in which he reached men's souls, and appealed most forcibly to their friendship and loyalty.

He possessed, too, the innate refinement that one finds in the born poet, or in the most highly cultivated intellectual and poetical nature. This extraordinary temperament and force combined is something of a miracle and can scarcely be accounted for except as a "heavenly mystery" of the "higher sort."

He was beyond my comprehension. The power of God rested upon him to such a degree that on many occasions he seemed transfigured. His expression was mild and almost childlike in repose; and when addressing the people, who loved him it seemed to adoration, the glory of his countenance was beyond description. At other times, the great power of his manner, more than of his voice (which was sublimely eloquent to me), seemed to shake the place on which we stood and penetrate the inmost soul of his hearers, and I am sure that then they would have laid down their lives to defend him. I always listened spellbound to his every utterance—the chosen of God in this last dispensation.

Young Woman's Journal, XVI, (December 1905), pp. 554-556.
