Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

"Aunt" Jane James

Yes, indeed. I guess I did know the Prophet Joseph. That lovely hand! He used to put it out to me. Never passed me without shaking hands with me, wherever he was. Oh, he was the finest man I ever saw on earth. I did not get much of a chance to talk with him. He'd always smile, always just like he did to his children. He used to be just like I was his child.

I think about Brother Joseph and Sister Emma and how good they was to me. When I went there I only had two things on me, no shoes nor stockings, wore them all out on the road. They was looking for us, because I wrote them a letter. There was eight of use my mother and two sisters and a brother and sister-in-law, and we had two children, one they had to carry all the way there, and we traveled a thousand miles.

Sister Emma, she come to the door first, and she says, "Walk in, come in all of you."

She went upstairs, and down he comes and goes into the sitting room and told the girls that they had there that he wanted to have the room this evening, for we have got company come.

I knew it was Brother Joseph, because I had seen him in a dream. He went and brought Dr. Bernhisel down and Sister Emma. and introduced him to every one of us, and said, "Now, I want you to tell me about some of your hard trials. I want to hear of some of those hard trials."

And we told him. He slapped his hands. "Dr. Bernhisel." he said, "what do you think of that?"

He said, "I think if I had had it to do I should not have come; would not have had faith enough."

Brother Joseph kept our folks a whole week until they got homes, and I was left. He came in every morning to see us and shake hands and know how we all were. One morning, before he came in, I had been up to the landing and found all my clothes were gone. Well, I sat there crying. He came in and looked around.

"Why, where's all the folks?"

"Why, Brother," I says, "they have all got themselves places. But I hain't got any place," and I burst out a-crying.

"We won't have tears here," he says.

"But," I says, "I have got no home."

"Well, you've got a home here," he says. "Have you seen Sister Emma this morning?"

"No, sir," I says.

So he started out and went upstairs and brought Sister Emma down and says, "Here's a girl who says she's got no home. Don't you think she's got a home here?"

And she says, "If she wants to stay here."

And he says, "Do you want to stay here?"

"Yes, sir," says I.

"Well, now," he says, "Sister Emma, you just talk to her and see how she is."

We had come afoot, a thousand miles. We lay in bushes, and in barns and outdoors, and traveled until there was a frost just like a snow, and we had to walk on that frost. I could not tell you, but I wanted to go to Brother Joseph.

I did not talk much to him, but every time he saw me he would say, "God bless you," and pat me on the shoulder.

To Sister Emma, he said, "Go and clothe her up, go down to the store and clothe her up."

Sister Emma did. She got me clothes by the bolt. I had everything.

Brother Joseph was tall, over six feet; he was a fine, big, noble, beautiful man! He had blue eyes and light hair, and very fine white skin.

When he was killed, I liked to a died myself. If it had not been for the teachers, I felt so bad. I could have died, just laid down and died. I was sick abed, and the teachers told me, "You don't want to die because he did. He died for us, and now we all want to live and do all the good we can."

Things came to pass what he prophesied about our colored race being freed. Things that he said has come to pass. I did not hear that, but I knew of it.

After I saw him plain, I was certain he was a prophet because I knew it. I was willing to come and gather, and when he came in with Dr. Bernhisel I knew him. Did not have to tell me because I knew him. I knew him when I saw him back in old Connecticut in a vision, saw him plain and knew he was a prophet.

This is the gospel of Jesus Christ, and there will never be any other on earth. It has come to stay.

Young Woman's Journal, XVI (December 1905), pp. 551-553.
