Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Joseph Lee Robinson

When we arrived at Nauvoo, my brother Ebenezer had a house for us not very far from the residence of Joseph Smith.

The Prophet's voice was like the thunders of heaven, yet his language was meek and his instructions edified much. There was a power and majesty that attended his words and preaching that we never beheld in any man before. He truly had been educated pertaining to the kingdom of God. He was highly charged with the Holy Ghost, which was his constant companion.

I will mention several of his sayings: "There is not one key or one power to be bestowed on this church to lead the people into the celestial kingdom but I have given you, shown you and talked it over with you; the kingdom is set up and you have the perfect pattern and you can go and build up the kingdom, go in at the celestial gate, taking your train with you."

Instructions to the Quorum of the Twelve before his death: "Though we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel or introduce any order of things other than those things which ye have received and are authorized to receive from the First Presidency, let him be accursed."

Again, I heard the Prophet say, "If I should reveal the things that God has revealed to me, there are some on this stand that would cut my throat or take my heart's blood."

I once asked the Prophet what my tithing was. He said, "Your tithing is one-tenth of what you have when you commence to pay tithing, and after that one-tenth of your increase annually."

The Lord gave us a beautiful daughter. But she became afflicted and had fits, and it seemed we could not stop them. We had heard the Prophet Joseph say that if any member of a family was sick and the head of the family would fast three days, the sick should get better. Knowing him to be a true prophet of God, we believed what he said.

My wife proposed to fast. I replied, "If you think you can stand it nursing a child, I certainly will try it."

I was afflicted with rheumatism in my back and hips, so I had this also to fast and pray for.

The first day was the hardest day for me. The second day came and no eating, but plenty of work. The third day we ate no dinner until supper time. We felt satisfied that our three days' fast was completed. We ate our supper, but as yet there had been no change with the fits on the child or with my lameness. We retired to our bed to rest after saying our prayers as usual, and as the Lord liveth those fits upon our child stopped, and my lameness went entirely away. We received this as a signal favor and a great blessing from the hand of God.

A pioneer company was organized to search out a land of promise for the Latter-day Saints in the West. The Prophet Joseph had been very anxious to get this people into the Rocky Mountains. He said at one time he wanted temples built all over the Rocky Mountains.

Prior to the death of our Prophet, he spoke at length upon the salvation and importance of this government, and mighty and once happy nation, deploring the situation that it was in at the present time, proposing many important improvements in the management and policy of the rulers and lawmaking departments, to save the nation from ruin and utter destruction.

The Journal of Joseph Lee Robinson, pp. 10-13, 16, 19, 30.
