Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Mary Ann Winters

In April, 1843, when our family returned from England to Nauvoo with my stepfather, Parley P. Pratt, Brother Joseph came to the landing to meet the company. He shook hands with our family, took my two little brothers on his knees, and said, "Well, well, Brother Parley, you have come home, bringing your sheaves with you."

The tears rolled down his cheeks. Brother Pratt answered, "Why Brother Joseph, if you feel so bad about our coming, I guess we will have to go back again."

Then a smile went all around. Brother Joseph arose and said, "Come, bring your folks right up to my house."

In August, 1843, there was an excursion down the river to Quincy, Illinois. The mayor of that city had invited the Prophet and some of the leading citizens of Nauvoo to be his guests for the day, and he was at the landing to receive his visitors. Brother Joseph was the after-dinner entertainer. He talked, and the others listened with the greatest attention, and were loath to have him depart.

As we were going home on the little boat, Brother Joseph sat on the upper deck with the company gathered around him listening to his wonderful words. My father sat opposite him, so near that their knees almost touched. I, a little girl, being tired and sleepy, my Pa took me in his arms to rest. Brother Joseph stopped speaking, stooped and took my feet on his knees. When I would have drawn them away, he said, "No, let me hold them; you will rest better."

I stood close by the Prophet while he was preaching to the Indians in the grove by the Temple. The Holy Spirit lighted up his countenance till it glowed like a halo around him, and his words penetrated the hearts of all who heard him. The Indians looked as solemn as eternity.

I saw him on parade at the head of the Nauvoo Legion, looking noble and grand as a leader could do. His commanding presence could be discerned above all others, and all eyes were centered on him, as he rode back and forth giving the commands of his office.

I was at a meeting in the grove on Mulholland Street when Brother Joseph asked the children to bring their Testaments and hymn books and meet there the next Sabbath to have Sunday School. He said, "I don't know as I will be here. I will if I can, but Brother Stephen Goddard will be here and take charge of you. Won't you Brother Goddard?"

I attended two Sabbaths, when those awful days of June, 1844, came and terminated our gathering for that purpose.

Young Woman's Journal, XVI (December 1905), pp. 557-558.
