Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

John F. Bellows

The morning after we arrived in Nauvoo we went to Joseph's Mansion to have an interview with the Prophet. He met us at the door smiling. He put out his hand and shook hands with my father first, then grasped my hand, inviting us to come in. I cannot describe the feelings I had when he grasped my hand. I thought he was the best and noblest man my eyes ever beheld. He led us into the sitting room, where we conversed for over an hour. Joseph and my father did most of the talking. Now and then he would ask me a few questions, and he paid considerable attention to me.

While we were in the Prophet's house, a knock was heard at the door. Joseph opened the door, and there stood two well-dressed men with tall, black stovepipe hats on. One of the men asked if Mr. Smith was in. Joseph said, "Yes, sir, I am the man."

There was silence for a moment, and then Joseph spoke up and said, "Gentlemen, I know what is in your hearts, but you do not know what is in mine; and I know who you are. You are officers from Missouri to arrest me. Wait a minute till I get my hat and I will go with you."

He turned around and made a polite bow and said, "Brother Bellows, please excuse me; call in again."

At this, Father and I followed Joseph out of the door. Joseph and the officers took the lead, and Father and I went on behind until we reached the gate. Here Joseph grasped the two men, one with each arm. This aroused my curiosity. I wanted to see the end, so I followed behind. Joseph led them to where some men were at work on the Nauvoo House. He led them around, and showing them the different rooms explained to them the design of the building. Presently they went inside out of my sight. I stayed there a short time and then returned to my stopping place. I had not been there more than thirty or forty minutes when the news was all over town that the officers from Missouri had come for Joseph and that they could not find him. How he got away from the officers I never learned.

My acquaintance with Joseph the Prophet was of short duration, only a little over a year; but in that short time I saw much of his doings and can say I never saw anything but what was noble and godlike.

The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII, (October 15, 1892), pp. 641-642.
