Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Edwin Rushton (Related by his son)

After sailing from England, our immigrant company reached Nauvoo, April 13, 1843. Father was very anxious to find the members of his family already established there, and hurried towards the town in search of them. He had gone only a short distance when he met a man riding a beautiful black horse. The man accosted him, saying, "Hey, Bub, is that a company of Mormons just landed?"

In much surprise, Father answered, "Yes sir."

"Are you a Mormon?" the stranger continued.

"Yes, sir," Father again answered.

"What do you know about old Joe Smith?" the stranger asked.

"I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God," said Father.

"I suppose you are looking for an old man with a long, gray beard. What would you think if I told you I was Joseph Smith?" the man continued.

"If you are Joseph Smith," said Father, "I know you are a prophet of God."

In a gentle voice, the man explained, "I am Joseph Smith. I came to meet those people, dressed as I am in rough clothes and speaking in this manner, to see if their faith is strong enough to stand the things they must meet. If not, they should turn back right now."

This was Father's introduction to the Prophet.

Father's acquaintance with and admiration for the Prophet grew rapidly, and there developed an intimate friendship between them. The Rushton family often serenaded the Prophet.

After the martyrdom, Father was one of four who took part in the second burial of the Prophet, to preserve the body from the hands of ruthless, designing men. Joseph Smith had prepared a burial vault for the Smith family, and when persecution became alarming he came to Father and requested him, in the event the Prophet was killed, to see that the remains of the Smith family were put into this vault.

When Joseph Smith was on his way to Carthage for the last time, Father was standing near by when Joseph said to his wife, "Emma, can you train my sons to walk in their father's footsteps?"

She answered, "Oh, Joseph, you are coming back."

Father says Joseph asked the same question three times, and that Emma gave the same answer each time. The Prophet then rode away to Carthage and his death.

Edwin Rushton, Pioneer Journals, (no place or date of publication), pp. 2, 3, 5-6.
