Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Sarah M. Pomeroy

My father moved from New York to Nauvoo in the spring of 1843. I was then in my ninth year. The day after our arrival I was out in the yard when a gentleman rode up and inquired for my father, Thomas Colborn. Of course I did not know who it was, but there was something so noble and dignified in his appearance that it struck me forcibly.

My father soon came out and cordially shook him by the hand, and called him Brother Joseph. I knew then it was the Prophet.

It was quite an exciting time just then. The Prophet had been falsely accused of an attempt to murder Governor Boggs of Missouri. Porter Rockwell, a firm friend of Joseph, had been kidnapped and taken to Missouri as an accomplice, and was about to have his trial. Joseph requested my father to lend him a hundred dollars to pay the lawyer who defended Porter Rockwell, and father freely counted out the money.

"This shall be returned within three days, if I am alive," said the Prophet, and departed.

My aunt, Father's sister, was quite wrathful. "Don't you know, Thomas," said she, "you will never see a cent of that money again. Here are your family without a home, and you throw your money away."

"Don't worry, Katie," Father replied, "if he cannot pay it, he is welcome to it."

This conversation was held before us children, and I thought seriously about it. Would he pay it, or would he not? But I had strong faith that he would.

The day came when it was to be paid—a cold, wet, rainy day. The day passed. Night came—9 o'clock, 10 o'clock, and we all retired for the night. Shortly after there was a knock at the door. Father arose and went to it, and there in the driving rain stood the Prophet Joseph.

"Here, Brother Thomas, is the money." A light was struck, and he counted out the hundred dollars in gold.

He said, "Brother Thomas, I have been trying all day to raise this sum, for my honor was at stake. God bless you."

My aunt had nothing to say. She afterwards left the Church.

Young Woman's Journal, XVII (December, 1906), pp. 538-539.
