Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Christopher Layton

We arrived at Nauvoo from Liverpool one very cold morning, April 12, 1843. There stood our Prophet on the banks of the river to welcome us. As he heartily grasped our hands, the fervently spoken words, "God bless you," sank deep into our hearts, giving us a feeling of peace such as we had never known before.

On the following day, the Prophet Joseph called to see us and blessed us.

Brother John Marriott and myself went in with some brethren, to build a house each. But as we thought we were not fairly dealt with, we drew out and told Joseph about it. After counseling and instructing us, he gave us each two and a half acres of land and said, "You shall live to see the day when you can buy out everyone who has oppressed you."

This prophecy has come true, as has all that noble man ever uttered concerning me.

Our Prophet was at this time passing through severe trials and persecutions, but he was unruffled in his calm dignity. His faith was so strong that he knew no fear, and at one time when he was told by his friends that the mob was after him, he calmly replied, "Do not be alarmed; I have no fear and shall not flee I will find friends and the Missourians cannot slay me, I tell you in the name of Israel's God."

On the 16th of June, 1844, Brother Joseph preached to the assembled Saints in the grove east of the Temple (while the rain fell heavily), from the revelation of St. John. After the city had been declared under martial law, the Legion was drawn up in front of the Mansion House and the Prophet, standing upon the framework of a building opposite, addressed them. Drawing his sword, he declared, "I call God and angels to witness that this people shall have their legal rights or my blood shall be spilt upon the ground and my body consigned to the tomb, but if there is one drop of blood shed on this occasion, the sword shall never again be sheathed until Christ comes to reign over the earth. Peace shall be taken from the land which permits these crimes against the Saints to go unavenged."

Autobiography of Christopher Layton (Salt Lake City, 1911), pp. 5-11, 18-21.
