Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Helen Mar Whitney

Joseph was noted for his child-like love and familiarity with children, and he never seemed to feel that he was losing any of his honor or dignity in doing so. If he heard the cry of a child, he would rush out of the house to see if it was harmed.

Near the first of June, 1843, the Prophet invited my father, Heber C. Kimball, to ride with him to give invitations to his friends to take a pleasure trip down to Quincy. I was invited to go along. As we drove up the river a steamer was landing, and a number of strange gentlemen came ashore who had quite a curiosity to see the Prophet. He got out, and in his warm and genial way gave each of them a cordial shake of the hand. As the carriage was about to start away, one of them requested the privilege of riding. After going a few rods he got out. He wished to say that he had ridden with Joseph Smith, whom they styled the "American Mahomet."

We had a most enjoyable trip to Quincy. But on our return trip a heavy thunder storm came up, and Judge Elias Higbee became very ill, so that we were obliged to stop over night at Keokuk. The cabin was small, and the Judge was so sick the majority stayed on deck all night, with umbrellas our only protection from the beating storm. The heat had been very excessive, and being thinly clad, many were made sick. I was among that number.

The Prophet, who was noted for his tender sympathies towards the afflicted, could not rest until he went around and informed himself of the condition of each one who had accompanied him to Quincy, and offered advice. Some he administered to.

The morning of the second day after our return, he called at our house. He recommended some medicine to be given me. His counsel was strictly adhered to, and the result was precisely as he had predicted.

Our city was occasionally visited by Lamanites, and a deputation of Pottawatamie chiefs came to the city to see Joseph Smith in June, 1843. The Prophet had an ox killed for them, and some horses were also prepared for them.

They remembered the kindness of Joseph and his people, and when driven from Nauvoo they made us welcome upon their land, where we were obliged to make our winter quarters.

We had struggles with evil spirits at Winter Quartrs which were something similar to what the Prophet Joseph Smith experienced in Far West, Missouri. He said the devil contended with him face to face, after he had afflicted his little child, claiming that he had the best right to a house which Joseph hadpurchased, it having been previously occupied by some wicked people that the Prophet rebuked the devil in the name of the Lord, and he had to leave the house.

My father also had some contests with the evil spirits when young in years and inexperienced. The Prophet once requested him to relate those occurrences and the vision of evil spirits when he had in England on the opening of the gospel to that people. After doing so, he asked Joseph what all those thing meant, fearing there might be something wrong in him. Joseph's answer was, "No, Brother Heber. At that time, when you were in England, you were nigh unto the Lord. There was only a veil between you and Him. When I heard of it, it gave me great joy, for I then knew the work of God had taken root in that land. It was this that caused the devil to make a struggle to kill you."

Joseph then said the nearer a person approached to the Lord, the greater power would be manifest by the devil to prevent the accomplishment of the purposes of God.

Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, X (December 1, 1881), pp. 97-98; XI (September 15, 1882), p. 58; (October 1, 1882), p. 70; XII (January 1, 1883), p. 144; (March 1, 1883), p. 146; XIV (December 15, 1885), p. 106.
