Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

John M. Bernhisel

Having been a boarder in General Smith's family for more than nine months, with abundant opportunities to contemplate his character and observe his conduct, I have concluded to give you a few of my "impressions" of him. General Joseph Smith is naturally a man of strong mental powers, and is possessed of much energy and decision of character, great penetration and a profound knowledge of human nature. He is a man of calm judgment, enlarged views, and is eminently distinguished by his love of justice. He is kind and obliging, generous and benevolent, sociable and cheerful, and is possessed of a mind of a contemplative and reflective character. He is honest, frank, fearless and independent, and as free from dissension as any now to be found.

But it is in the gentle charities of domestic life, as the tender and affectionate husband and parent, the warm and sympathizing friend, that the prominent traits of his character are revealed, and his heart is felt to be keenly alive to the kindest and softest emotions of which human nature is susceptible.

He is a true lover of his country and a bright and shining example of integrity and moral excellence in all the relations of life. As a religious teacher as well as a man, he is greatly beloved by this people.

Concerning his views on the pre-earth existence of spirits and the arrangements which were then made for sending spirits into this world, the Prophet said: "We were predestined to undergo a probation here, to serve an allotted time on this earth, in order to test our integrity and determine the fact of our faith, and our strength to overcome the wiles and devices of Lucifer, the great prince and power on this earth at the present day."

Joseph Smith also said: "In the future it will become a question of government on earth, and that of the priesthood, being the only perfect order, must necessarily prevail. Melchizedek, to whom Abraham paid his tithes, was a priest of this divine order, which was declared to be without beginning of days or end of years. In other words, that divine order became the word of God, and the revealed will of the Father to the inhabitants of the earth. If obeyed, peace, happiness and union would result, but if absolute obedience was not rendered, anarchy and confusion must necessarily follow. The object of Satan was to prevail over the frailties of mankind that they might continue in their disobedient course and follow his rule. We, being to a certain extent free agents, could select either path.

In every previous dispensation, Lucifer had prevailed and driven the priesthood from the earth. But in this last dispensation the reign of the Son of God and His priesthood was firmly established, nevermore to depart; thus all the inhabitants of the world might partake of the gifts and blessings of God. Our integrity to our Father and His righteousness is the only plan whereby we can save ourselves and acquire 'eternal lives and progression,' which is the greatest blessing God can confer on his faithful sons."

"It is only a question of time," said the Prophet, "a few years, or a few hundred, perhaps, according to our reckoning; but time and space being without limit in the estimation of our Father, the course will be determined in accordance with the 'eternal fitness of things' through His will only. Lucifer's reign of anarchy prevails at present, and the nations are even now arming for the conflict which even they foresee must necessarily ensue. In the cruel desolation of war, men will be slain by hundreds, thousands, and perhaps millions. Their widows and orphans will be compelled to flee to Zion for safety, and it will become the bounden duty of the Elders of Israel to provide for their sustenance and welfare."

"Our present system," said the Prophet, "will eventually resolve itself into a 'united order' in which every member will work not purely for his individual aggrandizement, but with an earnest desire to promote the interests of the kingdom of God on the earth."

Letter of John M. Bernhisel to Governor Thomas Ford, June 14, 1844, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; Washington Franklin Anderson, "Reminiscences of John M. Bernhisel," typewritten manuscript, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, pp. 1-4.
