Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Andrew J. Stewart

Several families of Latter-day Saints from Missouri moved into our neighborhood in Fox River, Iowa, and I began to question them about "Mormonism." Later, two Elders came to my house asking to stay overnight. After several meetings, my wife and I were baptized, on February 18, 1844. Afterwards, the Elders explained that they had been sent by the Prophet to baptize me and my family, and to stay until this mission was accomplished. They then asked me to go to Nauvoo with them to see the Prophet.

After we spent five days in Nauvoo, mostly with the Prophet, he requested me to attend April Conference, be ordained a Seventy and take a mission.

Joseph presented my name to the conference and appointed me to go to New York with Brigham Young on a mission, to stir up the state of New York on politics, for Joseph Smith to be President of the United States.

I returned to Nauvoo, June 10, to find all the people excited over the destroying of the Nauvoo Expositor. I went immediately to the Prophet to learn how and where I was to join Brigham Young. The Prophet said he was glad I had come, but he wanted to change my mission, and take me with him to find a place for the Saints. "For," he said, "the Saints could not build up the Church in the States." They would have to go and find a place in the mountains, where they could find a place to live in peace, and in five years they would not be disturbed or driven away again. He said he had a company made up, but he wanted me, especially, as I had been west on the Indian Land to the Missouri River.

I had a very fine horse the Prophet wanted to buy, and he offered two hundred dollars for it. I told him I would not sell the horse but would make him a present of it. He then asked me if I had other horses to ride and pack, and if I could fit out myself for the trip proposed.

I told him I could, and I was glad to go instead of to New York.

During the time I stayed in the city, I called on the Prophet every day, and was introduced to some of the company who had agreed to go with him. I was surprised that we would have to go into the mountains, or wilderness, and leave that great city and the Temple that was being built. He was eager to get the Temple built and give endowments before we left.

The plan the Prophet proposed was this: I was to go home to Fox River, fifty-five miles west, on the road from Nauvoo to the mountains, take the horse I had given him, and get ready. He would cross over the Mississippi River with a few men, come to my place the first night, and the next night go on, for at that time it was only fifteen miles to the Indian Land boundary which was outside of the United States. He said he would start in about a week, and the company could come on later. This was on June 12, 1844.

I went home, taking the horse with me, and got ready for the trip to the mountains. Later, in the evening of June 22, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and Willard Richards left Nauvoo and crossed the Mississippi River to find the place for the Saints. I heard that the Prophet had crossed the river for the mountains, and expected him every night until I heard that he was martyred.

Scraps from An Old Timer's Journal, written April 5, 1908, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
