Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Gilbert Belnap

After arriving in Nauvoo, June 1, 1844, I went to the residence of the Prophet, where a friend had agreed to meet me. I was introduced to the Prophet, whose mild and penetrating glance denoted great depth of thought and extensive forethought. While I was standing before his penetrating gaze, he seemed to read the very recesses of my heart. A thousand thoughts passed through my mind. I seemed to be transfigured before him. I gazed with wonder at his person and listened with delight to the sound of his voice. My very destiny seemed to be interwoven with his.

I loved his company. The sound of his voice was music to my ears. His counsels were good, and his acts were exemplary and worthy of imitation. His theological reasoning was of God. In his domestic circle, he was mild and forbearing, but resolute, and determined in the accomplishment of God's work. Although opposed by the combined powers of earth, he gathered his thousands around him and planted a great city which was to be the foundation of a mighty empire, and consecrated it to God as the land of Zion. At the same time, he endured the most unparalleled persecution of any man in the history of our country. With a mind that disdained to confine itself to the old beaten track of religious rites and ceremonies, he burst asunder the chains which for ages past had held in bondage the nations of the earth. He soared aloft and brought to light the hidden treasures of the Almighty. He bid defiance to the superstitious dogmas and the combined wisdom of the world, laid the foundation for man's eternal happiness and revived the tree of liberty.

I was frequently called out by the Prophet Joseph to the performance of various duties. There was to be held a convention of anti-Mormons in Carthage. I was required by the Prophet to form one of their number. With a promise of my fidelity to God, he assured me that not a hair of my head should fall to the ground, and if I followed the first impressions of my mind, I should not fail in the accomplishment of every object that I undertook. At times, when to all human appearance inevitable destruction awaited me, God would provide the means of escape.

When first I entered Carthage, I was interrogated by Joseph Jackson, Mike Barns, and Singleton as to what business I had there I replied that I had business at the recorder's office. They being suspicious of deception, went with me to the office. After examining the title of a certain tract of land, many impertinent questions were asked me which I promptly answered. Then a low-bred backwoodsman from Missouri began to boast of his powers in the murder of men, women and children of the Mormon Church, and the brutal prostitution of women while in the state of Missouri. He claimed that he had followed them to the state of Illinois for that purpose.

Without considering the greatness of their numbers, I felt like chastising him for his insolence. Just then, he made a desperate thrust at my bowels with his hunting knife, which penetrated all my clothing without any injury to my person. Nerved as it were with angelic power, I prostrated him to the earth, and with one hand seized him by the throat, and with the other drew his knife.

I afterward sat in council with delegates from different parts of the country and secured the resolutions passed by that assembly. I then returned in safety to Nauvoo, but not without a close pursuit by demons in human shape. I prayed to God that the strength of my horse would hold out in order that I might bear to the Prophet the information which I had obtained. But as I entered Nauvoo, my horse fell on his side in the mud, due to my urging him on to such a tremendous speed. We were entirely out of danger. Covered with mud by reason of the fall, I rushed into the presence of the Prophet and gave him a minute detail of all that had come under my observation during that short mission.

At length the evil day appeared and the dark cloud burst with fury over the Prophet's head. He appeared once more at the head of his favorite legion. They, however, surrendered the public arms and he gave himself a sacrifice for the people. Well I remember his saying, "Although I possessed the means of escape, yet I submit without a struggle and repair to the place of slaughter."

I saw the forms of court and heard the many charges against him, which were refuted by plain and positive testimony.

During that time, he received the promise of protection from Thomas Ford, then governor of the state, that he should go with him to Nauvoo. But the governor went to that place without fulfilling this promise.

After his departure, the few Saints that were left in Carthage were expelled at the point of the bayonet. Not, however, until the Prophet, from the jail window, exhorted them for the sake of their own lives to go home to Nauvoo. I well remember those last words of exhortation, and the long and lingering look on the den of infamy, for I did not consider it safe with such a guard. Thus, the Prophet, his brother Hyrum, Willard Richards, and John Taylor were left alone in the hands of those savage persons.

The afternoon previous to the martyrdom we hurried to Nauvoo to announce the coming of the Prophet, as was agreed by the governor. But with him came not the beloved Prophet, and this soon convinced the people that treachery of the foulest kind was at work.

On his return to Carthage, Governor Ford met George D. Grant bearing the sad news of the slaughter at the jail. Whereupon the cowardly curse arrested Grant and took him back to Carthage, in order to give himself time to escape. Thus, the distance of eighteen miles was traveled over three times before the sorrowful news of the Prophet's death reached his friends.

Autobiography of Gilbert Belnap, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 30-37.
