Hyrum L. Andrus, Helen Mae Andrus, They Knew the Prophet ( 1974)

Dan Jones

In the summer of 1842, I entered into an arrangement with a Mr. Moffat of Augusta, Iowa, to build a boat which we named the "Maid of Iowa." That winter I was baptized at St. Louis. In the spring I took a load of Saints from St. Louis to Nauvoo, where I first saw the Prophet. Patting me on the shoulder from behind, in the midst of the crowd on board, he said, "God bless this little man."

The news of my embracing Mormonism injured my influence as a steamboat captain. Mr. Moffat finally complained to Joseph of sustaining an injury by my embracing "Mormonism." That touched the fibres of his noble and generous soul. When I returned to Nauvoo, Joseph informed me that the unkind conduct of Mr. Moffat had won me his friendship, and that he had concluded to buy Mr. Moffat's interest in the boat, if I would take him for a partner.

On June 12, 1844, Joseph Smith was standing on the portico of the Mansion House, awaiting the remains of my little son who had died, to be brought out to be buried. He was accosted by the sheriff of Hancock County with a writ to appear before a magistrate in Carthage. He expostulated in vain for the privilege of paying the last debt of honor to the sacred dead.

Joseph having been honorably acquitted before Justice D. H. Wells, other attempts were then made to take the Prophet to Carthage. On Monday the 24th, hundreds gathered before the Mansion House early in the morning. In their midst, with head erect, towering above the rest, the Prophet stood gazing alternately on the devoted city and its much loved citizens. He listened to the entreaties of the throng not to give himself up or he would be murdered. A few brave-hearted men proposed to escort him to the West. Others, up north would have him go, while a fearless tar (sailor) proffered him a safe passage on a steamboat to whither he would go. A smile of approbation lit up the Seer's countenance. His lovely boys, hanging on to his skirts, urged on the suite and cried, "Father, O Father don't go to Carthage. They will kill you."

Not least impressive were the pleadings of his mother: "My son, my son, can you leave me without promising to return? Some forty times before have I seen you from me dragged, but never before without saying you would return; what say you now, my son?"

He stood erect, like a beacon among roaring breakers, his gigantic mind grasping still higher. The fire flashed in his eye. With hand uplifted on high, he spoke, "My friends, nay, dearer still, my brethren, I love you. I love the city of Nauvoo too well to save my life at your expense. If I go not to them, they will come and act out the horrid Missouri scenes in Nauvoo. I may prevent it. I fear not death. My work is well nigh done. Keep the faith and I will die for Nauvoo."

With some thirty or forty others who chose to follow, Joseph and Hyrum ascended the hill. When near the sacred spot—the Temple—the Prophet paused. He looked with admiration first on that, then on the city, and remarked, "This is the loveliest place and the best people under the heavens. Little do they know the trials that await them."

On the 25th, I carried some documents to Carthage, to be used in the Prophet's trial. There I heard Wilson Law, in endeavoring to get a warrant against Joseph for treason, declare that in preaching from Daniel 2:44, the Prophet said that the kingdom referred to therein was already set up, and that he (Joseph) was the king over it! (Wonder if Daniel himself was not more treasonable for predicting it?) The defendants, having given bail to appear at the quarter sessions, were released to return to Nauvoo.

But before the Prophet could leave I went downstaris, in Hamilton's Hotel, where I overheard the leaders of the mob say that they did not expect to prove anything against him., but that they had eighteen accusations, and as one failed they would try another to detain him there. Joseph Jackson replied, when I told them to desist from their cruel persecutions, that they had worked too hard to get "Old Joe" to Carthage to let him get out of it alive. Pointing to his pistols, he said, "The balls are in there that will decide his case."

I repaired upstairs and informed Joseph Smith what I had heard. He said, "They are going to take me to prison without a guard; you will not leave me, will you?"

To this I replied that, to the contrary, I had come to die with him.

Now the rush of heavy treads up the stairs drew our attention, and the stentorian voice of an officer demanded the prisoners. The "Carthage Greys" then escorted them to prison.

Being dark, the Prophet asked me to get inside the prison somehow. Colonel Markham was on one side, with a hickory club, while I was on the other, outside the guard. We parried off the guns and bayonets of the drunken rabble who tried to break the ranks to stab the prisoners. The prison doors being open before a light was produced, I rushed between the guard and the door and found my way into the farthest cells unhindered, followed by the attendants.

Amusing conversation on various interesting topics engaged us till late. After prayer, which made Carthage prison into the gate of heaven for a while, we lay promiscuously on the floor.

After breakfast, we were removed to an upstairs room, the entrance to which was up a flight of stairs from the front prison door, which was guarded by soldiers, by alternate four hours. The Prophet appeared extremely anxious, by his injunctions to the messengers who left for Nauvoo, to send out testimonies to exonerate his brother Hyrum.

A portion of us were alternately preaching to the guards, at which the Prophet, Patriarch and all took turns, and several were relieved before their time was out because they were proselyted to the belief of the innocency of the prisoners. Frequently they admitted they had been imposed upon the tales of the mobs, and more than once was it heard, "Let us go home, boys, for I will not fight against these men."

About the middle of the afternoon, the sheriff came to take the prisoners to the courthouse to be tried, followed by drunken mobs armed and threatening. The Prophet put on his hat and, followed by all of us, walked boldly into their midst. He politely locked arms with the worst mobocrat he could see, whereas Hyrum patterned after him by clenching the next worse one, followed by Elders Richards and Taylor, escorted by a guard. The mobocrat's side was the best protection from the leveled rifles of the surrounding bushhiders. Colonel Markham on one side, myself on the other, with our "switches" parried off the crowding rabble.

In the evening, they were again escorted to the prison amidst the whooping, hallooing and denunciations of infuriated thousands, some of whom tauntingly upbraided him for not calling a legion of angels to release him, and to destroy his enemies, inasmuch as he pretended to have miraculous power. Others asked him to prophesy when and what manner of death awaited him, professing themselves to know all about it. In fact, the situation forcibly reminded us of the taunting and jeering of the Jews to our holy and meek Redeemer, so similar the words and actions of the mob proved their spirits to be.

During the evening, the Patriarch read and commented upon extracts from the Book of Mormon, the imprisonments and deliverance of the servants of God for the gospel's sake. Joseph bore a powerful testimony to the guards of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the gospel, the ministration of angels, and the establishment of the kingdom of God again upon the earth, for the sake of which he was at that time incarcerated in the prison, and not because he had violated any law of God or man.

Late, we retired to rest, Joseph and Hyrum on the only bedstead, while four or five lay side by side on mattresses on the floor, Dr. Richards sat up writing until his last candle left him in the dark. The report of a gun, fired close by, caused Joseph (whose head was by a window) to arise, leave the bed, and lay himself by my side in close embrace. Soon after, Dr. Richards retired to the bed; and while I thought all but myself and heaven asleep, Joseph asked in a whisper if I was afraid to die.

"Has that time come, think you? Engaged in such a cause, I do not think that death would have many terrors," I replied.

"You will see Wales and fulfill the mission appointed you ere you die," he said.

I believed his word and relied upon it through the trying scenes which followed. All the conversation evinced a presentiment of an approaching crisis. At midnight I was awakened by heavy treads, as of soldiery close by, and I heard a voice under the window whispering, "Who, and how many shall go in?"

Upon arising, I saw a large number of men in front of the prison, and gave the alarm as they rushed up stairs to our door. We had taken the precaution to fortify ourselves by placing a chair, the only defence, against the door, which one of the brethren seized for a weapon, and we stood by the door awaiting their entrance. Hearing us, they hesitated when Joseph, with a "Prophet's voice," called out, "Come on, ye assassins. We are ready for you, and would as willingly die now as at daylight."

Hearing this, they retired again and consulted, advanced and retreated alternately, evidently failing to agree, until morning.

Early in the morning of the 27th of June, the Prophet requested me to descend and interrogate the guard as to the cause of the intrusion upon us in the night. The sergeant, whose name was Worrell, I think, of the Carthage Greys, replied in a very bitter spirit, "We have had too much trouble to bring 'Old Joe' here to let him ever escape alive, and unless you want to die with him you better leave before sundown. You are not a d - - n bit better than him for taking his part."

I endeavored to cool him down, but he insisted the more, "You'll see that I can prophesy better than 'Old Joe', that neither he nor his brother, nor anyone who will remain with them, will see the sun set today."

Joseph and Hyrum were all this time listening unobservedly at the head of the stairs, and on my return they desired me to go and inform Governor Ford of all that I had heard; which I did. The governor replied, "You are unnecessarily alarmed for your friends' safety, sir. The people are not that cruel."

I returned to the prison and sought to enter, but the guard would not let me in. I was then handed a letter from Joseph Smith, with a request to take it to Mr. Browning, of Quincy, forthwith. The guard being aware of the letter, informed the mob "that Joe had sent orders to raise the Nauvoo Legion to rescue him." This drew the mob around me, and they demanded the letter, which I utterly refused to give to them. When some would take it by force, others objected. The mob disagreed among themselves. While some said I should not leave the place alive, others swore that I should not stay there longer. At this, the former party said that if I left then I should not reach Nauvoo alive, and about a dozen started off with rifle in hand to waylay me where the road runs through the woods. Having previously ordered my horse, which was already in the street, I took advantage of their disagreement. No sooner was I in the saddle than both spurs were to work, and a race horse and rider were enveloped in a cloud of dust, with balls whistling by me. That night I heard of the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

Dan Jones, "The Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith," written January 20, 1855, handwritten manuscript in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
