Crowned in Charity and Power written by Amber Richardson

The summer I turned 16 my ward traveled to Salt Lake City for our annual youth retreat. The pinnacle of the trip was a few hours spent inside the temple where we performed proxy baptisms together. The font—delicately wrought in white and gold—reminded me of the signature golden doorknobs outside of the temple. There weren’t any beehives inside the baptistry though.

The font was elevated above the benches where we sat, and behind it there were two walkways that led into dressing rooms. Stephanie, who sat on the bench beside me, whispered, “She looks like an angel.” I looked up. JJ Woolstenhulme, one of our Young Women’s leaders, stood in her long white dress on a walkway. Comfortable with herself, she stood with an elongated, straight spine. She was a tall, slender woman, with a mane of rich brown curls.

JJ had always been exceptionally beautiful, but in that moment, there in that holy space, I noticed for the first time the love that was behind her eyes. It seemed to permeate her entire being. There was a royalty in that love, and a new and better kind of beauty.

Ten years later I found myself looking for the queenly maternal love I had seen in JJ Woolstenhulme that day. Until recently my search was fueled by desperation. Desperation because I thought I was looking for something external—the love of a Mother god. In pain I asked, “Where is my Mother? Why can’t I feel my Mother’s love?” And then one day I opened to Moroni 7:45.

“And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in inquity, but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.”

To my still-lasting surprise, I began seeing her in the scriptures. I saw Her in charity, in metaphors, in Her son, and particularly in Her daughters. God is Love, and so is She I’ve learned. I began to believe that She was inside of me, and inside of all of Her daughters; we were created in Her image after all! In this sense we are all queens, or at least queens-in-training.

As I’ve continued my search I recently began wondering about queens. There are so many in the scriptures. Was there something I could learn from scriptural she-monarchs about the Queen of Heaven?

Esther

“And charity suffereth long, and is kind”

Esther came to mind first when I was putting together my list of scriptural queens, and no surprise. She is not only the most well known queen in holy writ, but arguably one of the most well known women. I thought I knew her story quite well. But right from the get go I discovered something unfamiliar to me; Esther’s given name was Hadassah.

Hadassah was a Jew in exile who lived with her cousin and surrogate father, Mordecai, in Persia during the reign of King Ahasuerus. You probably know the story. The king banished his first wife, and then selected Esther to be his new queen from among the beautiful virgins he added to his harem following the divorce.

Racial tensions must have already been high considering that Mordecai instructed Esther not to “show her people or her kindred” once she entered the palace. It was probably at this time that Esther took her new name. Hadassah was a Jewish name, which means myrtle tree, but Esther was Persian. Esther means star.

Stars, of course, never stop shining through day or night. But to our eyes, they appear to only shine against a blackened sky. In that sense the darker it gets the more visible a star becomes.

There were many long, dark nights in Esther’s story.

She became queen during the 7th year of Ahasuerus’ reign. Five years later Haman approached the King and convinced him to authorize the genocide order against the Jews. We know only a little about what transpired during those five years. But we do know that throughout them Esther continued to conceal her true identity, and was confined to life within the palace.

That must have been incredibly lonely for her. To communicate exclusively with Mordecai in stolen looks and the occasional letter. And to hear in snippets and whispers about the injustices her people faced. How powerless she must have felt.

At the end of the 12th year of Ahasuerus’ reign he signed Haman’s genocide order. Interestingly, it wouldn’t go into effect until 11 months from the day it was signed. The language of the proclamation was deeply disturbing. It commanded “all people” in the kingdom to be “ready against that day” to “kill and to cause to perish all Jews… and to take the spoil of them for a prey.”

While I’ve never awaited an impending doom of the magnitude Esther sat across from, I have anticipated diagnoses, surgery dates, rejections, and other life-altering deadlines. It takes a very specific kind of faith to successfully pass through months and months of anxiety all while inching closer to something devastating.

Fortunately, Esther didn’t have to suffer through the entire 11 months. Mordecai wrote to Esther and sent her some of the most inspiring and persuasive words of the Old Testament: “And who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?” In an act of stunning faith Esther responded and asked for all the Jews in Shushan to fast with her for three days. At the end of the fast Esther bravely entered the king’s hall, and after two days of feasting Esther revealed her true self and her cause to King Ahasuerus.

After she singled out Haman as the Jews’ oppressor Esther swayed the king to reverse his order. Finally, a full three months after he had signed the order, the King issued a new proclamation. In it, he “granted the Jews to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish all the power of the people… that would assault them.”

On the 13th day of the 12th month, the Jews did defend themselves. By royal decree of Esther the feast of Purim was instituted on that day to forever commemorate the liberation of her people. The scriptures say of this event “the Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour.” And so they did thanks to Esther, their queen and star.

There’s an interesting tradition among followers of Judaism. They believe that Esther was the foretold subject of Psalms 22, because Psalms 22 is supposed to be sung to a tune entitled “The Star of the Morning.” While I subscribe to the Christian interpretation—that Psalms 22 was written about Jesus Christ—I see such beauty in the Jewish tradition.

I like thinking of Esther as the morning star, a celestial body so radiant it shines through the night right up through the first moments of dawn. The morning star signals the coming entrance of the sun, which is something Esther did for her people. Through her glorious kindness and selflessness Esther set the stage for another redeemer who would follow her—the Savior of us all.

Vashti

“and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own”

No mention of queens in the Book of Esther would be complete without reference to Queen Vashti. Like many women in the scriptures, Vashti often gets a bad rap. Vashti was King Ahasuerus’ former wife—before he married Esther. Within some religious circles Vashti’s decision to disobey her husband has been interpreted as the pride before the fall—the fall being her ultimate banishment. She is often depicted as vain, envious, and only interested in her own welfare. But I think there’s room for an alternative interpretation. “And in those days… the king made a feast unto all the people that were present in Shushan… seven days in the court of the garden of the king’s palace… On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded… the seven chamberlains… to bring Vashti the queen before the king with her crown royal, to shew the people and the princes her beauty: for she was fair to look on.”

So, quick recap. The king and his princes had been drinking for an entire week. And when the king was “merry with wine” (not a good state of rational thinking for anyone) he decided to bring his attractive wife before his drinking partners, so that the whole group could ogle her together.

Is it any wonder that Vashti did not go?

“But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king’s commandment by his chamberlains: therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger burned in him… Then the king said to the wise men, What shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to the law, because she hath not performed the commandment of the King Ahasuerus?”

The king’s wisemen reasoned that Vashti was a threat to the king, as her example— if followed by all the women of the kingdom—would cause an uproar. Imagine if all the women of the kingdom disobeyed their husbands as Vashti did! The words of the wisemen “pleased the king” and so the king did banish his wife, and sent out a proclamation that “every man should bear rule in his own house.”

The Old Testament (at least in the KJV) doesn’t give us more insight into Vashti than that. But as Mormons we do have modern prophets and apostles. Check out these words from Gordon B. Hinckley:

"Our behavior in public must be above reproach. Our behavior in private is even more important. It must clear the standard set by the Lord. We cannot indulge in sin, let alone try to cover our sins. We cannot gratify our pride. We cannot partake of the vanity of unrighteous ambition. We cannot exercise control, or dominion, or compulsion upon our wives or children, or any others in any degree of unrighteousness.”

I like to believe that King Ahasuerus experienced a change of heart down the road, but I also like to believe that in this moment he did the wrong thing. It’s okay for characters in the scriptures to be multi-dimensional. Queen Vashti undoubtedly was too! I don’t know much about her weaknesses or failures, but I do know that in her decision not to appear before her husband she set a great example for all queens-in-training who would one day be walking in her footsteps.

She respected herself.

Deborah

“is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil”

In the days of Deborah there were no kings in Israel (Judges 17:6). Instead judges ruled the land. Deborah may not have been a queen, but she was the political equivalent of one. She was a judge, and I should probably mention that her name means “bee.” She is remembered in the scriptures as a prophetess, and for at least two good reasons.

During Deborah’s reign as judge, her people were again oppressed. This time wickedness had landed them under the King of Canaan’s thumb for 20 years. One day Deborah invited Barak, an Israelite military leader, to come visit in her home near Mount Ephraim.

Deborah told Barak, “The Lord God of Israel [has] commanded saying go and draw toward Mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men… And I will draw unto thee… Sisera… and I will deliver him into thine hand.” (Judges 4:6-7)

Sisera was the enemy, the Canaanite military leader, and the scriptures say he had “chariots and a multitude” behind him. This was Deborah’s first prophecy—that Barak and the men who followed him would be successful. But it came with a charge. He had to confront Sisera.

But wait. Deborah was a woman, right? When I got to this point in the story I was convinced that Barak would never believe her. Which made Barak’s response all the more surprising. “If thou wilt go with me, I will go. But if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go,” he said.

What?

“I will surely go with thee,” Deborah replied. And then came her second prophecy. “[But] the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman.”

Yep, you read that right. Deborah would go into battle with Barak, but not without informing him beforehand that he wouldn’t be the ultimate hero of this story. That honor would go to a woman.

What follows can read as very barbaric by our twenty-first century standards. Barak’s army met Sisera’s multitudes at the edge of the river. Sisera and his army fled at the sight of Barak and his 10,000. They ran to an encampment for safety, and there Sisera spent the night in the tent of Heber the Kenite. Heber’s wife, Jael, played the perfect host until Sisera fell asleep. As he slumbered she drove a stake (one of the huge nails that kept the tent in the ground) through his head.
