TRANSGRESSION AND THE FALL.

     Article 2.--We believe that men will be punished for their own
     sins, and not for Adam's transgression.

TRANSGRESSION AND ITS RESULTS.

1. Man's Free Agency.--The Church holds and teaches as a strictly scriptural doctrine, that man has inherited among the inalienable rights conferred upon him by his divine Father, absolute freedom to choose the good or the evil in life as he may elect. This right cannot be guarded with more jealous care than is bestowed upon it by God Himself; for in all His dealings with man, He has left the mortal creature free to choose and to act, with no semblance of compulsion or restraint, beyond the influences of paternal counsel and loving direction.[119] True, He has given commandments, and has established statutes, with promises of blessings for compliance and dire penalties for infraction; but in the choice of these, God's children are untrammeled. In this respect, man is no less free than are the angels and the Gods, except as he has fettered himself with the bonds of sin, and forfeited his power of will and force of soul. The individual has as full a measure of liberty to violate the laws of health, the requirements of nature, and the commandments of God in matters both temporal and spiritual, as he has to obey all such; in the one case he brings upon himself the sure penalties that belong to the broken law; as in the other he inherits the specific blessings and the added freedom that attend a law-abiding life. Obedience to law is the habit of the free man; 'tis the transgressor who fears the law, for he brings upon himself deprivation and restraint, not because of the law, which would have protected him in his freedom, but because of his antagonism to law.

  [119] See Note 1.

2. The predominant attribute of justice, recognized as part of the Divine nature, forbids the thought that man should receive promises of reward for righteousness, and threats of punishment for evil deeds, if he possessed no power of independent action. It is no more a part of God's plan to compel men to work righteousness, than it is His purpose to permit evil powers to force His children into sin. In the days of Eden, the first man had placed before him commandment and law,[120] with an explanation of the penalty which would follow a violation of that law. No law could have been given him in righteousness had he not been free to act for himself. "Nevertheless thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee, but remember that I forbid it,"[121] said the Lord God to Adam. Concerning His dealings with the first patriarch of the race, God has declared in this day, "Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself."[122]

  [120] Genesis ii, 17; Pearl of Great Price, Moses ii, 27-29; iii,
  15-17.

  [121] Pearl of Great Price, Moses iii, 17.

  [122] Doctrine and Covenants, xxix, 35.

3. When the brothers Cain and Abel brought their sacrifices before the Lord, the elder one became angry because his offering was rejected; then the Lord reasoned with Cain, and endeavored to teach him that he must expect results of his actions to follow in kind, good or evil, as he might elect:--"If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door."[123]

  [123] Genesis iv, 7.

4. A knowledge of good and evil is essential to the advancement which God has made possible for His children to achieve; this knowledge can be best gained by actual experience, with the contrasts of good and its opposite before the eyes; therefore has man been placed upon the earth subject to the influence of good and wicked powers, with a knowledge of the conditions surrounding him, and the heaven-born right to choose for himself. The words of the prophet, Lehi, are particularly explicit: "Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself, save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other.... Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself."[124]

  [124] II Nephi ii, 16 and 27; x, 23. See also Alma iii, 26; xii,
  31; xxix, 4, 5; xxx, 9; Hel. xiv, 30.

5. Alma, another Nephite prophet, in speaking of those who had died, said they had gone "that they might reap their rewards, according to their works, whether they were good or whether they were bad, to reap eternal happiness or eternal misery, according to the spirit which they listed to obey, whether it be a good spirit or a bad one; For every man receiveth wages of him whom he listeth to obey, and this according to the words of the spirit of prophecy."[125]

  [125] Alma iii, 26-27.

6. Samuel, the converted Lamanite, upon whom the spirit of the prophets had fallen, admonished his wayward fellows in this wise: "And now remember, remember my brethren, that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge, and He hath made you free; He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and He hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death."[126]

  [126] Helaman xiv, 30-31.

7. When the plans for creating and peopling the earth were under discussion in heaven, Satan sought to destroy the free agency of man, by obtaining power to force the human family to do his will, promising the Father that by such means he would redeem all mankind, and that not one of them should be lost.[127] This proposition was rejected, while the original purpose of the Father,--to use persuasive influences of wholesome precept and sacrificing example with the inhabitants of the earth, then to leave them free to choose for themselves, was agreed upon, and the Only Begotten Son was chosen as the chief instrument in carrying that purpose into effect.

  [127] Moses iv. 1; see also Abraham iii, 27-28; and "Jesus the
  Christ," ch. ii.

8. Man's Responsibility for his individual acts is as complete as is his agency to elect for himself. The natural result of good deeds is happiness; the consequence of evil is misery; these follow in every man's life by inviolable laws. There is a plan of judgment[128] divinely fore-ordained, by which every man will be called to answer for his deeds; and not for deeds alone but for his words also, and even for the thoughts of his heart. "But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment."[129] These are the words of the Savior Himself. "And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love no false oath: for all these are things that I hate, saith the Lord."[130] John the Revelator was permitted to learn in vision something of the scenes connected with the last judgment; he says: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works."[131]

  [128] Matt. x, 15; xi, 22; II Peter ii, 9; iii, 7; I John iv, 17.

  [129] Matt. xii, 36.

  [130] Zech. viii, 17.

  [131] Rev. xx, 12, 13.

9. The judgment of God is not always made to follow immediately the acts of men; good deeds may not be at once rewarded, evil is rarely peremptorily punished; and this is according to Divine wisdom; were it appointed otherwise, the test of individual nature, and the trial of human faith, for which purposes this mortal probation was primarily ordained, would be greatly lessened; for the certainty of immediate pleasure or pain would almost universally determine human acts to secure the one and to avoid the other. Judgment, therefore, is postponed, that every one may fully prove his nature, the good man increasing in righteousness, and the evil doer possessing opportunity of repentance and reparation before the great and terrible day. On rare occasions, speedy judgment of a temporal nature has been executed, the physical results of worldly blessing for good,[132] and calamity for evil deeds[133] following swiftly upon the acts. Whether such retribution entirely satisfies the claims of justice, or a further visitation of judgment is to take place beyond this world, matters not. Such acts are exceptional in the Divine administration.

  [132] Job xlii, 10-17.

  [133] Numbers xii, 1-2; 10-15; xv, 32-36; xvi; xxi, 4-6; I Sam.
  vi, 19; II Sam. vi, 6-7; Acts v, 1-11.

10. It is the prerogative of Jesus Christ[134] to judge the children of men, and He will do it as His own purposes, which are likewise the purposes of His Father, may be best served. John records the words of Christ: "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son; that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father."[135] And Peter, while expounding the gospel to the devout Gentile, Cornelius, declared concerning Jesus Christ, that "it is He which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead."[136] Of the dread fate of the wicked reserved for the judgment day, many prophets have borne record[137] and the presiding Judge of that awful tribunal has given in His own words descriptions[138] so vivid and forceful, as to leave no shadow of doubt that every living soul will be called to acknowledge the record, and to accept the results of his acts. The Lord's words and those of His prophets are unequivocal, that He is no respecter of persons,[139] and that any species of favor foreign to justice is unknown to Him. This judgment none but the unrepentant wicked need fear; to the righteous it is a time of triumph.[140]

  [134] John v, 22-27; Acts x, 42; xvii, 31; Rom. ii, 16; II Cor. v,
  10; II Tim. iv, 1, 8; Doc. and Cov. cxxxiii, 2.

  [135] John v, 22.

  [136] Acts x, 42.

  [137] Dan. vii, 9; II Thess. i, 7, 8; III Nephi xxvi, 3-5; Doc.
  and Cov. lxxvi, 31-49; 103-106.

  [138] Matt. xxv, 31-46; Doc. and Cov. i, 9-12.

  [139] Acts x, 34, 35; Rom. ii, 11; Eph. vi, 9; Colos. iii, 25.

  [140] II Tim. iv, 8.

11. Sin.--What is the nature of sin? To this question the Apostle John replies, "Sin is the transgression of the law."[141] In the original language of the Bible records, many words occur for which our single term sin is used, all however conveying the common idea of opposition to the Divine will.[142] As God is the embodiment of purity and perfection, such opposition is a rebellion against the principles of advancement, and an acceptance of the practices that lead to degradation. Sin is any condition, whether consisting in omission of things required, or in commission of acts forbidden, which tends to prevent or hinder the development of the human soul. As a righteous course leads to eternal life, so sin tends toward the darkness of the second death. Sin was introduced to the world by the arch-fiend Satan;[143] yet it is by Divine permission that mankind is brought in contact with sin, the contrast between evil and good thus being learned.

  [141] I John iii, 4.

  [142] See Note 2.

  [143] Pearl of Great Price: Moses iv, 4; Genesis iii.

12. According to the technical definition of sin, it consists in the violation of law, and in this strict sense sin may be committed inadvertently or in ignorance. It is plain, however, from the scriptural doctrine of human responsibility, and the unerring justice of God, that in his transgressions as in his righteous deeds, man will be judged according to his ability to comprehend law. To him who has never been made acquainted with a higher law, the requirements of that law do not apply in their fulness. For sins committed without knowledge,--that is, for laws violated in ignorance, a propitiation has been provided in the atonement wrought through the sacrifice of the Savior; and sinners of this class do not stand condemned.

13. Nephi, prophesying to the ancient inhabitants of the western continent, taught them this doctrine:--"Where there is no law given, there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment, there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation, the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him; For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death and hell and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone which is endless torment; and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of Israel."[144] And then, in contrast with the lot of those who are thus pardonable, the prophet adds:--"But wo unto him that has the law given; yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state!"[145] This is in strict agreement with the teachings of Paul to the Romans, "For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law."[146] And the word of modern scripture is to the same effect, for we are told through recent revelation to the Church, that among those who are to receive the blessings of redemption are "they who died without law."[147] These will include the heathen nations, whose redemption is promised, with the added declaration that "they that knew no law shall have part in the first resurrection."[148]

  [144] II Nephi ix, 25-26.

  [145] The same, paragraph 27.

  [146] Rom. ii, 12.

  [147] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 72.

  [148] Doc. and Cov. xiv, 54. See p. 404, Note 4.

=14. Punishment for Sin.--As rewards for righteous deeds are proportionate to deserving acts, so the punishment prescribed for sin is made adequate to the offence.[149] Punishment is inflicted upon the sinner, for disciplinary and reformatory purposes, and in support of justice. There is nothing of vindictiveness or of desire to cause suffering in the Divine nature; on the contrary, our Father is cognizant of every pang, and permits such to afflict for beneficent purposes only. God's mercy is declared in the retributive pains which He allows, as in the blessings of peace which issue from His hand. It is scarcely profitable to speculate as to the exact nature of the spiritual suffering imposed as punishment for sin. Comparison with physical pain,[150] such as the tortures of fire, in a sulphurous lake, serve to show that the human mind is incapable of comprehending the depth of these dread penalties. The sufferings entailed by the awful fate of condemnation are more to be feared than are any possible inflictions of purely physical torture; the mind, the spirit, the whole soul is doomed to suffer, and the extent of the torment no man knoweth.

  [149] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 82-85; lxxxii, 21; civ, 9; lxiii, 17;
  II Nephi i, 13; ix, 27; xxviii, 23.

  [150] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 36, 44; Jacob vi, 10; Alma xii, 16-17;
  III Nephi xxvii, 11-12.

15. Consider the word of the Lord regarding those whose sin is the unpardonable one, whose transgression has carried them beyond the present horizon of possible redemption; those who have sunk so low in their wickedness as to have lost the power and even the desire to attempt reformation.[151] "Sons of Perdition" is the terrible designation by which they are known. These are they who, having learned the power of God, afterward renounce it; those who sin wilfully, in the light of knowledge; those who open their hearts to the Holy Spirit, and then put the Lord to a mockery and a shame by denying Him; and those who commit murder, wherein they shed innocent blood;[152] these are they of whom the Savior has declared that it would be better for them had they never been born.[153] These are to share the punishment of the devil and his angels--punishment so terrible that the knowledge is withheld from all except those who are consigned to this dread doom, though a momentary glance at the awful picture is permitted to some.[154] These sinners are the only ones over whom the second death hath power, "Yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord."[155]

  [151] See Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 26, 32, 43.

  [152] Doc. and Cov. cxxxii, 27.

  [153] John xvii, 12; II Thess. ii, 3; Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 32.

  [154] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 45-48.

  [155] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 38-39.

16. The Duration of Punishment.--As to the duration of such punishment, we may take assurance that it will be graded according to the sin; and that the popular interpretation of scriptural passages to the effect that every sentence for misdeeds is interminable, is entirely false.[156] Great as is the effect of this life upon the hereafter, and terrible as is the responsibility of opportunities lost for repentance, God holds the power to pardon beyond the grave. And yet the scriptures speak of eternal and endless punishment. Any punishment ordained of God is eternal, for He is eternal.[157] His is a system of endless punishment, for it will always exist as a place or condition prepared for disobedient spirits; yet the infliction of the penalty will have an end in every case of willing repentance and attempted reparation. And repentance is not impossible in the spirit world.[158] Yet, as seen, there are some sins so terrible that their consequent punishments are not made known to man;[159] these extreme penalties are reserved for the "Sons of Perdition."

  [156] Doc. and Cov. xix, 6-12; lxxvi, 36, 44.

  [157] Doc. and Cov. xix, 10-12.

  [158] I Peter iii, 18-20; iv, 6; Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 73. See p.
  119.

  [159] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 44.

17. The false doctrine that the punishment to be visited upon the erring souls is endless, that every sentence for sin is of interminable duration, must be regarded as one of the most pernicious results of unenlightened sectarianism. It is but a dogma of unauthorized and erring churches, at once unscriptural, unreasonable, and revolting to one who loves mercy and honors justice. True, the scriptures speak of everlasting burnings, eternal damnation, and the vengeance of eternal fire,[160] as characteristics of the judgment provided for the wicked; yet in no instance is there justification for the inference that the individual sinner will have to suffer the wrath of offended justice forever and ever. The punishment in any case is sufficiently severe without the added and supreme horror of unending continuation. Justice must have her due; but when "the uttermost farthing" is paid, the prison doors shall open and the captive be free. But the prison remains, and the law prescribing punishment for offences will not be repealed.

  [160] Matt. xviii, 8; xxv, 41, 46; II Thess. i, 9; Mark iii, 29;
  Jude 7.

18. So general were the ill-effects of the commonly-accepted doctrine, unscriptural and untrue though it was, regarding the endless torment awaiting every sinner, that even before the Church had been formally organized in the present dispensation, God gave a revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, touching this matter, in which we read:--"And surely every man must repent or suffer; for I, God, am endless: wherefore I revoke not the judgments which I shall pass, but woes shall go forth, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, yea to those who are found on my left hand; nevertheless it is not written that there shall be no end to this torment, but it is written endless torment. Again it is written eternal damnation ... for behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand, is endless punishment, for Endless is my name; wherefore, eternal punishment is God's punishment. Endless punishment is God's punishment.[161]"

  [161] Revelation given March, 1830; Doc. and Cov. xix, 4-12.

19. Satan.--We have had occasion to refer frequently to the author of evil among men. This is Satan,[162] the adversary or opponent of the Lord, the chief of all evil spirits, called also the Devil,[163] Beelzebub,[164] or the Prince of Devils, Perdition,[165] and Belial.[166] The figurative appellations Dragon and Serpent are applied to Satan, when reference is made to his fall.[167] We learn from the revealed word[168] that Satan was once an angel of light; he was then known as Lucifer, a Son of the Morning, but his uncontrolled ambition prompted him to aspire to the glory and power of the Father, to secure which he made the unjust proposition to redeem the human family by compulsion; failing in this purpose, he headed an open rebellion against the Father and the Son, drawing a third of the hosts of heaven into his impious league.[169] These rebellious spirits were expelled from heaven, and have since followed the impulses of their wicked natures by seeking to lead human souls to their own condition of darkness. They are the Devil and his angels. The right of free agency, maintained and vindicated by the fateful strife in heaven, prevents the possibility of compulsion being employed in this fiendish work of degradation; but the powers of these malignant spirits to tempt and persuade are used to their utmost limits. Satan tempted Eve to transgress the law of God;[170] it was he who imparted the secret of murder to the fratricide, Cain.[171]

  [162] Job i, 6-22; ii, 1-7; Zech. iii, 1-2.

  [163] Matt. iv, 5, 8, 11; I Peter v, 8.

  [164] Matt. xii, 24.

  [165] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 26.

  [166] II Cor. vi, 15.

  [167] Rev. xii, 9; xx, 2.

  [168] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 25-27.

  [169] Doc. and Cov. xxix, 36-37; see also Pearl of Great Price:
  Moses iv, 3-7; Abraham iii, 27-28; "Jesus the Christ," pp. 8, 9.

  [170] Genesis iii, 4-5, and Pearl of Great Price: Moses iv, 6-11.

  [171] Pearl of Great Price: Moses v, 29-33.

20. Satan exerts a mastery over the spirits that have been corrupted by his practices; he is the foremost of the angels who were thrust down, and the instigator of the ruin of those who fall in this life; he seeks to molest and hinder mankind in good efforts, by tempting to sin; it may be by imposing sickness,[172] or possibly death. Yet in all these malignant doings, he can go no farther than the transgressions of the victim may enable him, or the wisdom of God may permit him to go, and he may at any time be checked by the superior power. Indeed, even the operations of his utmost malice may be turned to the accomplishment of Divine purposes. The scriptures prove to us that the days of Satan's power are already numbered,[173] his doom has been pronounced, and in the Lord's own time he will be completely overcome. He is to be bound during the millennial reign,[174] and after that thousand years of blessed peace, he will be loosed for a little season; then his defeat will be made complete, and his power over the children of God will be entirely destroyed.

  [172] Luke xiii, 16; Job i.

  [173] John xii, 31; xvi, 11.

  [174] Rev. xx, 1-10.

THE FALL.

21. Our First Parents in Eden.[175]--The crowning scene of the great drama of creation was the forming of man in the image of his spiritual Father, God.[176] For the reception of the first man, the Creator had specially prepared a choice region of earth, and had embellished it with natural beauties calculated to gladden the heart of its royal possessor. "The Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden,[177] and there he put the man whom he had formed."[178] Soon after man's advent upon the earth the Lord created for him a companion or help-meet, declaring that it was not good that man should be alone,[179] Thus, male and female, Adam and his wife Eve, were placed in the Garden. They had been given dominion "over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth."[180] With this great power were associated certain special commands, the first of which in point of importance was that they "be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it;" then, that they refrain from eating or even touching the fruit of a certain tree, the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, which grew in the midst of the Garden, though of all other fruits they were permitted to freely partake. The words of God concerning this command and its penalty are:--"And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying, of every tree in the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; nevertheless thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee, but remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die."[181]

  [175] Read Genesis, chapters ii and iii; Pearl of Great Price:
  Moses iii, iv: Abraham v, 7-21.

  [176] Genesis i, 26; Pearl of Great Price: Moses ii, 27.

  [177] See Note 3.

  [178] Genesis ii, 8-9.

  [179] Genesis ii, 18; Pearl of Great Price: Moses iii, 18, 21-24.

  [180] Genesis i, 28; Pearl of Great Price: Moses ii, 28; Abraham
  iv, 28.

  [181] Pearl of Great Price: Moses iii, 16-17; see also Genesis ii,
  16-17.

22. The Temptation to disobey this command soon came. Satan presented himself before Eve in the Garden, and, speaking by the mouth of the serpent, questioned her about the commands which God had given respecting the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Eve answered that they were forbidden even to touch the fruit of that tree, under penalty of death. Satan then sought to beguile the woman, contradicting the Lord's statement, and declaring that death would not follow a violation of the Divine injunction; but that, on the other hand, by doing that which the Lord had forbidden, she and her husband would become like unto the gods, knowing good and evil for themselves. The woman was captivated by these representations; and, being eager to possess the advantages pictured by Satan, she disobeyed the command of the Lord, and partook of the fruit forbidden. She feared not evil, for she knew it not. Then, telling Adam what she had done, she urged him to do likewise.

23. Adam found himself in a position that impelled him to disobey one of the requirements of God. He and his wife had been commanded to multiply and replenish the earth. Adam was still immortal; Eve had come under the penalty of mortality; and in such dissimilar conditions, the two could not remain together, and therefore could not fulfill the Divine requirement. On the other hand, Adam would be disobeying another command by yielding to his wife's request. He deliberately and wisely decided to stand by the first and greater commandment; and, therefore, with a full comprehension of the nature of his act, he also partook of the fruit that grew on the Tree of Knowledge. The fact that Adam acted understandingly in this matter is affirmed by the scriptures. Paul, in writing to Timothy, explained that "Adam was not deceived; but the woman, being deceived, was in the transgression."[182] The prophet Lehi, in expounding the scriptures to his sons, declared "Adam fell that man might be, and men are that they might have joy."[183]

  [182] I Timothy ii, 14. See Note 8.

  [183] II Nephi ii, 25.

24. The Tree of Life.--There was another tree of special virtues in Eden; its fruit insured life to all who ate of it. While Adam and Eve lived in innocent immortality, this tree had not been forbidden them; the celestial fruit indeed was fitting food for their sinless state. Now that they had transgressed, however, now that the Divine decree had issued, fixing death as their lot, it was not proper that the fruit of the Tree of Life should be longer within their reach. They were, therefore, expelled from the Garden, and cherubim with a flaming sword guarded the way, that man might not return in an unregenerate state. By the act of transgression, our first parents acquired a knowledge, which in their condition of pristine innocence they had not possessed,--the experimental knowledge of good and evil. The result of the Fall could have been of none but ill effect had the fallen ones been immediately restored to a condition of immortality, without repentance, without atonement. In the despair that followed their realization of the great change that had come upon them, and in the light of the knowledge gained at such cost as to the virtues of the fruit that grew on the Tree of Life, it would have been but natural for them to seek the seeming advantages of an immediate escape, by partaking of the celestial food. It was in mercy that they were deprived of the means of so doing.

25. The words of the Creator are unmistakable as to the necessity of banishing His first earthly children from Eden:--"And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever: Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man: and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden cherubim, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life."[184]

  [184] Gen. iii, 22-24; Pearl of Great Price: Moses iv, 31.

26. Alma, the Nephite prophet, comprehended the result that would have followed had Adam and his wife eaten of the Tree of Life; he thus explained the matter:--"Now we see that the man had become as God, knowing good and evil; and lest he should put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat and live forever, the Lord God placed Cherubim and the flaming sword, that he should not partake of the fruit; And thus we see, that there was a time granted unto man to repent, yea, a probationary time, a time to repent and serve God. For behold, if Adam had put forth his hand immediately, and partook of the tree of life, he would have lived forever, according to the word of God, having no space for repentance; yea, and also the word of God would have been void, and the great plan of salvation would have been frustrated."[185]

  [185] Alma xlii, 3-5.

27. The Immediate Result of the Fall was the substitution of mortality, with all its attendant frailties, for the vigor of the primeval deathless state. Adam felt directly the effects of transgression, in finding a barren and dreary earth, with a sterile soil, instead of the beauty and fruitfulness of Eden. In place of pleasing and useful plants, thorns and thistles sprang up; and he had to labor arduously under the conditions of physical fatigue and suffering, to cultivate the soil that he might obtain necessary food. Upon Eve fell the penalty of bodily infirmity; the pains and sorrows, which since have been regarded as the natural lot of womankind, came upon her, and she was made subject to her husband. Having now lost their sense of former innocence, they became ashamed of their nakedness, and the Lord made for them garments of skins. And upon both the man and the woman was visited the penalty of spiritual death; for in that very day they were banished from Eden, and cast out from the presence of the Lord. The serpent, having served the purposes of Satan, was made a subject of Divine displeasure, being doomed to crawl forever in the dust, and to suffer from the enmity which it was decreed should be placed in the hearts of Eve's children.[186]

  [186] See Note 4.

28. Atonement was Provided for.--God left not His now mortal children without hope. He gave other commandments to Adam, requiring him to offer sacrifices in the name of the Only Begotten Son, and promising redemption unto him and all his descendants who would comply with the conditions prescribed. The opportunity of winning the victor's reward by overcoming evil was explained to our parents, and they rejoiced. Adam said, "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." Eve was glad and declared, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient."[187]

  [187] Pearl of Great Price: Moses v 10-11; see Note 6.

29. The Fall came not by Chance.--It would be unreasonable to suppose that the transgression of Eve and Adam came as a surprise to the Creator. By His infinite fore-knowledge, God knew what would be the result of Satan's temptation to Eve, and what Adam would do under the conditions. And further, it is evident that the Fall was foreseen, to be a means whereby man could be brought face to face with both good and evil; that of his own agency he might elect the one or the other, and thus be prepared by the experiences of a mortal probation for the exaltation provided in the glorious plan of his creation:--"For behold, this is my work and my glory, to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man;"[188] thus spake the Lord unto Moses. It was the purpose of God to place within the reach of the spirits begotten by Him in the heavens the means of individual effort, and the opportunity of winning, not merely redemption from death but also salvation and even exaltation, with the powers of eternal progression and increase. Hence, it was necessary that the spiritual offspring of God should leave the mansions of their primeval childhood, and enter the school of mortal experience, meeting, contending with, and overcoming evil, according to their several degrees of faith and strength. Adam and Eve could never have been the parents of a mortal posterity had they not themselves become mortal; mortality, as before stated, was an essential element in the Divine plan respecting the earth and its appointed inhabitants; and as a means of introducing mortality the Lord placed before the progenitors of the race a law, knowing full well that transgression would follow.

  [188] Pearl of Great Price: Moses i 39; see Note 7.

30. Eve was fulfilling the foreseen purposes of God by the part she took in the great drama of the Fall; yet she did not partake of the forbidden fruit with that object in view, but with the intent to violate the Divine command, being deceived by the sophistries of the serpent-fiend. Satan also, for that matter, furthered the purposes of the Creator, in tempting Eve; yet his design was to thwart the Lord's plan. We are definitely told that "he knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world."[189] Yet, his diabolical effort, far from being the initiatory step toward destruction, contributed to the plan of man's eternal exaltation. Adam's part in the great event was essentially different from that of his wife; he was not deceived; on the contrary he deliberately decided to do as Eve desired, that he might carry out the purposes of his Maker with respect to the race of men, whose first patriarch he was ordained to be.

  [189] Pearl of Great Price: Moses iv, 6.

31. Even the transgressions of man may be turned to the accomplishment of high purposes. As will be shown, the sacrifice of Christ was ordained from before the foundation of the world,[190] yet Judas who betrayed, and the blood-thirsty Jews who brought about the crucifixion of the Son of God, are none the less guilty of the awful crime.

  [190] See Lecture iv, p. 76.

32. It has become a common practice with mankind to heap reproaches upon the progenitors of the family, and to picture the supposedly blessed state in which we would be living but for the Fall; whereas our first parents are entitled to our deepest gratitude for their legacy to posterity,--the means of winning glory, exaltation, and eternal lives, on the battlefield of mortality. But for the opportunity thus given, the spirits of God's offspring would have remained forever in a state of innocent childhood; sinless through no effort of their own; negatively saved, not from sin, but from the opportunity of meeting sin; incapable of winning the honors of victory because prevented from taking part in the battle. As it is, they are heirs to the birthright of Adam's descendants,--mortality, with its immeasurable possibilities and its God-given freedom of action. From Father Adam we have inherited all the ills to which flesh is heir; but such are necessarily incident to the knowledge of good and evil, by the proper use of which knowledge man may become even as the Gods.[191]

  [191] See Note 5.

NOTES.

     1. Man's Agency is God-given.--The following is an extract from
     a discourse delivered by President Brigham Young, July 5, 1855.
     (See Journal of Discourses of that date, and Millennial Star,
     vol. xx, p. 43.) "What is the foundation of the rights of man?
     The Lord Almighty has organized man for the express purpose of
     becoming an independent being like unto Himself, and has given
     him his individual agency. Man is made in the likeness of his
     Creator, the great archetype of the human species, who bestowed
     upon him the principles of eternity, planting immortality within
     him, and leaving him at liberty to act in the way that seemeth
     good unto him;--to choose or refuse for himself, to be a
     Latter-day Saint or a Wesleyan Methodist, to belong to the Church
     of England, the oldest daughter of the Mother Church, to the old
     Mother herself, to her sister the Greek Church, or to be an
     infidel and belong to no church. When the kingdom of God is fully
     set up and established on the face of the earth, and takes the
     pre-eminence over all other nations and kingdoms, it will protect
     the people in the enjoyment of all their rights, no matter what
     they believe, what they profess, or what they worship."

     2. The Nature of Sin.--The English word "sin" represents a very
     great variety of terms occurring in the original languages, the
     literal translation of which bear to one another a very great
     similarity. Thus, in the Old Testament, the following terms among
     others occur:--setim (referred to in Psalms ci, 3), signifying
     "to deviate from the way;" shegagah (Lev. iv, 2; Num. xv, 27),
     "to err in the way;" avon, "the crooked, or perverted;" avel,
     "to turn aside." In the New Testament we find, hemartia, "the
     missing of a mark;" parabasis, "the transgressing of a line;"
     parakoe, "disobedience to a voice;" paraptoma, "falling from
     uprightness; "agnoema, "unjustifiable ignorance;" hettema,
     "giving only partial measure;" anomia, "non-observance of law;"
     plemmeleia, "a discord." The above illustrations are taken
     mainly from Müller and French. In all these expressions, the
     predominant idea is that of departure from the way of God, of
     separation from His companionship by opposition to the Divine
     requirements. Sin was introduced into the world from without; it
     was not a natural product of earth. The seed of disobedience was
     planted in the mind of Eve by the arch-fiend: that seed took
     root; and much fruit, of the nature that we, with unguarded
     words, call calamity, is the result. From these thorns and
     thistles of mortality, a Savior has been prepared to deliver us.

     3. Eden.--In the Hebrew tongue, from which our word "Eden" is
     taken, this term signifies something particularly delightful,--a
     place of pleasantness; the place is also called "the garden of
     the Lord." One particular spot in the land of Eden was prepared
     by the Lord as a garden; this was situated eastward in Eden. From
     the garden, the parents of the race were expelled after the Fall,
     though it is reasonable to suppose that they still dwelt in the
     land or region of Eden. We read that at a later date, Cain, the
     first murderer, "went out from the presence of the Lord, and
     dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden" (Gen. iv, 16).
     Though there is no uniform belief among Christian scholars as to
     the geographical location of Eden, the majority claim that it was
     in Persia; however, the most radical among the advocates of this
     view fail to prove any marked resemblance between the region at
     present and the place described in the Bible. The Latter-day
     Saints have more exact knowledge on the matter, a revelation
     having been given through Joseph Smith, at Spring Hill, Mo., May
     19, 1838, in which that place is named by the Lord
     "Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said he, it is the place where Adam
     shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit,
     as spoken of by Daniel the prophet" (Doc. and Cov. cxvi). From
     another revelation we learn (Doc. and Cov. cvii, 52-53) that
     three years before his death, Adam called together in the valley
     of Adam-ondi-Ahman those of his sons who had been made High
     Priests, together with the rest of his righteous posterity, and
     there bestowed upon them his patriarchal blessings, the event
     being marked by special manifestations from the Lord (see also
     Doc. and Cov. cxvii, 8). The Lord has pointed out in this day the
     exact location of the altar upon which Adam offered sacrifices
     after his expulsion from the Garden (see Contributor, Vol. vii,
     page 314). There is no authentic record of the human race having
     inhabited the Eastern Hemisphere until after the flood. The
     Western Continent, called now the New World, comprises indeed the
     oldest inhabited regions of earth. The west, not the east, is the
     "cradle of nations."

     4. The Serpent, as stated, having aided the purposes of Satan,
     received from the Lord a special curse (see Genesis iii, 13, 15,
     and the Pearl of Great Price, p. 16). The creature was doomed to
     a life of degradation. Even from the standpoint of anatomy, the
     serpent is a degraded type. Though a vertebrate,--a member of the
     highest sub-kingdom of animals, it is devoid even of external
     limbs, and its means of locomotion are of no higher order than
     are those of the worm and the caterpillar. In the scriptures, the
     serpent is made the symbol of craft, subtlety, cunning, and
     danger.

     5. Mortality Essential.--President John Taylor, after
     discussing the succession of events leading up to the Fall,
     says--"Thus it would appear that if any of the links of this
     great chain had been broken, it would have interfered with the
     comprehensive plan of the Almighty pertaining to the salvation
     and eternal exaltation of those spirits who were His sons, and
     for whom principally the world was made: that they, through
     submission to the requirements of the eternal principle and law
     governing those matters, might possess bodies, and those bodies
     united with the spirits might become living souls, and being the
     sons of God, and made in the image of God, they through the
     atonement might be exalted, by obedience to the law of the
     Gospel, to the Godhead."--Mediation and Atonement, p. 135.

     6. Beneficent Results of the Fall.--"'Honor thy father and thy
     mother.' This was one of the ten special commandments given to
     Israel, during a grand display of God's power and glory on Mount
     Sinai. In the past centuries of darkness it appears to have lost
     its significance with the Christian world. They do not appear to
     realize that honor is due to the first parents of the human race.
     They have been long taught that Adam and Eve were great
     transgressors, and have mourned over the fact that they partook
     of the forbidden fruit and brought death into the world. There is
     no possibility that the fall of man was an accident or chance,
     any more than was his creation. If an accident, then why was
     Christ prepared from before the foundation of the world as a
     propitiation for sin, and to open up the way for man to
     immortality? Christ's mediation was a sequence of the fall" (see
     Acts v, 31). "Without the fall there would have been no broken
     law, and therefore nothing to repent of; and there could be no
     forgiveness of sin without the atonement of Christ. The Book of
     Mormon makes this subject very plain: 'And now, behold, if Adam
     had not transgressed, he would not have fallen; but he would have
     remained in the Garden of Eden. And all things which were
     created, must have remained in the same state which they were
     after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and
     had no end. And they would have had no children; wherefore they
     would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for
     they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin' (II
     Nephi ii, 22-23).... We, the children of Adam, have no right to
     bring accusations against the Patriarch of the race. But rather,
     we should rejoice with them, that through their fall and the
     atonement of Jesus Christ, the way of eternal life has been
     opened up to us."--A Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel:
     F. D. Richards and J. A. Little, pp. 3-4.

     7. The Fall Fore-known.--"'Mormonism' accepts the doctrine of
     the Fall, and the account of the transgression in Eden, as set
     forth in Genesis; but it affirms that none save Adam shall ever
     have to account for Adam's disobedience; that mankind in general
     are absolutely absolved from the responsibility for that
     'original sin,' and that each shall answer for his own
     transgressions alone. That the Fall was foreknown of God,--that
     it was the accepted means by which the necessary condition of
     mortality should be inaugurated; and that a Redeemer was provided
     before the world was. That general salvation, in the sense of
     redemption from the effects of the Fall, comes to all without
     their seeking it; but that individual salvation or rescue from
     the effects of personal sins is to be acquired by each for
     himself, by faith and good works through the redemption wrought
     by Jesus Christ."--The Philosophy of Mormonism: The Author;
     Improvement Era, Vol. IV, pp. 465-466.

     8. The Fall a Process of Physical Degeneracy.=--For a concise
     treatment of this topic see "Jesus the Christ," pp. 19 and 29.
