AUTHORITY IN THE MINISTRY.

     Article 5.--We believe that a man must be called of God, by
     prophecy and by the laying on of hands by those who are in
     authority, to preach the Gospel, and administer in the ordinances
     thereof.

MEN CALLED OF GOD.

1. Scriptural Examples.--It is not less agreeable to the dictates of human reason, than it is conformable to the plan of perfect organization which characterizes the Church of Christ, that all who minister in the ordinances of the Gospel should be called and commissioned for their sacred duties by the authority of heaven. The scriptures sustain this view most thoroughly; they present to us an array of men whose Divine callings are specially attested, and whose mighty works declare a power greater than that of man. On the other hand, not an instance is set down in holy writ of anyone taking to himself the authority to officiate in sacred ordinances, and being acknowledged of the Lord in such administration.

2. Consider the case of Noah, who "found grace in the eyes of the Lord"[534] in the midst of a wicked world. Unto him the Lord spake, announcing His displeasure with the wicked inhabitants of earth, and the Divine intention concerning the deluge; and instructed him in the manner of building and stocking the ark. That Noah declared the word of God unto his perverse contemporaries is shown in Peter's declaration of Christ's mission in the spirit world,--that the Savior preached to those who had been disobedient during the period of God's long suffering in the days of Noah, and who had in consequence endured the privations of the prison house in the interval.[535] Surely none can question the Divine source of Noah's authority, nor the justice of the retributive punishment following the wilful rejection of his teachings, for his words were the words of God.

  [534] Gen. vi, 8.

  [535] I Peter iii, 19-20.

3. So also with Abraham, the father of the faithful; the Lord called him[536] and made covenant with him for all the generations of his posterity. Isaac[537] was similarly distinguished; likewise Jacob,[538] to whom, as he rested upon his pillow of stones in the desert, the Lord appeared. Unto Moses[539] came the voice of God amidst the fierceness of fire, calling and commissioning the man to go into Egypt and deliver therefrom the people whose cries had come up with such effect before the throne of heaven. In this great work Aaron[540] was called to assist his brother; and later, Aaron and his sons[541] were chosen by Divine direction from the midst of the children of Israel to minister in the priest's office. When Moses[542] saw that his days were numbered, he solicited the Lord to appoint a successor in his holy station; and by special command, Joshua, the son of Nun, was so selected.

  [536] Gen. xii-xxv; Pearl of Great Price: Book of Abraham.

  [537] Gen. xxvi, 2-5.

  [538] Gen. xxviii, 10-15.

  [539] Exo. iii, 2-10.

  [540] Exo. iv, 14-16, 27.

  [541] Exo. xxviii, 1.

  [542] Numb, xxvii, 15-23.

4. Samuel, who became so great a prophet in Israel, commissioned to consecrate, command, and rebuke kings, to direct armies, and to serve as the oracle of God unto the people, was chosen while yet a boy, and called by the voice of the Lord.[543] And such was the power that followed this call, that all Israel from Dan to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established a prophet of the Lord.[544] Time fails to permit the mention of many other men of might, who received their power from God, whose histories portray the honor with which the Lord regarded His chosen ministers. Think of the heavenly vision by which Isaiah was called and directed in the duties of his prophetic office;[545] of Jeremiah, to whom the word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah;[546] of the priest Ezekiel, who first received the Divine message in the land of the Chaldeans,[547] and subsequently on other occasions; of Hosea,[548] and all the rest of the prophets to Zechariah[549] and Malachi.[550]

  [543] I Sam. iii, 4-14.

  [544] I Sam. iii, 20.

  [545] Isa. i, 1; ii, 1; vi, 8-9.

  [546] Jer. i, 2-10.

  [547] Ezek. i, 1.

  [548] Hos. i, 1.

  [549] Zech. i, 1.

  [550] Mal. i, 1.

5. The apostles of the Lord were called by His own voice in the days of His ministry; and surely the Savior's authority is beyond question, vindicated as it is by the mighty works of the atonement, wrought through pain and the anguish of death, and by the authoritative declaration of the Father at the time of Christ's baptism. Peter, and Andrew his brother, while casting their nets into the sea, were called with the instruction,--"Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men;"[551] and soon after, James and John, the sons of Zebedee, were similarly called. So with all of the chosen Twelve who ministered with the Master; and unto the Eleven who had remained faithful, He appeared after His resurrection, giving them special commissions for the work of the kingdom.[552] Christ specifically declares that He had chosen His apostles, and that He had ordained them in their exalted stations.[553]

  [551] Matt. iv, 18-20.

  [552] Matt. xviii, 19-20; Mark xvi, 15.

  [553] John vi, 70; xv, 16.

6. In the period immediately following that of Christ's earthly mission, the ministers of the Gospel were all designated and set apart by unquestionable authority. Even Saul of Tarsus, afterward Paul the Apostle, who was converted with marvelous signs and wondrous manifestations,[554] had to be formally commissioned for the labor which the Lord desired him to perform; and we are told that the Holy Ghost spake to the prophets and teachers of the Church at Antioch, while they fasted before the Lord, saying, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them."[555]

  [554] Acts ix.

  [555] Acts xiii, 1-2.

7. The Ordination of Men to the Ministry, as sanctioned by scriptural precedent, and established by direct revelation of God's will, is to be effected through the gift of prophecy, and by the imposition of hands by those who are in authority. By prophecy is meant the right to receive, and the power to interpret, manifestations of the Divine will. That the laying on of hands is usual as a part of the ceremony is seen in several of the instances already cited; nevertheless the scriptures record numerous ordinations to the offices of the priesthood, with no specific statement concerning the imposition of hands, nor indeed any other details of the ceremony. Such instances do not warrant the conclusion that the laying on of hands was not actually performed; and indeed in the light of modern revelation it is clear that the imposition of hands was a usual accompaniment of ordination, as it was also a part of the ceremony of confirming blessings,[556] and of bestowing the Holy Ghost.[557]

  [556] Gen. xlviii, 14-19. Compare II Kings v, 11; Matt. viii, 15;
  Mark vi, 5; xvi, 15-18.

  [557] See Lecture viii, pp. 162-174.

8. Thus, the priesthood descended from Adam to Noah, under the hands of the fathers;[558] Enos was ordained by the hand of Adam; and the same was true of Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah. Lamech was ordained under the hand of Seth; Noah received his authority from the hand of Methuselah. And so may the priesthood be traced, bestowed as the spirit of prophecy directed by the hand of one upon another, till the time of Moses. Melchizedek, who conferred this authority upon Abraham, received his own through the direct lineage of his fathers, from Noah. Esaias, a contemporary of Abraham, received his ordination under the hand of God. Through the hand of Esaias, the authority passed to Gad, thence by the same means to Jeremy, Elihu, Caleb, and Jethro, the priest of Midian, under whose hand Moses was ordained.[559] Joshua the son of Nun was set apart as directed of God, through the imposition of hands by Moses.[560]

  [558] Doc. and Cov. cvii, 40-52.

  [559] Doc. and Cov. lxxxiv, 6-14.

  [560] Numb. xxvii, 18; Deut. xxxiv, 9.

9. In the days of the apostles, circumstances rendered it expedient to appoint special officers in the Church, to care for the poor and attend to the distribution of supplies; these were selected with care, and were set apart through prayer and laying on of hands.[561] Timothy was similarly ordained, as witness the admonitions given him by Paul:--"Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery,"[562] and again, "Stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands."[563] The Lord has bound Himself by solemn covenant to acknowledge the acts of His authorized servants. Unto whomsoever the elders give promise after baptism the Holy Ghost will come.[564] Whatever the priesthood shall bind or loose on earth, is to be similarly bound or loosed in heaven;[565] the sick upon whom the elders lay their hands, are to recover;[566] and many other signs are to follow them that believe. And so jealous is the Lord of the power to officiate in His name, that at the judgment, all who have aided or persecuted His servants, are to be rewarded or punished as if they had done those things unto Christ Himself.[567]

  [561] Acts vi, 1-6.

  [562] I Timothy iv, 14.

  [563] II Tim. i, 6.

  [564] Acts ii, 38; III Nephi xi, 35; xii, 2; Doc. and Cov. lxxxiv,
  64.

  [565] Matt. xvi, 19; Doc. and Cov. i, 8; cxxviii, 8-11.

  [566] Mark xvi, 15-18.

  [567] Matt. xviii, 4-6; xxv, 31-46; Doc. and Cov. lxxv, 19-22;
  lxxxiv, 88-90.

10. Unauthorized Ministrations in priestly functions are not alone invalid, they are indeed grievously sinful. In His dealings with mankind, God has ever recognized and honored the priesthood established by His direction; and has never countenanced any unauthorized assumption of authority. A terrible lesson is taught in the case of Korah and his associates, in their rebellion against the authority of the priesthood,--in that they falsely professed the right to minister in the priest's office. The Lord promptly visited them for their sins, causing the ground to cleave asunder, and to swallow them up with all their belongings.[568]

  [568] Numbers xvi.

11. And think of the affliction that fell upon Miriam, the sister of Moses, a prophetess among the people.[569] She, with Aaron, railed against Moses, and they said, "Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath He not spoken also by us? and the Lord heard it."[570] He came at once in a cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle, denouncing their presumption, and vindicating the authority of His chosen oracle, Moses. When the cloud passed from the tabernacle, Miriam was seen to be leprous, white as snow; and according to the law, she was shut out of the camp of Israel. However, through the earnest entreaties of Moses, the Lord healed the woman, and she was subsequently permitted to return to the company.

  [569] Exo. xv, 21.

  [570] Numbers xii.

12. Consider the fate of Uzza, the Israelite who met sudden death through the anger of God, because he put forth his hand to steady the ark of the covenant lest it fall.[571] This he did in spite of the law that none but the priests might touch the sacred accompaniments of the ark; we read that not even the appointed bearers of the vessel were allowed to touch its holy parts, on pain of death.[572]

  [571] I Chron. xiii, 10.

  [572] Num. iv, 15.

13. Think also of Saul the King of Israel, who had been called from the farm to be made a monarch favored of God. When the Philistines were marshalled against Israel in Michmash, Saul waited for Samuel,[573] under whose hand he had received his kingly anointing,[574] and to whom he had looked in the days of his humility for guidance; he asked that the prophet come and offer sacrifices to the Lord in behalf of the people. But, growing impatient at Samuel's delay, Saul prepared the burnt offering himself, forgetting that though he occupied the throne, wore the crown, and bore the sceptre, these insignia of kingly power gave him no right to officiate even as a door-keeper in the house of God; and for this and other instances of his unrighteous presumption, he was rejected of God and another was chosen in his place.

  [573] I Sam. xiii, 5-14.

  [574] I Sam. x.

14. A striking instance of Divine jealousy concerning holy functions is shown in the dreadful experience of Uzziah, king of Judah. He was placed upon the throne when but sixteen years old; and, as long as he sought the Lord, he was greatly prospered, so that his name became a terror unto his enemies. But he allowed pride to grow in his heart, and indulged the delusion that in his kingship he was supreme. He entered the temple and essayed to burn incense on the altar. Shocked at his blasphemous action, Azariah, the chief priest of the temple, and fourscore priests with him, forbade the king, saying:--"It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests, the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense; go out of the sanctuary, for thou hast trespassed." At this rebuke and condemnation from his subjects, though they were priests of the living God, the king became angry; but immediately the dread scourge of leprosy fell upon him; the signs of the horrible disease appeared in his forehead; and, being now physically an unclean creature, his presence tended the more to defile the holy place. So Azariah and his associate priests thrust the king out from the temple, and he, a smitten thing, fled from the house of God never again to enter its sacred precincts. Concerning the rest of his punishment we read, "And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the Lord."[575]

  [575] II Chron. xxvi.

15. A forceful illustration of the futility of false ceremonies, or of the mere form of sacred ordinances when the authority is absent, is shown in the New Testament record of the seven sons of Sceva. These in common with others had seen, and had marveled at, the miraculous power exhibited by Paul, whom the Lord so blessed in his apostleship that through contact with handkerchiefs or aprons sent by him the sick were healed, and their evil spirits were cast out. Sceva's sons, who are counted by the sacred chronicler among the exorcists and the vagabond Jews, sought also to expel an evil spirit: "We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth," said they; but the evil spirit derided them for their lack of authority, exclaiming: "Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye?" Then the afflicted person, in whom the evil spirit dwelt, leaped upon them and overcame them, so that when they escaped from the house they were naked and wounded.[576]

  [576] Acts xix, 13-17.

16. Teachers True and False.--None but those who are duly authorized to teach can be regarded as true expounders of the word. The remarks of Paul concerning the high priests are alike applicable to every office of the priesthood: "No man taketh this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron."[577] And Aaron, as we have already seen, was called through Moses unto whom the Lord revealed His will in the matter. This authority to act in the name of the Lord is given to those only who are chosen of God; it is not to be had for the mere asking; it is not to be bought with gold. We read of Simon, the sorcerer, who coveted the power possessed by the apostles; he offered these ministers of Christ money, saying, "Give me also this power that on whomsoever I lay my hands he may receive the Holy Ghost." But Peter answered him with righteous indignation, "Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money; thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God."[578]

  [577] Heb. v, 4.

  [578] Acts viii, 18-24.

17. It was known to the apostles of old that men would seek to arrogate unto themselves the right to officiate in things divine, thus becoming servants of Satan. In addressing a conference of the elders at Ephesus, Paul prophesied of these ill events, and warned the shepherds of the flock to look well to their charge.[579] In an epistle to Timothy, the apostle reiterates this prophecy; encouraging to diligence in preaching the word, he declares, "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables."[580] Peter's declarations on the same subject are no less plain. Addressing himself to the Saints of his time, he refers to the false prophets of old, and adds:--"There shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies; even denying the Lord that bought them.... And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of."[581]

  [579] Acts xx, 28-30.

  [580] II Tim. iv, 2-4.

  [581] II Pet. ii, 1-3.

18. Divine Authority in the Present Dispensation.--The Latter-day Saints claim to possess authority to administer in the name of God, and that this right has been conferred in this day under the hands of those who held the same power in former dispensations. That the authority of the holy priesthood was to be taken from the earth as the apostles of old were slain, and that it would of necessity have to be restored from heaven before the Church could be re-established, may be shown by scripture. On the 15th day of May, 1829, while Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were engaged in earnest prayer for instruction concerning baptism for the remission of sins, mention of which they had found in the plates from which they were then engaged in translating the Book of Mormon, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light. He announced himself as John, called of old the Baptist, and said he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of the higher priesthood. The messenger laid his hands upon the two young men and ordained them to authority, saying, "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."[582]

  [582] Pearl of Great Price: Extr. Hist. of Joseph Smith, 69. Doc.
  and Cov. xiii.

19. A short time after this event, Peter, James, and John appeared to Joseph and Oliver, and ordained the two to the higher or Melchizedek priesthood, bestowing upon them the keys of the apostleship, which these heavenly messengers had held and exercised in the former gospel dispensation. This order of priesthood holds authority over all the offices in the Church, and includes power to administer in spiritual things;[583] consequently all the authorities and powers necessary to the establishment of the Church were by this visitation restored to earth.

  [583] Doc. and Cov. cvii.

20. No one is authorized to officiate in any of the ordinances of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints unless he has been ordained to that calling by those holding the power; thus, no man receives the priesthood except under the hand of one who holds that priesthood himself; that one must have obtained it from others previously commissioned; and so every holder of the priesthood to-day can trace his authority to the hands of Joseph the Prophet, who, as already stated, received his ordination under the hands of heavenly messengers clothed with power divine. That men who are called of God to the authority of the ministry on earth may have been selected for such appointment even before they took mortal bodies is evident from the scriptures. This matter may properly claim attention in the present connection; and its consideration leads us to the subjects which follow.

FORE-ORDINATION AND PRE-EXISTENCE.

21. Fore-ordination.--In a wonderful interview with Abraham, the Lord revealed many things ordinarily withheld from mortal eyes. Said the patriarch:--"Now the Lord had shewn unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said, These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me, Abraham, thou art one of them, thou wast chosen before thou wast born."[584] This is one of the many scriptural proofs that the spirits of mankind existed prior to their earthly probation:--a condition in which these intelligences lived and exercised their free agency before they assumed bodily tabernacles. Surely then the natures, dispositions, and tendencies of men are known to the Father of their spirits, even before these beings are born in mortality; and He needs not to wait till they develop and prove their capacities on earth before they are appointed to special labors in the fulfillment of Divine purposes.

  [584] Pearl of Great Price: Abraham iii, 22-23; see also Jer. i,
  4-5.

22. Evidence is abundant that Christ was chosen and ordained to be the Redeemer of the world, even from the beginning. We read of His foremost position amongst the sons of God in offering Himself as a sacrifice to carry into effect the will of the Father.[585] He it was, "Who verily was fore-ordained before the foundation of the world."[586]

  [585] [586] I Peter i, 20. See "Jesus the Christ," ch. ii.

23. Paul taught the doctrine of Divine selection and pre-appointment thus:--"For whom he did fore-know, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son.... Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called."[587] And again:--"God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew."[588]

  [587] Rom. viii, 29-30.

  [588] Rom. xi, 2.

24. Alma, the Nephite prophet, spoke of the priests who had been ordained after the order of the Son, and added:--"And this is the manner after which they were ordained: being called and prepared from the foundation of the world, according to the fore-knowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceeding great faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy calling which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory redemption for such."[589]

  [589] Alma xiii, 3; also 10, 11.

25. Fore-ordination does not Imply Compulsion.--The doctrine of absolute predestination, resulting in a nullification of man's free agency, has been advocated with various modifications by different sects. Nevertheless, such teachings are wholly unjustified by both the letter and the spirit of sacred writ. God's fore-knowledge concerning the natures and capacities of His children enables Him to see the end of their earthly career even from the first:--"Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world."[590] Many people have been led to regard this fore-knowledge of God as a sure predestination whereby souls are assigned to glory or condemnation, even before their birth in the flesh, and independently of any merits or demerits of their own. This heretical doctrine seeks to rob Deity of every trait of mercy, of justice, and of pure love; it makes the Father appear capricious and selfish, directing and creating all things for His own glory alone, caring not for the consequent suffering of the victims of His injustice. How dreadful, how inconsistent is such an idea of God! It leads to the absurd conclusion that the mere knowledge of coming events must act as a determining influence in bringing about those occurrences. God's knowledge of spiritual and of human nature enables Him to conclude with certainty as to the actions of any of His children under given conditions; yet such knowledge has surely no determining effect upon the creature.[591]

  [590] Acts xv, 18.

  [591] See "Jesus the Christ," pp. 18, 28.

26. Doubtless He knows of some spirits that they await only the opportunity of choice between good and evil to choose the latter and to accomplish their own destruction; these are they as spoken of by Jude, "who were before of old ordained to this condemnation."[592] To avert the fate of such, their free agency would have to be taken away; they can be saved by force alone; and compulsion is forbidden by the laws of heaven, for salvation and for condemnation alike. There are others whose integrity and faithfulness have been demonstrated in their pristine state; the Father knows how unreservedly they may be trusted, and many of them are called even in their mortal youth to special and exalted labors as chosen servants of the Most High.

  [592] Jude 4.

27. Pre-existence of Spirits.--The facts already presented concerning fore-ordination furnish proof that the spirits of mankind passed through a stage of existence prior to the earthly probation. This antemortal period is oft-times spoken of as the stage of "primeval childhood" or "first estate." That these spirits existed as organized intelligences, and exercised their free agency during that primeval stage, is clear from the declaration of the Lord to Abraham:--"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon, and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads forever and ever."[593]

28. No Christian doubts the pre-existence of the Savior, or questions His position as one of the Godhead before He came to earth as Mary's Son. The common interpretation given to the opening words of John's Gospel sustains the view of Christ's primeval God-ship:--"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." We read further, "And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us."[594] The sayings of the Redeemer Himself support this truth. When His disciples dissented concerning His doctrine of Himself, He said, "What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?"[595] On another occasion He spoke in this wise:--"I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world; again, I leave the world and go to the Father."[596] And His disciples, pleased with this plain declaration confirming the belief which, perchance, they already entertained at heart, rejoined, "Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb ... by this we believe that thou camest forth from God."[597] To the wicked Jews who boasted of their descent from Abraham, and sought to hide their sins under the protecting mantle of the great patriarch's name, the Savior declared:--"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am."[598] In a solemn prayer to His Father, the Son implored, "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was."[599] Yet Christ was born a child among mortals; and it is fair to infer, that if His earthly birth was the union of a pre-existent or antemortal spirit with a mortal body, such also is the birth of every member of the human family.

  [593] Pearl of Great Price: Abraham iii, 26.

  [594] John i, 1, 14.

  [595] John vi, 62.

  [596] John xvi, 28.

  [597] Verses 29-30.

  [598] John viii, 58. See "Jesus the Christ." pp. 37, 411.

  [599] John xvii, 5. See also II Nephi ix, 5; xxv, 12; Mos. iii, 5;
  xiii, 33-34; xv, 1.

29. But we are not left to mere inference on a basis of analogy only; the scriptures plainly teach that the spirits of mankind are known and numbered unto God before their earthly advent. In his farewell administration to Israel Moses sang, "Remember the days of old.... When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel."[600] From this we learn that the earth was allotted to the nations, according to the number of the children of Israel; it is evident therefore that the number was known prior to the existence of the Israelitish nation in the flesh; this is most easily explained on the assumption of a previous existence in which the spirits of the future nation were known.

  [600] Deut. xxxii, 7-8.

30. No chance is possible therefore in the number or extent of the temporal creations of God.[601] The population of the earth is fixed according to the number of spirits appointed to take tabernacles of flesh upon this sphere; when these have all come forth in the order and time decreed of God, then, and not till then, shall the end come.

  [601] See Note, this page.

NOTES.

     1. Spiritual Creations.--The pre-existent condition is not
     characteristic of human souls alone; all things of earth have a
     spiritual being, of which the temporal structure forms but the
     counterpart. We read of the creation of "every plant of the field
     before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it
     grew" (Gen. ii, 5). This is set forth with greater fulness in
     another revelation to Moses:--"These are the generations of the
     heaven and the earth when they were created, in the day that I,
     the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth, and every plant of
     the earth before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field
     before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things of which
     I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the
     face of the earth.... And I, the Lord God, had created all the
     children of men, and not yet a man to till the ground; for in
     heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the
     earth, neither in the water, neither in the air: but I, the Lord
     God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered
     the whole face of the ground. And I, the Lord God, formed man
     from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the
     breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh
     upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were
     before created, but spiritually were they created and made
     according to my word."--(Pearl of Great Price: Moses iii, 4-7.)

     2. Authority Given of God.--"The most comprehensive evidence
     that Joseph Smith received the authority and power of the Holy
     Priesthood, is that the works of John the Baptist, of Jesus and
     His apostles, are being again done on the earth by his
     administration. To receive the powers of this Priesthood, it is
     necessary that men should obey the laws and ordinances of the
     Gospel. The Lord has personally appeared to some men, and
     covenanted with them as He did with Abraham (see Gen. xii, 1-3;
     xiii, 14-17). The Lord also personally called and authorized His
     twelve Jewish apostles. So fully were they authorized to labor
     for Him, and act in His name, that He said to them: 'He that
     receiveth you receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth
     him that sent me' (Matt. x, 40). More generally, it is from the
     prophets and apostles of Christ that men receive the Priesthood.
     Many received it under the hands of the apostles of the first
     Gospel dispensation. Those who have received it in this
     latter-day dispensation, have received it from Joseph Smith and
     Oliver Cowdery; and, in doing so, have received it through a
     legitimate channel from God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ.
     Those who have received this Priesthood have covenanted with God
     the Father, and He with them. This is evidently the view taken of
     the subject in the above passage quoted from Matthew. The
     doctrine is more fully illustrated in Doc. and Cov.: 'All they
     who receive this Priesthood receiveth me, saith the Lord; for he
     that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me
     receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father, receiveth
     my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be
     given unto him, and this is according to the oath and covenant
     which belongeth to the Priesthood' (Doc. and Cov. lxxxiv,
     35-39)."--Compendium, F. D. Richards and J. A. Little, p. 67.

     3. Fore-ordination.--"'Known unto God are all his works from
     the beginning of the world' (Acts xv, 18). The knowledge that we
     have of the beginning of the world is principally derived from
     the history of its creation in the Bible Genesis, and in the
     writings of Moses and of Abraham, as given in the Pearl of Great
     Price.... These writings make it plain that man existed in a
     spiritual condition prior to coming here, and also quite as
     evident that in that pre-existence he exercised his free
     agency.... God may have called and chosen men in their first
     estate, or spiritual existence, but whether they will accept that
     call and fill it, by repentance and good works in this life, is a
     matter in which it is their privilege to exercise their free
     agency.... Men exercised their free agency in the first or
     spiritual estate, as well as in this. That the character of their
     works in that estate shaped their destiny in this is
     evident."--Compendium, F. D. Richards and J. A. Little, pp.
     138-140.

     See also: Acts ii, 23; Romans viii, 29-30; xi, 2, 28; Isaiah
     xlviii, 12; I Chron. xxix, 1; Book of Mormon: Alma xiii, 3-7;
     Doc. and Cov. lxxxiv, 34, 99.
