THE BOOK OF MORMON.

     Article 8.--... We also believe the Book of Mormon to be the
     word of God.

DESCRIPTION AND ORIGIN.

1. What is the Book of Mormon?--The claims made for the Book of Mormon affirm it to be a divinely inspired record, made by the prophets of the ancient peoples who inhabited the American continent for centuries before and immediately after the time of Christ; which record has been translated in the present generation through the gift of God and by His special appointment. The authorized and inspired translator of these sacred scriptures, through whose instrumentality they have been given to the world in modern language, is Joseph Smith, whose first acquaintance with the plates was mentioned in the first lecture.[768] As stated, on the 21st of September, 1823, Joseph Smith received, in answer to fervent prayer, a visitation from an angelic personage, who gave his name as Moroni; subsequent revelations showed him to be the last of a long line of prophets whose translated writings constitute the Book of Mormon; by him the ancient records had been closed; by him the graven plates had been deposited in the earth; and through his ministration they were brought into the possession of the modern prophet and seer whose work of translation is now before us.

  [768] 2. On the occasion of Moroni's first visit to Joseph Smith, the angelic visitor declared the existence of the record, which, he said, was engraved on plates of gold, at that time lying buried in the side of a hill near Joseph's home. The hill, which was known by one division of the ancient peoples as Cumorah, by another as Ramah, is situated near Palmyra in the county of Wayne, State of New York. The precise spot where the plates lay was shown to Joseph in vision; and he had no difficulty in finding it on the day following the visitation referred to. Joseph's statement of Moroni's declaration concerning the plates is as follows:--"He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from which they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants. Also, that there were two stones in silver bows, (and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim), deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones was what constituted Seers in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book."[769]

  [769] Pearl of Great Price: Extr. Hist. of Joseph Smith, 34-35.

3. Joseph found a large stone at the indicated spot on the hill Cumorah; beneath the stone was a box, also of stone; the lid of this he raised by means of a lever; then he saw within the box the plates, and the breastplate with the Urim and Thummim, as described by the angel. As he was about to remove the contents of the box, Moroni again appeared before him, and forbade him taking the sacred things at that time, saying that four years must pass before they would be committed to his personal care; and that, in the meantime, Joseph would be required to visit the place at yearly intervals; this the youthful revelator did, receiving on each occasion additional instruction concerning the record and God's purposes with it. On the 22nd of September, 1827, Joseph received from the angel Moroni the plates and the Urim and Thummim with the breastplate. He was instructed to guard them with strict care, and was promised that if he used his best efforts to protect them they would be preserved inviolate in his hands; and that on the completion of the labor of translation, Moroni would visit him again, and receive the plates.

4. The reason prompting the angelic caution regarding Joseph's care of the treasures soon appeared; thrice in the course of his short journey homeward with the sacred relics, he was attacked; but by Divine aid he was enabled to withstand his assailants and finally reached his home with the plates and other articles unharmed. These attacks were but the beginning of a siege of persecution which was relentlessly waged against him by the powers of evil as long as the plates remained in his custody. News that he had the golden record in his possession soon spread; and numerous attempts, many of them violent, were made to wrest the plates from his hands. But they were preserved; and, slowly, with many hindrances incident to persecution by the wicked, and to the conditions of his own poverty which made it necessary for him to toil and left little leisure for the appointed labor, Joseph proceeded with the translation; and in 1830 the Book of Mormon was first published to the world.

5. The Title Page of the Book of Mormon.--Our best answer to the question: What is the Book of Mormon? is found on the title page to the volume. Thereon we read:

     "The Book of Mormon: an account written by the hand of Mormon,
     upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi. Wherefore it is an
     abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the
     Lamanites; written to the Lamanites who are a remnant of the
     house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile: written by way of
     commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of
     revelation. Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that
     they might not be destroyed; to come forth by the gift and power
     of God unto the interpretation thereof: sealed by the hand of
     Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by
     the way of Gentile; the interpretation thereof by the gift of
     God.

     "An abridgment taken from the book of Ether also; which is a
     record of the people of Jared; who were scattered at the time the
     Lord confounded the language of the people when they were
     building a tower to get to heaven; which is to show unto the
     remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath
     done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of
     the Lord, that they are not cast off forever; and also to the
     convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the
     Eternal God, manifesting Himself unto all nations. And now, if
     there are faults, they are the mistakes of men: wherefore condemn
     not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the
     judgment seat of Christ."

This combined title and preface is a translation from the last page of the plates, and was presumably written by Moroni, who, as before stated, sealed and hid up the book in former days.[770]

  [770] See Note 1.

6. Main Divisions of the Book.--From the title page, we learn that in the Book of Mormon we have to deal with the histories of two great nations, who flourished in America as the descendants of small colonies brought hither from the eastern continent by Divine direction. Of these we may conveniently speak as the Nephites and the Jaredites.

7. The Nephite Nation was the later, and in point of the fulness of the records, the more important. The progenitors of this nation were led from Jerusalem 600 B. C., by Lehi, a Jewish prophet of the tribe of Manasseh. His immediate family, at the time of their departure from Jerusalem, comprised his wife Sariah, and their sons Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and Nephi; at a later stage of the history, daughters are mentioned, but whether any of these were born before the family exodus we are not told. Beside his own family, the colony of Lehi included Zoram and Ishmael, the latter an Israelite of the tribe of Ephraim. Ishmael, with his family, joined Lehi in the wilderness; and his descendants were numbered with the nation of whom we are speaking. The company journeyed somewhat east of south, keeping near the borders of the Red Sea; then, changing their course to the eastward, crossed the peninsula of Arabia; and there, on the shores of the Arabian Sea, built and provisioned a vessel in which they committed themselves to Divine care upon the waters. Their voyage carried them eastward across the Indian Ocean, then over the south Pacific Ocean to the western coast of South America, whereon they landed (590 B. C.). The landing place is not described with such detail as to warrant definite conclusions.

8. The people established themselves on what to them was the land of promise; many children were born, and in the course of a few generations a numerous posterity held possession of the land. After the death of Lehi, a division occurred, some of the people accepting as their leader Nephi, who had been duly appointed to the prophetic office; while the rest proclaimed Laman, the eldest of Lehi's sons, as their chief. Henceforth the divided people were known as Nephites and Lamanites respectively. At times they observed toward each other fairly friendly relations; but generally they were opposed, the Lamanites manifesting implacable hatred and hostility toward their Nephite kindred. The Nephites advanced in the arts of civilization, built large cities, and established prosperous commonwealths; yet they often fell into transgression; and the Lord chastened them by permitting their foes to be victorious. They spread northward, occupying the northern part of South America; then, crossing the Isthmus, they extended their domain over the southern, central, and eastern portions of what is now the United States of America. The Lamanites, while increasing in numbers, fell under the curse of darkness; they became dark in skin and benighted in spirit, forgot the God of their fathers, lived a wild nomadic life, and degenerated into the fallen state in which the American Indians,--their lineal descendants,--were found by those who re-discovered the western continent in later times.

9. The final struggles between Nephites and Lamanites were waged in the vicinity of the hill Cumorah, in what is now the state of New York, resulting in the entire destruction of the Nephites, about 400 A. D. The last Nephite representative was Moroni, who, wandering for safety from place to place, daily expecting death from the victorious Lamanites, who had decreed the absolute extinction of their white kindred, wrote the concluding parts of the Book of Mormon, hid the record in Cumorah, and soon thereafter died. It was this same Moroni who, as a resurrected being, gave the records into the hands of Joseph Smith in the present dispensation.

10. The Jaredite Nation.--Of the two nations whose histories constitute the Book of Mormon, the first in order of time consisted of the people of Jared, who followed their leader from the Tower of Babel at the time of the confusion of tongues. Their history was written on twenty-four plates of gold by Ether, the last of their prophets, who, fore-seeing the destruction of his people because of their wickedness, hid away the historical plates. They were afterward found, B. C. 123, by an expedition sent out by King Limhi, a Nephite ruler. The record engraved on these plates was subsequently abridged by Moroni, and the condensed account was attached by him to the Book of Mormon record; it appears in the modern translation under the name of the Book of Ether.

11. The first and chief prophet of the Jaredites is not mentioned by name in the record as we have it; he is known only as the brother of Jared. Of the people, we learn that, amid the confusion of Babel, Jared and his brother importuned the Lord that He would spare them and their associates from the impending disruption. Their prayer was heard, and the Lord led them with a considerable company, who, like themselves, were free from the taint of idolatry, away from their homes, promising to conduct them to a land choice above all other lands. Their course of travel is not given with exactness; we learn only that they reached the ocean, and there constructed eight vessels, called barges, in which they set out upon the waters. These vessels were small and dark within; but the Lord made luminous certain stones, which gave light to the imprisoned voyagers. After a passage of three hundred and forty-four days, the colony landed on the western shore of North America, possibly south of the Gulf of California, and north of the Isthmus of Panama.

12. Here they became a flourishing nation; but, giving way in time to internal dissensions, they divided into factions, which warred with one another until the people were totally destroyed. This destruction, which occurred near the hill Ramah, afterward known among the Nephites as Cumorah, probably took place at about the time of Lehi's landing in South America,--590 B. C. The last representative of the ill-fated race was Coriantumr, the former king, concerning whom Ether had prophesied that he should survive all his subjects, and live to see another people in possession of the land. This prediction was fulfilled in that the king, whose people had become extinct, came, in the course of his solitary wanderings, to a region occupied by the people of Mulek, who are to be mentioned here as the third ancient colony of emigrants from the eastern continent.

13. Mulek, we are told, was the son of Zedekiah, king of Judah, an infant at the time of his brothers' violent deaths and his father's cruel torture at the hands of the king of Babylon.[771] Eleven years after Lehi's departure from Jerusalem, another colony was led from the city, amongst whom was Mulek. His name has been given to the people, probably on account of his recognized rights of leadership by virtue of his lineage. The Book of Mormon record concerning Mulek and his people is scant; we learn, however, that the colony was brought across the waters, to a landing on the northern part of the continent. The descendants of this colony were discovered by the Nephites under Mosiah; they had grown numerous, but, having had no scriptures for their guidance, had fallen into a condition of spiritual darkness. They joined the Nephites, and their history is merged into that of the greater nation.[772] The Nephites gave to North America the name Land of Mulek.

  [771] See II Kings xxv, 7.

  [772] Omni i, 12-19.

THE ANCIENT PLATES AND THE MODERN TRANSLATION.

14. The Plates of the Book of Mormon as delivered by the angel Moroni to Joseph Smith, according to the description given by the modern prophet, were of gold, of uniform size, each about seven inches wide by eight inches long; in thickness a little less than ordinary sheet tin; they were fastened together by three rings running through the plates near one edge; together they formed a book nearly six inches in thickness, but not all has been translated, a part being sealed. Both sides of the plates were engraved with small and beautiful characters, described by those who examined them as of curious workmanship, with the appearance of ancient origin.

15. Three classes of plates are mentioned on the title page of the Book of Mormon, viz:--

(1.) The Plates of Nephi, which, as will be shown, were of two kinds:--(a) the larger plates; (b) the smaller plates.

(2.) The Plates of Mormon, containing an abridgment from the plates of Nephi, with additions made by Mormon and his son Moroni.

(3.) The Plates of Ether, containing, as we have seen, the history of the Jaredites.

To these may be added another set of plates, as being mentioned in the Book of Mormon, viz:

(4.) The Brass Plates of Laban, brought by Lehi's people from Jerusalem, and containing Jewish scriptures and genealogies, many extracts from which appear in the Nephite records. We have now to consider more particularly the plates of Nephi, and Mormon's abridgment thereof.

16. The Plates of Nephi are so named from the fact that they were prepared, and their record was begun, by Nephi, the son of Lehi. These plates were of two kinds,[773] which may be distinguished as the "larger plates" and the "smaller plates." Nephi began his labors as a recorder by engraving on plates of gold a historical account of his people, from the time his father left Jerusalem. This account recited the story of their wanderings, their prosperity and their distress, the reigns of their kings, and the wars and contentions of the people; the record was in the nature of a secular history. These plates were handed from one recorder to another throughout the generations of the Nephite people; so that, at the time they were abridged by Mormon, the record covered a period of about a thousand years, dating from 600 B. C., the time of Lehi's exodus from Jerusalem. Although these plates bore the name of their maker, who was also the first of the writers, the separate work of each recorder is known in general by his specific name, so that the record is made up of many distinct books.

  [773] I Nephi ix; xix, 1-5; II Nephi v, 30; Jacob i, 1-4; Words of
  Mormon i, 3-7.

17. By command of the Lord, Nephi made other plates, upon which he recorded particularly the ecclesiastical history of his people, citing only such instances of other events as seemed necessary to the proper sequence of the narrative. "I have received a commandment of the Lord," says Nephi, "that I should make these plates for the special purpose that there should be an account engraven of the ministry of my people."[774] The object of this double line of history was unknown to Nephi, it was enough for him that the Lord required the labor; that it was for a wise purpose will be shown.

  [774] I Nephi ix, 3.

18. Mormon's Abridgment.--In the course of time the records that had accumulated as the history of the people grew fell into the hands of Mormon;[775] and he undertook to make an abridgment of these extensive works, upon plates made with his own hands.[776] By such a course, a record was prepared more concise and more nearly uniform in style, language, and treatment than could possibly be the case with the varied writings of so many authors as had contributed to the great history during the thousand years of its growth. Mormon recognizes and testifies to the inspiration of God by which he was moved to undertake the great labor.[777] In preparing this shorter history, Mormon preserved the division of the record into books according to the arrangement of the originals; and thus, though the language may be that of Mormon, except in cases of quotations from the plates of Nephi, which are indeed numerous, we find the Books of Nephi, the Book of Alma, the Book of Helaman, etc., the form of speech known as the first person being generally preserved.

  [775] Words of Mormon i, 11; Mormon i, 1-4; iv, 23.

  [776] III Nephi v, 8-11.

  [777] III Nephi v, 14-19.

19. When Mormon, in the course of his abridgment, had reached the time of King Benjamin's reign, he was deeply impressed with the record engraved on the smaller plates of Nephi,--the history of God's dealings with the people during the period of about four centuries, extending from the time of Lehi's exodus from Jerusalem down to the time of King Benjamin. This record, comprising so much of prophecy concerning the mission of the Savior, was regarded by Mormon with more than ordinary favor. Of these plates he attempted no transcript, but included the originals with his own abridgment of the larger plates, making of the two one book. The record as compiled by Mormon contained, therefore, a double account of the descendants of Lehi for the first four hundred years of their history,--the brief secular history condensed from the larger plates, and the full text on the smaller plates. In solemn language, and with an emphasis which subsequent events have shown to be significant, Mormon declares the hidden wisdom of the Divine purpose in this duplication:--"And I do this for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me, according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me. And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will."[778]

  [778] Words of Mormon i, 7.

20. The Lord's Purpose in the matter of preparing and of preserving the smaller plates as testified of by Mormon, and also by Nephi,[779] is rendered plain from certain circumstances in this dispensation attending the translation of the records by Joseph Smith. When the prophet had prepared a translation of the first part of the writings of Mormon, the manuscript was won from his care through the unrighteous solicitations of Martin Harris, to whom he considered himself in a degree indebted for financial assistance in the work of publication. This manuscript, in all 116 pages, was never returned to Joseph; but, through the dark schemes of evil powers, it fell into the hands of enemies, who straightway laid a wicked plan to ridicule the translator and thwart the purposes of God. This evil design was that they wait until Joseph had re-translated the missing matter, when the stolen manuscript, which in the meantime had been altered so that the words were made to express the contrary from the true record, would be set forth as a proof that the prophet was unable to translate the same passages twice alike. But the Lord's wisdom interposed to bring to naught these dark designs.

  [779] I Nephi ix, 5.

21. Having chastened the prophet by depriving him for a season of his gift to translate, as also of the custody of the sacred records, and this for his dereliction in permitting the writings to pass into unappointed hands, the Lord graciously restored His penitent servant to favor, and revealed to him the designs of his enemies;[780] at the same time showing how these evil machinations should be made to fail. Joseph was instructed, therefore, not to attempt a re-translation of that part of Mormon's abridgment, the first translation of which had been stolen; but instead, to translate the record of the same events from the plates of Nephi,--the set of smaller plates which Mormon had incorporated with his own writings. The translation so made was therefore published as the record of Nephi, and not as the writing of Mormon; and thus no second translation was made of the parts from which the stolen manuscript had been prepared.

  [780] Doctrine and Covenants, x.

22. The Translation of the Book of Mormon was effected through the power of God manifested in the bestowal of the gift of revelation. The book professes not to be dependent upon the wisdom or learning of man; its translator was not versed in linguistics; his qualifications were of a different and of a far more efficient order. With the plates, Joseph Smith received from the angel other sacred treasures, including a breastplate, to which were attached the Urim and Thummim,[781] called by the Nephites Interpreters; and by the use of these he was enabled to render the ancient records in our modern tongue. The details of the work of translation have not been authentically recorded beyond the statement that the translator examined the engraved characters by means of the sacred instruments, and then dictated to the scribe the English sentences.

  [781] Doc. and Cov. x. 1; xvii, 1; cxxx, 8, 9; Mos. viii, 13-19;
  Ether iii, 23-28.

23. Joseph began his work with the plates by patiently copying a number of characters, adding to some of the pages thus prepared the translations. The prophet's first assistant in the labor, Martin Harris, obtained permission to take away some of these transcripts, with the purpose of submitting them to the examination of men learned in ancient languages. He placed some of the sheets before Professor Charles Anthon, of Columbia College, who, after careful examination, certified that the characters were in general of the ancient Egyptian order, and that the accompanying translations appeared to be correct. Hearing how this ancient record came into Joseph's hands, Professor Anthon requested Mr. Harris to bring the original book for examination, stating that he would undertake the translation of the entire work; then, learning that a part of the book was sealed, he remarked, "I cannot read a sealed book"; and thus unwittingly did this man fulfill the prophecy of Isaiah concerning the coming forth of the volume:--"And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, read this, I pray thee, and he saith, I cannot, for it is sealed."[782] Another linguist, a Dr. Mitchell, of New York, having examined the characters, gave concerning them a testimony in all important respects corresponding to that of Prof. Anthon.

  [782] Isaiah xxix, 11.

24. Arrangement of the Book of Mormon.--The Book of Mormon comprises fifteen separate parts, commonly called books, distinguished by the names of their principal authors. Of these, the first six books, viz., I and II Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, and Omni, are literal translations from corresponding portions of the smaller plates of Nephi. The body of the volume, from the Book of Mosiah to Mormon, chapter vii, inclusive, is the translation of Mormon's abridgment of the larger plates of Nephi. Between the books of Omni and Mosiah "The Words of Mormon" occur, connecting the record of Nephi, as engraved on the smaller plates, with Mormon's abridgment of the larger plates for the periods following. The Words of Mormon may be regarded as a brief explanation of the preceding portions of the work, and a preface of the parts then to follow. The last part of the Book of Mormon, from the beginning of Mormon viii to the end of the volume, is in the language of Moroni, the son of Mormon, who first proceeds to finish the record of his father, and then adds an abridgment of a set of plates which contained an account of the Jaredites; this appears as the Book of Ether.[783]

  [783] 25. At the time of Moroni's writing he stood alone,--the sole surviving representative of his people. The last of the terrible wars between Nephites and Lamanites had resulted in the annihilation of the former as a people; and Moroni supposed that his abridgment of the Book of Ether would be his last literary work; but, finding himself miraculously preserved at the conclusion of that undertaking, he added the parts known to us as the Book of Moroni, containing accounts of the ceremonies of ordination, baptism, administration of the sacrament, etc., and a record of certain utterances and writings of his father Mormon.

THE GENUINENESS OF THE BOOK OF MORMON.

26. The earnest student of the Book of Mormon will be most concerned in his consideration of the reliability of the great record; and this subject may be conveniently considered under two headings: 1st, the genuineness and integrity of the Book of Mormon, i. e., the evidence that the book is what it professes to be,--an actual translation of ancient records; 2nd, the authenticity of the original writings, as shown by internal and external evidence.

27. The Genuineness of the Book will appear to anyone who undertakes an impartial investigation into the circumstances attending its coming forth. The many so-called theories of its origin, advanced by prejudiced opponents to the work of God, are in general too inconsistent, and in most instances too thoroughly puerile, to merit serious consideration. Such fancies as are set forth in representations of the Book of Mormon as the production of a single author or of men working in collusion, as a work of fiction, or in any manner as a modern composition, are their own refutation.[784] The sacred character of the plates forbade their display as a means of gratifying personal curiosity; nevertheless a number of reputable witnesses examined them, and these men have given to the world their solemn testimony of the fact. In June, 1829, the prophecies respecting the witnesses by whose testimony the word of God as set forth in the Book of Mormon was to be established,[785] saw its fulfillment in a manifestation of Divine power, demonstrating the genuineness of the record to three men, whose affirmations accompany all editions of the book.

  [784] See Note 2.

  [785] II Nephi xi, 3; xxvii, 12-13; Ether v, 3-4; see also Doc.
  and Cov. v, 11-15; xvii, 1-9.

28. The Testimony of Three Witnesses.--Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken; and we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us,[786] wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings[787] which are upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven[788] and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true; and it is marvelous in our eyes, nevertheless the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen.

  OLIVER COWDERY,
  DAVID WHITMER,
  MARTIN HARRIS.

  [786] Doc. and Cov. xvii, 6; xx, 8.

  [787] II Nephi v, 32; Alma lxiii, 12; Mormon i, 3.

  [788] See History of Joseph Smith, June, 1829.

29. The testimony so declared was never revoked, nor even modified by any one of the witnesses whose names are subscribed to the foregoing,[789] though all of them withdrew from the Church, and developed feelings amounting almost to hatred toward Joseph Smith. To the last of their lives, they maintained the same solemn declaration of the angelic visit, and of the testimony that had been implanted in their hearts. Shortly after the witnessing of the plates by the three, other eight persons were permitted to see and handle the ancient records; and in this also was prophecy fulfilled, in that it was of old declared, that beside the three, "God sendeth more witnesses,"[790] whose testimony would be added to that of the three. It was presumably in July, 1829, that Joseph Smith showed the plates to the eight whose names are attached to the following certificate.

30. The Testimony of Eight Witnesses.--Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen; and we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

  CHRISTIAN WHITMER,
  JACOB WHITMER,
  PETER WHITMER, JUN.,
  JOHN WHITMER,
  HIRAM PAGE,
  JOSEPH SMITH, SEN.,
  HYRUM SMITH,
  SAMUEL H. SMITH.

  [789] See Note 3.

  [790] II Nephi xi, 3.

31. Three of the eight witnesses died out of the Church, yet not one of the whole number ever was known to deny his testimony concerning the Book of Mormon.[791] Here, then, are proofs of varied kinds regarding the reliability of this volume. Learned linguists pronounce the characters genuine; eleven men of honest report make solemn oath of the appearance of the plates; and the nature of the book itself sustains the claim that it is nothing more nor less than a translation of ancient records.

  [791] See Note 4.

NOTES.

     1. Book of Mormon Title Page.--"I wish to mention here that the
     title page of the Book of Mormon is a literal translation, taken
     from the very last leaf on the left hand side of the collection
     or book of plates, which contained the record which has been
     translated, the language of the whole running the same as all
     Hebrew writing in general; and that said title page is not by any
     means a modern composition, either of mine or any other man who
     has lived or does live in this generation."--Joseph Smith, "Ch.
     Hist.," Vol. I, p. 71.

     2. Theories concerning the Origin of the Book of Mormon. The
     Spaulding Story.--The true account of the origin of the Book of
     Mormon was rejected by the public in general, who thus assumed
     the responsibility of explaining in some plausible way the source
     of the record. Many vague theories, based on the incredible
     assumption that the book was the work of a single author, were
     put forward; of these the most famous, and, indeed, the only one
     that lived long enough in public favor to be discussed, is the so
     called "Spaulding Story." Solomon Spaulding, a clergyman of
     Amity, Pa., wrote a romance to which no title other than
     "Manuscript Story" was prefixed. Twenty years after the author's
     death, one Hurlburt, an apostate from the Church of Jesus Christ
     of Latter-day Saints, announced a resemblance between the story
     and the Book of Mormon, and expressed his conviction that the
     work presented to the world by Joseph Smith was nothing but
     Spaulding's romance revised and amplified. The manuscript was
     lost for a time, and, in the absence of proof to the contrary,
     stories of the parallelism between the two works multiplied. But,
     by a fortunate circumstance, in 1884 President James H. Fairchild
     of Oberlin College, Ohio, and a literary friend, one Mr. Rice, in
     examining a heterogeneous collection of old papers that had been
     purchased by Mr. Rice, found the original story. The gentlemen
     made a careful comparison of the manuscript and the Book of
     Mormon; and, with the sole desire of subserving the purposes of
     truth, made public their results. Pres. Fairchild published an
     article in the New York Observer, Feb. 5, 1885, in which he
     said:--"The theory of the origin of the Book of Mormon in the
     traditional manuscript of Solomon Spaulding will probably have to
     be relinquished.... Mr. Rice, myself, and others compared it [the
     Spaulding manuscript] with the Book of Mormon and could detect no
     resemblance between the two.... Some other explanation of the
     Book of Mormon must be found, if any explanation is required."

     The manuscript was deposited in the library of Oberlin College,
     where it now reposes. Still, the theory of the "Manuscript
     Found," as Spaulding's story has come to be known, is
     occasionally pressed into service in the cause of anti-"Mormon"
     zeal, by some whom we will charitably believe to be ignorant of
     the facts set forth by Pres. Fairchild. A letter of more recent
     date, written by that honorable gentleman in reply to an
     enquiring correspondent, was published in the Millennial Star,
     Liverpool, Nov. 3, 1898, and is as follows:

  OBERLIN COLLEGE, OHIO,
  October 17, 1895.

     J. R. Hindley, Esq.,

     DEAR SIR:--We have in our College Library an original manuscript
     of Solomon Spaulding--unquestionably genuine.

     I found it in 1884 in the hands of Hon. L. L. Rice of Honolulu,
     Hawaiian Islands. He was formerly State Printer at Columbus, O.,
     and before that, publisher of a paper in Painesville, whose
     preceding publisher had visited Mrs. Spaulding and obtained the
     manuscript from her. It had lain among his old papers forty years
     or more, and was brought out by my asking him to look up
     anti-slavery documents among his papers.

     The manuscript has upon it the signatures of several men of
     Conneaut, O., who had heard Spaulding read it and knew it to be
     his. No one can see it and question its genuineness. The
     manuscript has been printed twice at least--once by the Mormons
     of Salt Lake City, and once by the Josephite Mormons of Iowa. The
     Utah Mormons obtained the copy of Mr. Rice at Honolulu, and the
     Josephites got it of me after it came into my possession.

     This manuscript is not the original of the Book of Mormon.

  Yours very truly,
  JAS. H. FAIRCHILD.

     Printed copies of the "Manuscript Found" are obtainable, and any
     enquirer may examine for himself. For further information see
     The Myth of the Manuscript Found, by Elder George Reynolds,
     Salt Lake City; Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. I, pp. 46-56;
     Elder George Reynolds' preface to the story as issued by the
     Deseret News Company, Salt Lake City, 1886; and the story itself.
     See also three articles by Pres. Joseph F. Smith in "Improvement
     Era," Vol. III, pp. 241, 377, 451.

     3. The Three Witnesses.--Oliver Cowdery.--Born at Wells,
     Rutland Co., Vermont, October, 1805; baptized May 15, 1829; died
     at Richmond, Mo., March 3, 1850.

     David Whitmer.--Born near Harrisburg, Pa., January 7, 1805;
     baptized June, 1829; excommunicated from the Church, April 13,
     1838; died at Richmond, Mo., January 25, 1888.

     Martin Harris.--Born at East-town, Saratoga Co., New York, May
     18, 1783; baptized 1830; removed to Utah, August, 1870, and died
     at Clarkston, Cache Co., Utah, July 10, 1875.

     4. The Eight Witnesses.--Christian Whitmer.--Born January 18,
     1798; baptized April 11, 1830; died in full fellowship in the
     Church, Clay County, Missouri, November 27, 1835. He was the
     eldest son of Peter Whitmer.

     Jacob Whitmer.--Second son of Peter Whitmer; born in
     Pennsylvania, January 27, 1800; baptized April 11, 1830; died
     April 21, 1856, having previously withdrawn from the Church.

     Peter Whitmer, Jr.--Born September 27, 1809; fifth son of Peter
     Whitmer; baptized June, 1829; died a faithful member of the
     Church, at or near Liberty, Clay Co., Missouri, September 22,
     1836.

     John Whitmer.--Third son of Peter Whitmer; born August 27, 1802;
     baptized June, 1829; excommunicated from the Church March 10,
     1838; died at Far West, Missouri, July 11, 1878.

     Hiram Page.--Born in Vermont, 1800; baptized April 11, 1830;
     withdrew from the Church, 1838; died in Ray Co., Missouri, August
     12, 1852.

     Joseph Smith, Sen.--The Prophet Joseph's father; born at
     Topsfield, Essex Co., Mass., July 12, 1771; baptized April 6,
     1830; ordained Patriarch to the Church, December 18, 1833; died
     in full fellowship in the Church at Nauvoo, Ill., Sept. 14, 1840.

     Hyrum Smith.--Second son of Joseph Smith, Sen., born at
     Tunbridge, Vt., February 9, 1800; baptized June, 1829; appointed
     one of the First Presidency of the Church November 7, 1837;
     Patriarch to the Church January 19, 1841; martyred with his
     brother, the Prophet, at Carthage, Ill., June 27, 1844.

     Samuel Harrison Smith.--Born Tunbridge, Vt., March 13, 1808;
     fourth son of Joseph Smith, Sen., baptized May 15, 1829; died
     July 30, 1844.

     5. Consistency of the Book of Mormon.--"If the historical parts
     of the Book of Mormon be compared with what little is known from
     other sources, concerning the history of ancient America, there
     will be found much evidence to substantiate its truth; but there
     cannot be found one truth among all the gleanings of antiquity
     that clashes with the historical truths of the Book of Mormon. If
     the prophetical part of this wonderful book be compared with the
     prophetical declarations of the Bible, there will be found much
     evidence in the latter to establish the truth of the former. But
     though there are many predictions in the Book of Mormon, relating
     to the great events of the last days, which the Bible gives us no
     information about, yet there is nothing in the predictions of the
     Bible that contradicts in the least the predictions of the Book
     of Mormon. If the doctrinal part of the Book of Mormon be
     compared with the doctrines of the Bible, there will be found the
     same perfect harmony which we find on the comparison of the
     prophetical parts of the two books. Although there are many
     points of the doctrine of Christ that are far more plain and
     definite in the Book of Mormon than in the Bible, and many things
     revealed in relation to doctrine that never could be fully
     learned from the Bible, yet there are not any items of doctrine
     in the two sacred books that contradict each other or clash in
     the least. If the various books which enter into the collection
     called the Book of Mormon be carefully compared with each other,
     there will be found nothing contradictory in history, in
     prophecy, or in doctrine.... If we compare the historical,
     prophetical, and doctrinal parts of the Book of Mormon with the
     great truths of science and nature, we find no contradictions--no
     absurdities--nothing unreasonable. The most perfect harmony
     therefore exists between the great truths revealed in the Book of
     Mormon and all other known truths, whether religious, historical,
     or scientific."--Apostle Orson Pratt in Divine Authenticity of
     the Book of Mormon, p. 56.
