CHRIST'S REIGN ON EARTH.

     Article 10.--We believe ... That Christ will reign personally
     upon the earth, etc.

1. Christ's First and Second Advents.--The facts of Christ's birth in the flesh, of His thirty and three years of life among mortals, of His ministry, sufferings, and death, are universally accepted as attested history. Not alone do the records that the Christian world regards as sacred and inspired bear testimony concerning these facts, but the history written by man, and, in contrast, called profane, is generally in harmony with the biblical account. Even those who reject the doctrine of Christ's divinity, even they who refuse to accept Him as their Redeemer, admit the historical facts of His marvelous life, and acknowledge the incalculable effect of His precepts and example upon the human family.

2. In the "Meridian of Time" Christ was born to earth, amid humble surroundings,--in obscurity, indeed, to all except the faithful few who had been watching for the expected advent. His coming had been heralded through the previous centuries, even from the dawn of human existence; every prophet of God had borne record of the great events which were to characterize His advent. Every important incident connected with His birth, life, death, triumphal resurrection, and ultimate glory as King, Lord, and God, had been predicted; and even the details of the circumstances were given with exactness. Judah and Israel had been told to prepare for the coming of the Anointed One;[1066] yet, behold, when He came to His own they received Him not. Persecuted and despised, He trod the thorny path of duty, "a, man of sorrows and acquainted with grief;" and, finally condemned by His people, who clamored to an alien power for authority to execute their own diabolical sentence upon their Lord, He went to the death prescribed for malefactors.

  [1066] See Note 1.

3. To human judgment, it surely seemed that the Divine mission of Christ had been nullified, that His work had failed, and that the powers of darkness had become triumphant. Blind, deaf, and hard of heart were those who refused to see, hear, and comprehend the purport of the Savior's mission. Similarly benighted are they who reject the prophetic evidence of His second coming, and who fail to read the signs of the times, which declare the event, at once so terrible and glorious, to be near at hand. Both before and after His death, Christ prophesied of His appointed reappearance upon the earth; and His faithful followers are to-day waiting and watching for the signs of the great fulfillment. The heavens are flaming with those signals, and the burden of inspired teaching is again heard,--Repent, repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

4. Christ's Second Coming Predicted; and Signs Described. Bible Prophecies.--The prophets of the Old Testament, and those of Book of Mormon record who lived and wrote before the era of Christ, had little to say regarding the second coming of the Lord, little indeed in comparison with their numerous and explicit predictions concerning His first advent. As they looked into the sky of futurity, and with prophetic power read the story of the heavenly orbs, their vision was dazzled with the brilliancy of the Meridian Sun, and they saw little of the glorious luminary beyond, whose proportions and radiance were veiled by the mists of distance. A few of them saw and so testified, as the following passages show: The Psalmist sang:--"Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him."[1067] These devouring and tempestuous conditions did not attend the coming of Bethlehem's Babe.

  [1067] Psalms l, 3.

5. Isaiah cries:--"Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not; behold your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense; he will come and save you."[1068] Aside from the evident fact that these conditions did not attend the first coming of Christ, the context of the prophet's words shows that he applied them to the last days, the time of restitution, the day of the "ransomed of the Lord," and of the triumph of Zion.[1069] Again Isaiah speaks:--"Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him."[1070]

  [1068] Isa. xxxv, 4.

  [1069] Verses 5-10.

  [1070] Isa. xl, 10.

6. The prophet Enoch, who lived twenty centuries before the first of those whose words are given above, spoke with vigor on the subject. His teachings do not appear under his own name in the Bible, though Jude, a New Testament writer, cites them.[1071] From the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, we learn concerning the revelation given to Enoch:--"And the Lord said unto Enoch, As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah."[1072]

  [1071] Jude 14-15.

  [1072] Pearl of Great Price: Moses vii, 60.

7. Jesus taught the disciples that His mission in the flesh was to be of short duration, and that he would come again to earth, for we find them enquiring in this wise, "Tell us when shall these things be? And what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?"[1073] In reply, our Lord detailed many of the signs of the latter times, the last and greatest of which He thus stated:--"And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come."[1074] With great clearness, Jesus spoke of the worldliness in which the children of men had continued to indulge, even on the eve of the Deluge, and on the day of the fiery destruction which befell the Cities of the Plains, and added:--"Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed."[1075]

  [1073] Matt. xxiv, 3. See "Jesus the Christ," ch. xxxii.

  [1074] Verse 14.

  [1075] Luke xvii, 26-30.

8. Another of our Lord's predictions concerning His second coming is as follows; His citation of the signs by which the approach of the event may be known is so impressive that we should read the description in its entirety:--"And they [the disciples] asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be? and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass? And he said, Take heed that ye be not deceived: for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and the time draweth near: go ye not therefore after them. But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and by. Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven. But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake.... And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh."[1076]

  [1076] Luke xxi, 7-28; see also Mark xiii, 14-26; Rev. vi, 12-17.

9. Again, by way of warning, the Lord said:--"Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels."[1077]

  [1077] Mark viii, 38.

10. At the time of the Ascension, as the apostles stood gazing into the firmament, where a cloud had hidden their resurrected Lord from sight, they became aware of the presence of two heavenly visitors, who said:--"Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven."[1078] Paul instructed the churches in the doctrines of Christ's second advent, and described the glory of His coming.[1079] So also did others of the apostles.[1080]

  [1078] Acts i, 11. See "Jesus the Christ," p. 695.

  [1079] I Thess. iv, 16; II Thess. i, 7-8; Heb. ix, 28.

  [1080] I Peter iv, 13; I John ii, 28; iii, 2.

11. Among Book of Mormon Prophecies concerning our present subject, we find the teachings of Christ Himself at the time of His ministrations to the Nephites in His resurrected state. To the multitude He explained many matters, "even from the beginning until the time that He should come in his glory."[1081] In promising the three disciples the desire of their hearts, which was that they might be spared in the flesh to continue the work of the ministry, the Lord said to them:--"Ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father, unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled, according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory, with the powers of heaven."[1082]

  [1081] III Nephi xxvi, 3; see also xxv, 5.

  [1082] III Nephi xxviii, 7; see also 8. See "Jesus the Christ,"
  ch. xxxix.

12. The Word of Modern Revelation is no less sure regarding the appointed advent of the Redeemer. To servants, specially commissioned, instructions were given to this effect:--"Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning, and oil with you,[1083] that you may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom. For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you that I come quickly."[1084] And again, this instruction is given:--"Cry repentance unto a crooked and perverse generation, preparing the way of the Lord for his second coming; for behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, the time is soon at hand that I shall come in a cloud with power and great glory."[1085]

  [1083] An allusion to the parable of the Ten Virgins; see Matt.
  xxv, 1-13.

  [1084] Doc. and Cov. xxxiii, 17.

  [1085] Doc. and Cov. xxxiv, 6-7.

13. In a revelation to the people of the Church, March 7, 1831, the Lord speaks of the signs of His coming, and counsels diligence. Consider His words:--"Ye look and behold the fig-trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender, that summer is now nigh at hand; even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh. And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of man; and they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath; and they shall behold blood and fire, and vapors of smoke; and before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and stars fall from heaven; and the remnant shall be gathered unto this place, and then they shall look for me, and behold I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory, with all the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off."[1086]

  [1086] Doc. and Cov. xiv, 37-44; see also paragraphs 74-75.

14. The distinctive characteristic of the revelations as given in the present dispensation, regarding the second coming of our Lord, is the emphatic and oft-repeated declaration that the event is near at hand.[1087] The call is, "Prepare ye, prepare ye, for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh." Instead of the cry of one man in the wilderness of Judea, the voice of thousands is heard authoritatively warning the nations, and inviting them to repent and flee to Zion for safety. The fig tree is rapidly putting forth its leaves; the signs in heaven and earth are increasing; surely the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near.

  [1087] See the numerous references in connection with Doc. and
  Cov. i, 12. See "Jesus the Christ," ch. xlii.

15. The Precise Time of Christ's Coming has not been made known to man. By learning to comprehend the signs of the times, by watching the development of the work of God among the nations, and by noting the rapid fulfillment of significant prophecies, we may perceive the progressive evidence of the approaching event, "But the hour and the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes."[1088] His coming will be a surprise to those who have rejected His warnings, and who have failed to watch. "Like a thief in the night"[1089] will be the coming of the day of the Lord unto the wicked. "Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh."[1090]

  [1088] Doc. and Cov. xlix, 7.

  [1089] II Peter iii, 10; I Thess. v, 2, etc.

  [1090] Matt, xxv, 13; see also xxiv, 42, 44; Mark xiii, 33, 35;
  Luke xii, 40.

16. Christ's Reign: The Kingdom.--We have seen that, according to the words of holy prophets ancient and modern, Christ is to come, in a literal sense, and so manifest Himself in person in the last days. He is to dwell among His Saints. "Yea, even I will be in the midst of you,"[1091] He declared to the people on this continent, whom He promised to establish in the land of the New Jerusalem; and similar assurances were given through the prophets of the east.[1092] In this prospective ministration among His gathered Saints, Christ is to be at once their God and their King. His government is to be that of a perfect theocracy; the laws of righteousness will be the code, and control will be administered under one authority, undisputed because indisputable.

  [1091] III Nephi xx, 22; see also xxi, 25.

  [1092] Ezek. xxxvii, 26-27; Zech. ii, 10, 11; viii, 3; II Cor. vi,
  16.

17. The scriptures abound with declarations that the Lord will yet reign among his people. To this effect sang Moses before the hosts of Israel after their miraculous passage through the Red Sea,--"The Lord shall reign for ever and ever;"[1093] and the psalmist echoes the refrain, "The Lord is King for ever and ever."[1094] Jeremiah calls Him "an everlasting king," before whose wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations yield;[1095] and Nebuchadnezzar, humbled through tribulation, rejoiced in honoring the King of Heaven, "whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation."[1096]

  [1093] Exo. xv, 18.

  [1094] Psa. x, 16 see also xxix, 10; cxlv, 13; cxlvi, 10.

  [1095] Jer. x, 10.

  [1096] Dan. iv, 34-37.

18. Even chosen Israel were not always willing to accept God as their king. Remember how they protested that Samuel, the anointed prophet and judge, was old,--a poor excuse for their claim, as the old man ministered with vigor among them for thirty-five years beyond that time,--and how they cried for a king to rule them, that they might be like other nations.[1097] Note the pathetic words with which the Lord replied to Samuel's prayer regarding this demand of the people, and the sorrow with which He granted them their wish:--"Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me that I should not reign over them."[1098] But the Lord will not be ever rejected by His people; at the time appointed He will come with power and great glory, and will assume His rightful place of authority as King of earth.

  [1097] I Sam. viii, 5.

  [1098] Verse 7; see also x, 19; Hosea xiii, 10-11.

19. Daniel interpreted the dream of Nebuchadnezzar, and spoke of the many kingdoms and divisions of kingdoms which were to be established, then added:--"And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever."[1099] Touching the extent of the great kingdom to be established the same prophet declared:--"And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him."[1100]

  [1099] Dan. ii, 44.

  [1100] Dan. vii, 27.

20. Speaking of the restoration of Judah and Israel in the last days, Micah prophesies:--"And the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever."[1101] In the annunciation to the Virgin, the angel said of the unborn Christ:--"He shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end."[1102] In the visions of Patmos, the Apostle John saw the glorious consummation, and a universal recognition of the eternal King:--"And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign forever and ever."[1103] Modern revelation is rich in evidence of an approaching reign of righteousness, with Christ as King; witness the following:--"And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst."[1104] "For in my own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth."[1105]

  [1101] Micah iv, 7; see also Isa. xxiv, 23.

  [1102] Luke i, 33.

  [1103] Rev. xi, 15.

  [1104] Doc. and Cov. i, 36.

  [1105] Doc. and Cov. xliii, 29; see also lxxxiv, 119.

21. Kingdom and Church.--In the Gospel according to Matthew, the phrase "kingdom of heaven" is of frequent occurrence; while in the books of the other evangelists, and throughout the epistles, the expression is "kingdom of God," "kingdom of Christ," or simply "kingdom." It is evident that these expressions may be used interchangeably without violence to the true meaning. However, the term kingdom is used in more senses than one, and a careful study of the context in each instance may be necessary to a proper comprehension of the writers intent. The most common usages are two:--1. An expression synonymous with "the Church," having reference to the followers of Christ without distinction as to their temporal or spiritual organizations. 2. The designation of the literal kingdom over which Christ is to reign on earth in the last days.

22. When we contemplate the Kingdom in the latter and more general sense, the Church must be regarded as a part thereof; an essential indeed, for it is the germ from which the Kingdom is to be developed, and the very heart of the perfected organization. The Church has existed and now continues in an organized form, without the Kingdom as a visibly established power with temporal authority in the world; but the Kingdom cannot be maintained without the Church.

23. In modern revelation, the expressions "kingdom of God" and "kingdom of heaven" are sometimes used with distinctive meanings,--the former phrase signifying the Church, and the latter the literal kingdom which is to supersede and comprise all existing national divisions. In this sense, the kingdom of God has been set up already in these the last days; its beginning in and for the present dispensation was the establishment of the Church on its latter-day and permanent foundation. This is consistent with our conception of the Church as the vital organ of the Kingdom in general. The powers and authority committed to the Church are then the keys of the Kingdom. Such meaning is made clear in the following revelation to the Church:--"The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands[1106] shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth.... Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth; wherefore may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven, so on earth, that thy enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory for ever and ever."[1107]

  [1106] Allusion to Daniel's interpretation of the dream of
  Nebuchadnezzar; see Dan. ii, 34, 44.

  [1107] Doc. and Cov. lxv, 2, 5-6.

24. At the time of His glorious advent, Christ will be accompanied by the hosts of righteous ones who have already passed from earth; and the Saints who are still alive on earth are to be quickened and caught up to meet Him, and to descend with Him as partakers of His glory.[1108] With Him too will come Enoch and his band of the pure in heart;[1109] and a union will be effected with the Kingdom of God, or that part of the Kingdom of Heaven previously established as the Church of Christ on earth; and the Kingdom on earth will be one with that in heaven. Then will be realized a complete fulfillment of the Lord's own prayer, given as a pattern to all who pray:--"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven."[1110]

  [1108] Doc. and Cov. lxxxviii, 91-98.

  [1109] See pp. 358, 362-363.

  [1110] Matt. vi, 10; Luke xi, 2.

25. The disputed question, "Is the Kingdom already set up on earth or are we to wait for its establishment until the time of the future advent of Christ, the King?" may properly receive answer either affirmative or negative, according to the sense in which the term kingdom is understood. The Kingdom of God as identical with the Church of Christ has assuredly been established; its history is that of the Church in these the last days; its officers are divinely commissioned, their power is that of the holy priesthood. They claim an authority which is spiritual, but also temporal in dealing with the members of the organization,--Church or Kingdom as you may choose to call it,--but they make no attempt, nor do they assert the right, to modify, assail, or in any way interfere with, existing governments; far less to subdue nations or to set up rival systems of control. The Kingdom of Heaven, including the Church, and comprising all nations, will be set up with power and great glory when the triumphant King comes with His heavenly retinue to personally rule and reign on the earth which He has redeemed at the sacrifice of His own life.

26. As seen, the Kingdom of Heaven will comprise more than the Church. The honorable and honest among men will be accorded protection and the privileges of citizenship under the perfect system of government which Christ will administer; and this will be their happy lot whether they are actually members of the Church or not. Law-breakers and men of impure heart will meet the judgment of destruction according to their sin; but those who live according to the truth as they have been able to receive and comprehend it, will enjoy the fullest liberty under the benign influences of a perfect administration. The special privileges and blessings associated with the Church, the right to hold and exercise the priesthood with its boundless possibilities and eternal powers, will be, as now they are, for those only who enter into the covenant and become part of the Church of the Redeemer.

27. The Millennium.--In connection with scriptural mention of Christ's reign on earth, a duration of a thousand years is frequently specified. While we cannot regard this as indicating a time limit to the Kingdom's existence, or a measure of the Savior's administration of power, we are justified in the belief that the thousand years immediately following the establishment of the Kingdom are to be specially characterized, so as to be different from both preceding and succeeding time. The gathering of Israel and the establishment of an earthly Zion are to be effected, preparatory to His coming. His advent is to be marked by a destruction of the wicked, and by the inauguration of an era of peace. The Revelator saw the souls of the martyrs, and of other righteous men, in power, living and reigning with Christ a thousand years.[1111] At the beginning of this period Satan is to be bound, "that he should deceive the nations no more until the thousand years should be fulfilled."[1112] Certain of the dead are not to live again until the thousand years are passed;[1113] while the righteous "shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years."[1114] Among the most ancient of revelations regarding the Millennium is that given to Enoch:--"And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the space of a thousand years."[1115]

  [1111] Rev. xx, 4; see also 6.

  [1112] Rev. xx, 2-3.

  [1113] Verse 5.

  [1114] Verse 6.

  [1115] Pearl of Great Price: Moses vii, 65.

28. It is evident, then, that in speaking of the Millennium we have to consider a definite period, with important events marking its beginning and its close, and conditions of unusual blessedness extending throughout. It will be a sabbatical era,[1116]--a thousand years of peace. Enmity between man and beast shall cease; the fierceness and venom of the brute creation shall be done away,[1117] and love shall rule.[1118] A new condition of affairs will prevail, as was declared in the word of the Lord to Isaiah:--"For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; and the former shall not be remembered nor come into mind."[1119]

  [1116] See Note 2.

  [1117] Isa. xi, 6-9; lxv, 25.

  [1118] See Notes 3 and 4.

  [1119] Isa. lxv, 17.

29. Concerning the state of peace, prosperity, and duration of human life, characteristic of that period, we read:--"There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed. And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer: and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord."[1120]

  [1120] Verses 20-23.

30. The Lord's voice is heard to-day declaring the same prophetic truths, as is shown in the revelations touching the Millennium given in the present dispensation of the Church.[1121] In 1831, the Lord addressed the elders of His Church, and said:--"For the great Millennium, of which I have spoken by the mouth of my servants, shall come; for Satan shall be bound, and when he is loosed again, he shall only reign for a little season, and then cometh the end of the earth."[1122] On another occasion these words were spoken:--"For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand.... And again, verily, verity, I say unto you, that when the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season, and the end shall come."[1123]

  [1121] Doc. and Cov. lxiii, 49-51.

  [1122] Doc. and Cov. xliii, 30-31.

  [1123] Doc. and Cov. xxix, 11, 22-23.

31. The Millennium then is to precede the events usually indicated by the scriptural phrase, "the end of the world." During that period, all conditions will be propitious for righteousness; Satan's power will be suspended; and men, relieved to some extent from temptation, will be zealous in the service of their reigning Lord. Nevertheless, sin will not be wholly abolished, nor will death be banished; though children will live to reach maturity in the flesh, and then may be changed to a condition of immortality in the "twinkling of an eye."[1124] Both mortal and immortal beings will tenant the earth, and communion with the heavenly powers will be common. The Latter-day Saints believe that during that millennial era they will be privileged to continue the vicarious work for the dead, which constitutes so important and so characteristic a feature of their duty,[1125] and that the facilities for direct communication with the heavens will enable them to carry on their labor of love without hindrance. When the thousand years are passed, Satan will again assert his power, and those who are not then numbered among the pure in heart will yield to his influence. But the liberty thus recovered by "the prince of the power of the air"[1126] will be of short duration; his final doom will speedily follow, and with him will go to the punishment that is everlasting, all who are his. Then the earth will pass to its celestial condition, and become a fit abode for the glorified sons and daughters of our God.

  [1124] Doc. and Cov. lxiii, 50-51.

  [1125] See pp. 148-159.

  [1126] Eph. ii, 2.

NOTES.

     1. "The Anointed One."--"Christ, the official name of the
     Redeemer of mankind, as Jesus, or in the Hebrew, Joshua,
     'Savior,' was His natural name. Christ means 'anointed,' from
     chrio, 'to anoint.' Under the Old Testament dispensation, high
     priests, kings, and prophets were appointed to their office by
     the pouring of the sacred oil upon their heads. The rite was
     performed by the recognized officer of Jehovah, and was an
     outward testimony that their appointment proceeded direct from
     God himself, as the source of all authority, and as being under
     the ancient covenant, in a peculiar way, the governor of his
     people. The oil used in the consecration of priests, and the
     anointing of the tabernacle and sacred vessels, was a special
     preparation of myrrh, cinnamon, calamus, and cassia (Exo. xxx,
     23-25), which the Jews were forbidden to apply to the body, or to
     copy under pain of death. It was no doubt intended to typify the
     gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit."--Cassell's Bible
     Dictionary, p. 257.

     2. The Seventh Thousand Years.--"As each seventh year was
     Israel's year of remission, so of the world's seven thousands,
     the seventh shall be its sabbatism."--Fausset's Bible
     Cyclopedia, p. 685. "There remaineth therefore a rest to the
     people of God"; or, as given by marginal reference, instead of
     "rest," the "keeping of a sabbath."--Heb. iv, 9.

     3. Millennial Peace.--"The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb,
     and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the
     young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall
     lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones
     shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the
     ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and
     the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den. They
     shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth
     shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
     the sea."--Isa. xi, 6-9; see also lxv, 25.

     4. The Earth before, during, and after the Millennium.--"There
     are three conditions of the earth spoken of in the inspired
     writings,--the present, in which everything pertaining to it must
     go through a change which we call death; the millennial
     condition, in which it will be sanctified for the residence of
     purer intelligences, some mortal and some immortal; and the
     celestial condition, spoken of in the twenty-first and
     twenty-second chapters of Revelation, which will be one of
     immortality and eternal life."--Compendium, by Elders F. D.
     Richards and James A. Little, p. 202.
