Our Answer:

It can be depressing just hearing about all the bad things happening in the world. We seem to be surrounded by negative influences at school, at work, and sometimes even in our homes. But we don’t have to be overcome by such influences. During World War II, a popular song advised people to “accentuate the positive, eliminate the negative.” We can work towards doing that by living the gospel and doing all the things the Lord would have us do.

Of course, living the gospel is no guarantee that our lives will be problem free. We accepted that fact in our pre-earth life. In the Council in Heaven we agreed to come to earth to be tested. We knew there would be “opposition in all things” (2 Ne. 2:11). But we also knew that Heavenly Father would provide us with a way to overcome this opposition. That Way is his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ (see John 14:6).

There are, in fact, several ways the Savior helps us overcome the negative influences of mortality. First and foremost, he atoned for our sins so that we might not suffer for them if we repent (see D&C 19:16). Having atoned for our sins, he now commands us, “Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me” (D&C 19:23).

Second, during his mortal ministry Jesus set an example for us. “He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them” (D&C 20:22).

Third, because the Savior experienced sorrow and pain, illness and temptation fully, he can help us cope with these trials. “He shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind,” prophesied Alma, adding that the Savior would also “take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people.

“… And he will take upon him [our] infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities” (Alma 7:11–12).

We sometimes forget that in addition to atoning for our sins, the Lord also suffered “the pains and the sicknesses” of humankind. From personal experience, he knows how to bless us, no matter what our individual circumstances may be.

When we believe that the Savior has the power to bless and help us, we have the faith necessary to “cleave unto every good thing” (Moro. 7:28). Surely the Savior himself is the living symbol of “every good thing,” and so we should cleave most unto him. To do this, we need to be “doers of the word, and not hearers only” (James 1:22).

One of our readers suggested that as we cultivate the Lord’s word in our lives, fears and doubts melt away. Helaman counseled his sons, “Remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, … when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo” (Hel. 5:12).

For those struggling against the mighty winds of the adversary, the Lord’s promise is sure: “I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world” (Matt. 28:20).

Readers’ Answers:

My faith in the Lord is strengthened every time I seek his help. I know there will be negative influences in my life; without opposition there is no progress. But the Lord will not let me be tempted beyond my capacity to withstand temptation. That means he knows me. This assurance builds my faith in my Savior and strengthens my testimony of the gospel.

Feauini Lomu,
Ha’ateiho Second Ward, Nuku‘alofa Tonga South Stake

We are constantly exposed to evil by the actions of others, by television and movies, and by newspapers and other publications. The closer we get to the Second Coming of the Lord, the more tempted we will be as Latter-day Saints. But with the help of the Holy Ghost we can reject temptation and live gospel principles. We must be mindful of the counsel we receive from Church leaders, who warn us constantly against accepting the false ideals of the world. By following their counsel, we can meet and conquer the challenges that surround us.

Maria Mounzer,
Licata Branch, Palermo Italy District

I strive to overcome evil by doing good works and by contemplating the life of my Savior every day. He wants me to return to him; that is the great blessing of the plan of salvation. Loving my Savior, I cannot allow myself to be overcome by temptation or to do any wrong that would hurt him.

Joan T. Talia’uli,
Mu’a Second Ward, Nuku‘alofa Tonga Mu’a Stake

I know the scriptures and the counsel we receive from the Lord’s prophets are suited to us in these latter days. If we read, understand, and apply the scriptures and such counsel to our lives, we can develop a faith in the Lord that will counter the negative influences that surround us.

Ohmar T. Moises,
Binalonan Ward, Urdaneta Philippines Stake

As a university student, I am surrounded by nonmember friends. My basic concepts and values are constantly challenged. However, living gospel standards gives me the strength to withstand temptation. By so doing, I find my life filled with joy, I gain the respect of others, and I have the chance to share my testimony with them.

Li, Yung Gun,
Taichung Third Ward, Taichung Taiwan Stake

We should not be surprised if difficulties weigh us down or even if people offend us or treat us badly. The Savior faced all these problems, and he overcame them. As a result, the Savior knows how to help us. If we open our hearts to him, he will fill us with his immense love. He will console us and give us strength.

We must remember that “men are, that they might have joy” (2 Ne. 2:25) and that each of us is of great value to the Lord.

Elisabetta Marangon,
Treviso Branch, Venice Italy Stake

To neutralize the negative influences of the world, I begin my day by reading the scriptures. This opens my heart to the positive influence of the Spirit, and I feel inspired as I seek the Lord in prayer. Fasting combined with prayer opens my mind and increases my vision of things eternal.

Carolina A. Nachtigall,
Itaimbe Ward, Santa Maria Brazil Stake

As a missionary I often meet people with questions similar to this one. Their faith is strengthened when they gain an understanding of who they are—children of a loving God. When they realize that there is a purpose to life and that the Lord wants to guide them, they feel a desire to be worthy of Heavenly Father’s promises of peace in this life and eternal progression in the world to come.

Elder Miguel Marcelo Benítez,
Argentina Rosario Mission

The scriptures, loving and inspired Church leaders, and my testimony of the Savior’s Atonement for my sins give me the desire, the strength, and the faith I need to neutralize pessimistic influences. As a full-time missionary, I have the challenge of developing a positive attitude in the midst of difficulties and opposition. My faith in the Lord, plus work, equals miracles.

Sister Aldênia Emiliano Mendes,
Brazil Belo Horizonte East Mission

The problems we may have can be solved through studying the scriptures,following the counsel of the Brethren, fasting with a purpose, seeking the Lord through prayer, and being worthy of the Holy Ghost.

We need to be humble, charitable, and obedient members of the Church. We need not only the will to do his work but more especially the desire.

João Batista de Oliveira,
Paranoa Branch, Brasilia Brazil Stake

When I experience negative influences in my life, I remember that the Lord gave his life for me. My trials are nothing compared to what he suffered. Even though I will have to go through trials the rest of my life, it will be worth it if I can return to live with him.

Clara Lourdes Díaz Maguiña,
Elio Ward, Lima Peru Magdalena Stake

I think the best way to counter the negative influences of the world is to always pray to the Lord for help, to be active in the Church and in seminary and institute, and to read the scriptures. As we do this, we develop faith in the Lord; and as we develop faith in him, we receive the great gift of hope in the Savior, who counters every negative influence.

Nelma A. Andales,
Allen First Branch, Catarman Philippines District
