Do you wonder what you should do sometimes? I do. That’s when I try to think about the Savior. I ask myself, What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

I’d rather watch television and play video games than do my homework and read the scriptures with my family. What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

As all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith (D&C 88:118).

Soon I will be eight years old. I am a little bit afraid to be baptized. What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day (3 Ne. 27:20).

I’ve been saving my money to buy a new bike. If I don’t pay my tithing this month, I’ll have enough. What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you (3 Ne. 13:33).

I usually like going to church on Sundays, but sometimes I’d rather be out playing with my friends. What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

That thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day (D&C 59:9).

When I went to the store, I stole some bubble gum. It tastes good, but I know what I did was wrong. I don’t want anyone to know what I did, though. What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

I, the Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts (D&C 61:2).

The meanest, toughest bully at school lives next door to me. He’s always picking on me and teasing me. What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you (3 Ne. 12:44).

My grandma died. I miss her so much—all I want to do is stay in my room and cry. What does Jesus Christ want me to do?

Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die. … And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them (D&C 42:45–46).

If thou art sorrowful, call on the Lord thy God with supplication, that your souls may be joyful (D&C 136:29).

What can I do? What can you do?
