John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER ONE

CAN THE UNSEEN WORLD BE KNOWN?

The unseen world is the one that lies beyond the immediate ken of our senses. It is a reality of the Christian faith, and of almost every other religious creed. But if that world may not be known by us individually, or only by proxy, religion becomes remote and insubstantial.

It is mankind's misfortune that, throughout the years, men have set up a wall between the visible and invisible worlds. They say that that wall may not be surmounted by mortal man; he may know whatever lies on his side; but he can sense, only by guess, whatever lies on the other side. Further, they say that, though man is so limited, the beings of the unseen world are under no such restrictions. They may, at their pleasure, and unhindered by the wall, enter our world. In short, the wall between the two worlds is a barrier only to us of earth, who would pry into the world beyond the reach of eye or ear. That teaching has made the unseen world seem distant, unreal, and incomprehensible.

The idea of such a barrier has been carried to an unreasonable extent among many otherwise thoughtful people. For example: Christians believe in the Bible as a series of books prepared under divine inspiration. The Bible records that at various times, God, his Son Jesus Christ, and angels have appeared from their heavenly abode to converse with men on earth. Yet, by an unaccountable turn of thinking, the wall has been made impenetrable even for those who dwell in the unseen world. It is declared, by a multitude of Christian believers, that all such things ended with the completion of the books now constituting the Bible. God and angels have no further need to communicate with mankind, nor will they do so. The Bible is sufficient, even for our changing day. By this doctrine the wall is made impenetrable from both sides. Latter-day Saints cannot believe this; for it is in clear opposition to our best knowledge.

Strange as it may seem, the most destructive blows upon this wall, separating the visible and invisible worlds, have come from science. Science has battered the wall steadily, until it now lies in fragments.

Let me explain.

Modern science began with the observation of the behavior of objects in the immediate, physical, and visible universe. Soon, however, students of the universe became aware of the insufficiency of the ordinary senses of man. There was shadowy evidence of the existence of things affecting the visible universe beyond the reach of eye or ear. Exasperated and humiliated by their human limitations, by knowledge vaguely touched but beyond their grasp, seekers after truth looked for aids which would reveal to them the part of the universe closed to their direct senses.

Such aids were found. They came in quick succession. Each one opened the door to a part of the universe formerly impenetrable to man. Each one led to the founding, as it were, of a new science. Thenceforth the history of science became the story of aids to man's senses.

The story of light furnishes a good example. At first, light was but light to the eye of man. But, when Isaac Newton passed a beam of light through a glass prism, the resulting spectrum showed at least seven colors from violet at one end, to red at the other. One glance into the unseen world had changed, forever, man's conception of light.

When the photographic plate came as another aid to man's senses, it was found that beyond the violet end of the light spectrum are rays invisible to the eye, but capable of affecting the sensitive photographic plate.

And, when the thermometer was invented, another aid to man's senses, it was found that at the red end of the spectrum were still other constituents of the light beam, heat rays, invisible to the eye.

Glass prism, photographic plate, and thermometer, in succession, opened unexpected doors to the world of light. Every school-boy now has easy access to this part of the unseen world.

Similarly, the starry heavens were as a closed book until aids to man's senses were secured. The telescope and the spectroscope were invented. By their magic, planets and stars were brought nearer to the eye; mountains were seen on the moon; rings of luminous substance surrounded Saturn; satellites revolved around Jupiter; in the dark spaces of the heavens were found luminous stars, unsuspected before; the stars in the high heavens, the fixed stars, and all creation, in the very depths of space, were shown to be in motion; and it was found that the earth and the stars in the heavens are composed of the same elements. The earth was no longer a stranger amidst the celestial host. Our universe was found to be one in essential nature; neither static nor dead; but in vibrant life.

These simple instruments, the glass prism, the photographic plate, the thermometer, the telescope, and the spectroscope, have penetrated the unseen parts of the world of light and of the universe about us, and thereby have battered down much of the wall between the seen and the unseen worlds.

An equally remarkable invasion of the unseen world was in the region of the infinitely small. In the canals of Rotterdam was clear water. But when Leuwenhook contrived a microscope, the apparently pure water was found to contain multitudes of minute forms of life, moving about, feeding, reproducing, and dying. A world unseen by the natural eye was opened to view. The major activities of the biological sciences rest upon the revelations of the microscope.

Of daily interest is the radio tube, by which we pick out of the still air, music and messages, from far away, far beyond the reach of the unaided ear.

But, science has dug deeper. Star and earth, man and animalcule, are composed of molecules, "the minutest particles of matter capable of separate existence." Some of them are so small that it would require a thousand million of them, end to end, to make an inch. Yet they are known, and their properties described with great accuracy.

With this, science is not content. Molecules are made up of atoms. Atoms belong to another world than the one in which we live and move and have our being; therefore would be thought to be wholly beyond the reach of man through any of his senses or aids to his senses. On the contrary, the number and kinds of atoms, their weights and their properties, are accurately known.

Even this is not all, marvelous as it appears. The atoms have been broken down, and their constituent parts revealed. Electrons, neutrons, protons, the constituents of the atoms, have been weighed and measured and their behavior determined. The subatomic world, thus opened, is absolutely and wholly beyond direct human senses. It is a world so far from the world in which we live, as to baffle the human mind. Yet, its reality, through its effects, is convincing.

All this has come about through the invention of relatively simple aids to man's senses. A host of such aids exist. It is by their use, in exploring the unseen world, that we have won our vast knowledge-possessions, and it is by such aids that knowledge will increase.

A moment's reflection will lead to the conviction that so fruitful a method of securing knowledge cannot be confined to merely physical things. It must be of general application. It must be as useful in the mental, emotional, and spiritual worlds, as in the so-called material world, since they are all parts of the one world in which we live.

There can be no organic difference between the material and spiritual worlds. More and more, it is becoming evident that the seen and the unseen, the visible and invisible, are but phases of the same world, the one world. More and more we are coming to recognize that the apparent differences depend upon our own, limited, human powers. More and more we are driven to think of one world, one universe, comprehending all truth, of every kind and character. The wall between the two worlds is disappearing.

This has always been the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It was well stated, in its essential meaning, by Joseph Smith, the Prophet: "There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes; we cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter." [^1] And, the Latter-day Saints also believe that since the so-called physical and spiritual worlds are manifestations of the one world, both may be known, in part at least, by human beings.

The application of this method of inquiry in the spiritual domain, has often been made. For example, Joseph Smith, the Prophet, received plates covered with engravings, the meaning of which he did not understand. But he was also given an instrument, called the urim and thummim, an aid to his senses, by which the translation of the engravings was made possible. By that help he invaded to a limited extent the unseen world. It was a thoroughly scientific method—one of the many evidences of the truth of the claims of the Prophet.

It is a commonplace, today, to speak of the necessity of being "in tune." The marvel of the radio has brought this about. The voice of the speaker at the microphone causes air waves, which in turn agitate the ether, or whatever we may call the universe-filling medium. These waves spread to the uttermost limits. Wherever there is a receiving apparatus, powerful enough, and in tune with the microphone, the speaker may be heard. But, the instrument must be "in tune."

This principle is in full application in our daily lives. Unless we are in tune, in the mood, we usually say, the good book we read does not appeal to us; the inspired music is not enjoyable; the friendly company is not congenial; the color-rich sunset does not thrill us.

Commonly, such discord is of our making. We are in tune with other or lower levels of enjoyment. If we chose, we could tune ourselves to be in harmony with the edifying thoughts in the book, the beauty of music, the loveliness of our friends, or the glory of a sky filled with purple and red.

In this failure to be in tune with that which is good or beautiful or true, lies most of the sorrows and disasters of life.

This may be extended to the spiritual life. We must "tune in" to truth to find it; to the commandments of the Lord to know Him; to a surrender to the Lord to receive His revelations. That is the only manner in which revelations, great or small, may be received from the Lord of the heavens.

This marvelous power has been given to us all. Each one of us may become, as it were, a receiving apparatus, placing us in communication with the unseen world of spiritual realities. By the use of this power we may be enlightened, guided, protected all the days of our lives. Truth, with its ever-accompanying light, may be our companion.

But, as there is opposition in all things, so that power may be misused. We may, by evil lives, by unworthy communication, by the acceptance of unfounded beliefs, tune ourselves to hear messages from the region of darkness. And, let it always be remembered, that if we are "in tune" with evil, we are out of tune with good. We can hear either, depending upon our own choice, but we cannot hear both at the same time.

That explains why those who live in untruth cannot understand truth; why they cannot be changed, until, by the efforts of their wills, by obedience to the laws of truth, they so change their lives, that they may hear the message of truth.

This principle of self-effort, in making of ourselves receiving apparatuses, in establishing spiritual communications, is well set forth in modern revelation. Oliver Cowdery, who desired revelations from the Lord, was told:

"Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right." [^2]

Joseph Smith himself is an excellent example of the principle of being "in tune," and of becoming increasingly "in tune." When he first began his work, he received his revelations with the aid of the urim and thummim. As he grew in spiritual power, he laid aside the aid. He, himself, had become a suitable and competent receiving apparatus. Thereafter, he enquired of the Lord, without outside aids, and he received answers.

This power residing within the human organism, has long been overlooked. Yet, in a world of prophets and seers, from the earliest days, it should not have been so. Every one of us, by righteous living, may so fit ourselves as to receive the help that we need from the unseen world. We, composed of body and soul, are greater and more powerful than any man-made contrivance for the reception of truth. Remember, that the radio itself would speak to empty space, were it not for ears, parts of our marvelous body.

Certainly, the time has long passed when a barrier between the unseen and the seen worlds, between God and man, can be tolerated. By the very means used by men of old to receive the word of God directly, men of this latter-day may receive help from out the other world, or may speak with Him. Never, in the long history of the world, have the means of securing revelation been so well understood as today. And perhaps never has the evil one fought so ferociously to prevent us from gathering truth from heaven. Therefore, never before has the world had such need of direct revelation, to help solve the chaotic problems of our today.

Yes, the unseen world may be known! And only by that knowledge will happiness cover the earth.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Psalms 19:1, 2)
[^2] (D. & C. 88:47)
