John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER THREE

WHAT IS MAN?

What is man? This age-old question is asked today by every intelligent person. There are times when every one of us, thinks about the mystery of life. What is the meaning of our existence? What are we? and what is our business on earth? It is probably impossible to formulate a satisfactory religion, unless these questions are answered.

On such occasions one of the most haunting questions is, whether our lives really began with our birth on earth. There seems to be a dim memory within us of a life before this; of another, earlier, home from which we came. With Wordsworth, we seem to know that "Our birth is but a sleep, and a forgetting."

That there may be a life before this, a pre-existent life, a primeval place of living, is not a new thought. Philosophers have pondered it, and poets have sung about it. Indeed, the doctrine of the pre-existence of man has been ever-present in the feelings of humanity.

All who accept Christian theology and the correctness of the scriptures, are driven to believe that, in the unseen world, are hosts of personal intelligences, who lived there before the earth was created. Jesus, the Son of God, lived with the Father before His earthly ministry.

However, a curious belief has grown up concerning us, men and women. It is conceded that we stand apart from the remainder of creation, in attributes of mind and spirit. We tame the lightning, and acquire power over all natural forces. We stand as rulers among the multiplicity of living forms. We are endowed with attributes of mind and spirit, which seem inferior to those of God, only in degree, not in kind. According to the Christian promise, we shall, in time, reside in the habitation of the Lord. Even Jesus Christ, "the Only Begotten of the Father," was willing to come on earth in human form, and accept the attributes of mortality. The psalmist, when he asked, "What is man?" recognizing the preeminence of man, was moved upon to add "that thou art mindful of him." [^1]

Yet, according to the common belief of the churches, despite these marvelous possessions, that seem to relate man to someone greater, we do not really belong to the order of heavenly beings. They lived before the earth it is said. We did not exist until we came on earth is added. This makes us inferior to the remainder of intelligent creation. By this commonly accepted view, man is at best an adopted member of the heavenly host; something of an intruder there.

It is this doctrine that has made it so difficult for the churches to explain, rationally, the meaning of human life. In their attempts to satisfy our understanding, they have stood as before a dark curtain. Too often they have said, "It is a mystery." For example, in one of the most widely circulated books of the day, the head of one of the world's most powerful churches, a man who speaks for millions, writes:

"If there were no world, God would be just what He is—only (presumably) about to make the world. For He is impelled to make the world by His love." [^2]

If God "is impelled to make the world by His love," we may fairly ask, for love of whom? Since man, according to the commonly accepted view, did not at first exist, his creation cannot be for love of mankind, except as a potter may love his jars in advance of making them. That would make the creation of man on earth nothing more than a pastime of a divine power. That God would so occupy Himself cannot be believed by the rational mind.

In direct opposition to this view, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches the pre-existence of all humanity. We are not, as often taught, called by "God's power into being out of nothing." Every person lived before he came on earth. His spirit, possessed of personality, was "in the beginning with the Father," [^3] as stated in the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith. How far back that goes is not given to man to know. The "beginning" transcends human comprehension.

One conclusion, of stupendous meaning, comes out of belief in personal pre-existence. It makes man one of the eternal realities. If he were "in the beginning with the Father," he is eternal, indestructible. His eternity recedes into the eternal past, and moves onward into the endless future. He becomes an integral part of the universe. Then he is, also, from everlasting to everlasting.

The Church teaches, further, that the relationship between God, and all human beings, is that of Father and children. We were begotten of, rather than created by, God. In that pre-existent state, we received our spiritual bodies. That gives us a divine pedigree, and lifts us to the dignity of a place, a rightful place, by the side of God.

In that pre-existent period, we possessed personal powers like unto those we now enjoy. We could think and learn, accept or reject, go forward or backward. Perhaps we had powers beyond those of earth. By the diligent use of these powers we fitted ourselves for life on earth. We earned the right to come on earth. That is the simple, understandable doctrine of the Church.

Thus it comes about that every one of us, on earth, has the right to hold his head high. We knew, in the distant past, to some degree, what awaited us on earth. We had qualified ourselves for the experience. We had god-like powers given us with which to do battle against evil and for good. We may enter, fearlessly, as fitted and authorized citizens of earth, into the contests and joys of life.

In brief, we are all everlasting, of the past, as in the future. We are of a divine spiritual origin. As actual spiritual sons and daughters of God, we are members of the heavenly family. That gives us a possible God-like destiny. That declares and fixes our place in the universe. We are not of the earth, debased, but of the heavens, exalted. That is the first distinguishing mark of man.

The second such distinguishing mark, according to the teachings of the Church, is that man has always been a free agent. In the life before this we could exercise choice. By our own actions, choosing between right and wrong, we prepared ourselves for life on earth. This power remains with us here. As in the spirit world, so here, we must constantly choose between this and that, between good and evil. Every new truth, or law, must be obeyed or disobeyed. The laws of the universe cannot be ignored by man, who is himself a part of the universe. Forever, we must decide and choose.

I may learn the evils of alcohol, yet I may drink; I may know of the foul diseases that follow immorality, yet I may give no respect to my body. I may be taught the way to health, yet may follow destructive appetites.

By self effort, I may advance or retrograde, may rise or fall. There is no savor in fame, position, or power, unless one has earned it, with the Lord's help, by himself.

A plan for our welfare may be laid out, a path made, and a program arranged; but it depends upon ourselves whether we shall fit into the plan, travel the path, or hear the program. To a large extent, therefore, the destiny of a person is determined by himself. The mercy and grace of God have made the plan and path and program available; but their use depends on the man himself. It is by the exercise of this right that man may rise to his divine destiny.

This doctrine is in direct opposition to the religious philosophy which leaves man out of the picture of salvation; and lets God do all by grace. This philosophy, at least in days past, has allowed a man to have his sinful fling through life; but if, upon his death, he confessed faith in the Father and the Son, he would find himself, after death, among the blessed ones, in the presence of God.

This philosophy meets the stern disapproval of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Faith is but an idle word, unless translated into works. Indeed, the Church doubts whether faith is really alive unless it compels its possessor to engage in works corresponding to the faith. Salvation is, and must be, a cooperative enterprise between God and man.

This doctrine of the freedom of human action lies basically in the foundations of the gospel. It is as sacred to God as to man. The Lord knows that the process of education, of growth, must come from within; never from without.

Therefore, force and coercion are strangers to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

In the words of Brigham Young:

"I am not going to drive a man or woman to heaven. A great many think that they will flog people into heaven, but this can never be done, for the intelligence in us is as independent as God's." [^4] "We would not make everybody bow down to our religion, if we had the power, for this would not be godlike." [^5] And this, we may add, applies to drivings by fear of future punishment, a burning hell, as by physical torture, such as has been practiced in earlier, evil ages.

Men are taught the truth; they are left to accept or reject it. After that has been done, they must be allowed to do as they choose. It is better to permit them to walk in darkness than to attempt by force to bring them into light temporarily. "A man convinced against his will is of the same opinion still." In the words of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, when he was asked how he governed his people, "I teach the people correct principles and they govern themselves." [^6]

Admittedly, the free agent is under great and grave responsibilities. The free agent becomes a responsible agent. We must face the consequence of our choice, soberly. My days, my future, are as I make them. That makes the acts of living a serious business. But, in answer, by the responsibilities attaching to the right of free agency, each one of us is lifted, as it were, from childhood to maturity, from being receivers to givers, from passive onlookers of life to active creators of joy. Real living begins with independent action. The privilege should be accepted gladly.

True, there are many who prefer indolence to action who would rather live as parasites, feeding on the bounty of others, and enfeebling their souls. Such people, whether of high or low degree, are useless, dangerous, and to be shunned. It was their kind that led to the only recorded war in heaven; and it is their kind that lurk and have lurked behind every war on earth.

In the heavens, in a great council, the plans for pre-existent man's descent to earth were discussed. The right of free agency proposed by God, the Father of all, became the issue. A foremost son of God, Lucifer, prince of light, son of the morning, undertook to destroy this mark of eternal, intelligent man. He proposed that man should not be subjected to the trials and tribulations, the sins and sorrows, accompanying striving man as a free agent. Instead, he proposed that the waiting spirits would be placed on earth, in beautiful surroundings, with never a care or sorrow. Everything would be provided. It would be a regimented, supervised, guarded and guaranteed excursion—everything first class. In course of time they would be returned to their spiritual abode, bloated and dull.

Lucifer's plan would leave nothing for man to do. Man would be spoon-fed. Strength, of course, would ooze out of him. As an unproductive member of the heavenly host, he would eternally consume, not produce. Retrogression, intolerable to intelligence, would be his destiny.

When his plan was rejected, Lucifer fell from the councils of heaven. And many others, of those present, thinking only of the deceiving comforts promised, fell with him. He and they became Satan and his angels, tempters, whisperers, and doers of evil.

The story is barely outlined in Holy Writ, most clearly in the revelations to Joseph Smith, the prophet:

"Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, . . . and he became Satan, yea even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will." [^7] "And also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away from me because of their agency, and they were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels." [^8]

And John Milton describes in heroic verse the tremendous event:

". . . With all his host Of rebel angels, by whose aid, aspiring— To set himself in glory above his peers, He trusted to have equalled the most High, . . . With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power Hurled headlong, flaming from the etherial sky. With hideous ruin and combustion, down To bottomless perdition . . ." [^9]

This immortal story, the most important for man's ultimate welfare, should be heeded, from the courts of heaven to every institution on earth. It has been re-enacted countless times in the world of mankind. Every war has been, in essence, a replica of the war in heaven.

Free agency is our choicest possession. It leads to freedom, the sweetest of words, and the inmost hope and desire of intelligent beings. Tyrants, despots, and dictators are but followers of the prince of darkness, who seek to defeat freedom and make us subservient slaves. No religion is worth attention which does not rest upon the permanence of personal freedom, so long as the freedom of others is not disturbed.

We may now answer the query of the psalmist, What Is Man?

He is a pre-existent, eternal personage, a very son of God, endowed with godlike power and with a godlike destiny. He is possessed of the eternal right of free agency, which belongs to all intelligent creatures. Amidst the laws of the universe, with the tool and weapon of independent action, he may obey or disobey; be in bondage or free; may rise or descend; may consort with the devils, or dwell with the Gods.

And that is the nature and power and destiny of each one of us.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (My Confession, Crowell Edition, pp. 14, 15)
[^2] (Matt. 19:27)
[^3] (Sutherland, Inanimate Nature, Victoria Institute Transactions, Vol. 73, p. 166)
[^4] (The Mysterious Universe, pp. 144, 148)
[^5] (2 Nephi 2:25)
[^6] (Teachings, p. 255)
[^7] (Discourses, p. 87)
[^8] (Henry James, Charles W. Eliot, 2:300)
[^9] (John 10:10)
