John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER FOUR

THE OBJECTIVE OF LIFE

Count Leo N. Tolstoi, famous author, thinker, and humanitarian, has set down on paper, his search for the objective of man's life on earth. In the midst of his great successes, showered with wealth and fame, he tells that his "life had come to a stop." He found that amidst his honors and achievements he had not discovered the meaning of life. Eating, sleeping, writing, farming, did not explain the purpose that he felt life must have. If life had no meaning, beyond the satisfaction of the appetites of body and mind, he felt, in his own words, that "My life was a foolish and wicked joke played on me by someone." [^1] From that time on (he was then about fifty years of age), he devoted himself to the discovery of life's meaning. And, he found enough of it to change the course of his life completely, and to bring a new happiness into his life. He accepted Christ and tried to live his doctrine.

Tolstoi's question is that of the multitude. All of us, each according to his capacity, ask it. Peter, the apostle, asked it. "Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?" [^2] Like all others, he desired to know the objective of his life and labors. The demand for an answer is implanted within the human soul.

In the silent hours of inmost thought we ponder this question. We gaze into the sky, and wonder if a great purpose is behind the creation of the starry heavens. We peer into our own hearts and ask if there is an overshadowing purpose in human life, from the dim beginning, when we were with God, through earth life, into the eternities beyond. We survey all creation, and in our hearts demand to know whether we live in a purposeless or purposeful universe. We want to know whether we, with all other creations, are moving towards some definite and destined objective.

If these questions are not answered, serious consequences may follow. A life without an objective is much like a ship at sea with no port in mind. It drifts with the waves or storms, or with the whim of the captain. They are tempted to ask, amidst the battles of life, "Is the struggle worth-while?" That attitude lessens the joy of living. They who say that there is no purpose in life are not only unhappy, but become dangerous to themselves and others, for they have no safe guide for their actions. Indeed, if life has no objective save physical satisfactions, it is empty and valueless.

That there is a purpose in life, that creation is more than a mere whim of divine power, is the necessary conclusion of all who believe in an intelligent Maker of all things. It is inconceivable that God would create the vast and wonderful universe, without a purpose. The human mind refuses to accept such an absurdity.

External nature confirms belief in a purposeful universe. Every natural condition fits human needs, and promotes the welfare of human beings. With the progress of knowledge, there has appeared everywhere a delicate but real balance between natural forces, in physical and biological fields, and in human life. All of nature seems to supply the needs of man. This has compelled sober thinkers to believe that, throughout nature runs a design, a purpose, a product of intelligence to benefit man. [^3] Many leading thinkers of the day believe that purpose penetrates and gives form to all nature.

In earlier years the argument for design in nature was widely studied and taught. As the years went by, the fashion changed, for fashions of opinions change as often as women's hats; and the argument for design was laid aside. But, in our day, in the face of our larger knowledge, men have again been forced to the conclusion that there is a dominating purpose in universal nature.

For example, Sir James Jeans, famous physicist and astronomer, writes:

"Today there is a wide measure of agreement, which on the physical side of science approaches almost to unanimity, that the stream of knowledge is heading towards a non-mechanical reality; the universe begins to look more like a great thought than like a great machine. Mind no longer appears as an accidental intruder into the realm of matter; we are beginning to suspect that we ought rather to hail it as the creator and governor of the realm of matter. . . ." "If the universe is a universe of thought, then its creation must have been an act of thought." [^4]

And Latter-day Saints add, as perhaps every intelligent person does, that if a mind, a thinker, created the earth, and all upon it, that mind must have had a purpose in the act of creation.

A classic example of the approach to belief in a purposeful universe, through design in nature, is the relationship of man to the atmosphere about him.

The atmosphere, the air we breathe, without which we could not live, is composed mainly of one part of the gas oxygen and four parts of the gas nitrogen. Oxygen is an active element. Fire is the combination of oxygen with the burning substance. In the body, the oxygen, taken into the lungs and blood, burns food materials in the body. Nitrogen, on the other hand, is an inert element, which finds it difficult to combine with other elements. As far as the animal economy goes, its presence in air serves to diminish the activity of the oxygen.

The proportion of one part of oxygen to four of nitrogen, fits the needs of the human body. Were there less oxygen, bodily processes would be slowed up. Were there more, the fierceness of combustion would destroy the body. The proportion is just right. If it were changed, life, as we know it, could not survive on earth.

This is not all. Life on earth exists only within rather narrow limits of temperature. Increase the temperature, and life suffers, decrease the temperature and life likewise suffers, and may be destroyed. It is necessary for the maintenance of life on earth that the temperature be kept constant within certain rather narrow limits.

This is also accomplished by the atmosphere. The rays from the sun pass readily through the air to warm the earth. But the rays from the warmed earth find it difficult to escape into space.

One reason for this is that in the atmosphere are small amounts of water vapor and the gas carbon dioxide; neither of which is readily penetrated by heat rays. Consequently, the atmosphere, because it contains these two substances, lies as a blanket around the earth, preventing the escape of heat and keeping us all warm. Were these two substances removed from the air, the heat of the earth would largely radiate into space; our earth would become icy and life on our planet would suffer, or would be at an end.

The nature of the atmosphere becomes an evidence for a design or purpose to serve human beings.

Those opposed to this type of argument declare that man has come into his present condition by small degrees, and has gradually adapted himself to his surroundings. Perhaps, they say, only those who could adapt themselves to the earth, as it is, survived. The others died on the way.

Without denying that adaptation may be one of God's methods of operation, it may be definitely said, that an intelligent Master of the universe, in which we believe, has the power to prepare an earth to fit the needs of man; or fit man to meet the conditions of earth. If He were not able to do so, He would be inferior to His creatures who build houses for human comfort, and equip them with heating, freezing, and many other devices. The argument for adaptation, standing alone, requires chance as a creative force. That we do not and cannot believe.

However, seekers after truth halt at the door to life's meaning. They may agree that the universe is purposeful, but what is the purpose? the ultimate objective? they ask. Scientists, philosophers, and churchmen have given their opinions. Upon the varying answers, churches and cults, societies and organizations have been formed. As the explanations have approached truth, joy has entered human hearts and bettered society. As they have moved towards error, darkness and unhappiness have ruled.

Yet, the answer is not far to find. The design in nature is for man's welfare. The purpose of an intelligent God must be to provide for the happiness of His children. From every human heart rises the cry for happiness. Everything about us, and within us, declares that happiness is the objective of life.

This is the welcomed doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The whole plan and purpose of God for us, His children, is that we shall have happiness. In the words of the Book of Mormon Prophet, Lehi, "Men are, that they might have joy." [^5] And Joseph Smith, the Prophet, added, "Happiness is the object and design of our existence." [^6] Brigham Young expressed the same thought by saying, "What are we here for? To learn to enjoy more, and to increase in knowledge and experience." [^7]

Though the doctrine of happiness as the objective in life, is accepted by many, there is a wide difference of opinion as to what constitutes happiness and when it shall begin.

For example, among Christians, the usual answer is, that the purpose of life is to win a place of rest, after death, in the presence of God, there to worship and praise Him forever—to win eternal rest.

This objective has given comfort to many a troubled heart. Yet, it must be admitted, that it is too indefinite in meaning, to satisfy the cravings of the soul. Earnest, God-fearing men have asked for a more acceptable definition of happiness. For example, Charles W. Eliot, former president of Harvard University, himself a believer in life after death, expressed his feelings in no uncertain words:

"The idea of an eternity of rest is positively repulsive to any man or woman, primitive, barbarous, or civilized, who has had joy in his work." [^8]

Many others have expressed themselves similarly. To this the Church agrees. It rejects the idea of inactivity, continual rest, as a means to joy. Eternal happiness to Latter-day Saints means eternal activity.

The Church teaches, further, that happiness, intended as the objective of life, must not be confined to the hereafter, but must be enjoyed on earth. Things on earth are patterned after those in heaven; therefore, the days on earth must be joyous.

This doctrine is in opposition to the widely disseminated belief that man on earth, to qualify for salvation, hereafter, must suffer, and be deprived of the necessities or comforts of life. The Church teaches, on the contrary, that in health, and under conditions of happiness, we can best perform the works that prepare us for eternal salvation. The pains of humanity, the poverty, sickness, and warfare that drag men to depths of misery, are out of harmony with the purposes of God for man.

True, happiness, or joy, does not mean, merely, the satisfaction of animal appetites. Joy is first of the spirit; then of the body. Appetites have their claims, but must be subordinated to the requirements of joy. Happiness-seeking man must conquer himself, and overcome surrounding forces, but that does not require unhappiness as a condition or precedent.

Now, you are thinking, What kind of activity leads to joy?

Any activity that produces growth, development, or progress, results in joy. Such activities come from the normal use of all of our faculties in harmony with principles of truth and righteousness. Joy follows our efforts to overcome the obstacles that may lie in way of our growth or progress. There must be an onward march to reach the promised joy.

Growth is the product of our creative powers, in whatever field, the sources of the greatest human joys. Such joy replaces the drabness of life with vivid light and color. Without growth there can be no real joy.

That leaves all who prefer inactivity, or who engage in untruthful practices, far from the attainment of joy.

Growth or progress, as the objective of life, is a product of life and proper living. The more complete the process of living, the greater the growth. This appears to have been in the mind of Jesus the Christ, when He said He had come to "bring life, and bring it more abundantly." [^9] They who merely exist, who do not really live, in the abundant sense, are static or retrogressive. They are in opposition to growth. President Heber J. Grant says:

"In order to progress symmetrically, we must conform to all the requirements of the gospel . . . You cannot leave out any part in building a structure and have it complete." [^10]

The distinction between mere existence and active life is repeatedly made in the scriptures. At one time Jesus said, 'I am the resurrection, and the life;" [^11] and, speaking to Moses, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, He said, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^12]

This carries the key to the objective of man's life.

One may exist who is only static, who stands forever in the same place, who adds nothing, by his own effort, to himself or others. Under the law of the gospel, all who have dwelt on earth are entitled to eternal existence. But that does not lead to joy.

One who is active, increasing, progressing, who accepts and obeys the gospel law, ever moves into higher zones of existence, and carries others along in his onward course. He receives the gift of eternal life, with its unending conquest, progress, development, and growth. He feels the quivering, thrilling response called joy.

There are those who will protest that there is no growth in heaven. In firm answer, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints asserts that the power of increase or growth is a necessary quality of intelligence. If intelligence remains with us in the hereafter, the power of growth will continue also.

Many men, the world over, not of our faith, now hold to the doctrine of eternal activity and progress. Note these words of Thomas Curtis Clark in the Christian Century:

"We serve no God whose work is done, Who rests within His firmament: Our God, His labors but begun, Toils evermore, with powers unspent."

That rings true to Latter-day Saint ears.

We can now understand more clearly the real, the ultimate objective of life. Growth or progress may be unending. Every onward step, ever so small, is another approach to the ideal of perfection. God is perfect. Therefore, eternally progressing man is ever approaching the likeness of God; ever on the way to perfection. That is the objective of life, here and hereafter,—to approach, eternally, the likeness of our Father in Heaven, on earth, and in the hereafter.

This aim we may attain by seeking to be daily as perfect as we can. By upward steps, however small, we, who have eternity at our command, may rise to undreamed-of heights, to the very threshold of divinity. But we must ever rise and look upward:

"Standing on what too long we bore With shoulders bent and downcast eyes, We may discern—unseen before— A path to higher destinies." [^13]

This is a reasonable, understandable doctrine. God is the literal, spiritual Father of humankind. What dearer purpose could He have than to help lift His children toward His own high estate? And what dearer purpose could we have than to become like our Father? There could be no keener joy.

So runs the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Were this doctrine well understood, the seekers after the meaning of life would be lifted from the morass of speculation and indecision. Light would replace darkness; joy would banish fear.

The Lord has made the promise:

"If you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace." [^14]

The thrill of that ascent, through our daily acts, makes life a glorious adventure. Slowly, and sometimes painfully, we may rise, but with every forward, upward step, with happiness nestling at our feet, we shall thrill with increasing joy.

And so in conclusion: There is a purpose in life—to raise men nearer to the likeness of God. Whoever seeks that ideal, daily, finds joy; and in no other way can true joy be found.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Psalms 23:2)
[^2] (Luke 2:13)
[^3] (Moses 6:51)
[^4] (Moses 6:64-65)
[^5] (D. & C. 84:46)
[^6] (Key to Theology, Ed. 1883, pp. 39, 40)
[^7] (Alma 5:46)
[^8] (D. & C. 76:10)
[^9] (Matt. 10:29-31)
[^10] (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 45)
[^11] 11. (John 11:25)
[^12] 12. (Moses 1:39)
[^13] 13. (Longfellow)
[^14] 14. (D. & C. 93:20)
