John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER FIVE

IS THERE GUIDANCE IN LIFE?

Man has been endowed with mighty powers, by the use of which he has become a wonder-worker on earth. He has achieved mastery over many things about him. Nevertheless, we stand as humble figures before the vastness of the universe. We have constant need for help in exploring the mysteries of existence. Especially is this true in matters of religion, which deal with the purpose and the plan of the Lord for His children.

Thoughtful men, conscious of their insignificance, have recognized their helplessness, if dependent only upon their own natural powers. Sir Isaac Newton, one of the greatest minds of history, said:

"To myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble and a prettier shell than ordinary, while the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me." And it is notable that Newton wrote more on religion than on science.

We have the right, however, to expect that we may secure help as it may be needed. The universe was organized by God; He set the stars and the planets in their courses; and placed man upon earth. It is inconceivable that He would do all this, and then leave His works in forgetfulness. Instead, we may safely believe, as conforms to intelligence, that God supervises, directs, and keeps in order the system which He has produced. Were it not so, God could well be left out of the picture. Materialism would rule and could be sufficient.

The faith that God is concerned with the affairs of men has been a source of comfort and strength to the generations of mankind. It has assured puny man, infinitely small as he appears in the midst of universal vastness, that he is under the watch-care of his Heavenly Father. This faith has inspired him to mighty works, and has given him courage to meet the diverse issues of life. Without this faith, man could live only a faltering, doubting life. With it, certainty and gladness enter the heart, as in the words of David, "He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters." [^1]

The first reasonable thought with respect to divine guidance, is that God would reveal, in person, the plan of existence to His children on earth. To deny Him that power, would make Him inferior to His own works, and subject to them. Those who deny the possibility of personal divine revelation, deny by implication God's place as the creator of the earth and the other parts of the universe. To deny personal revelation of God to His children becomes another form of atheism. Certainly, one cannot believe the scriptures, and make such denial.

Our Father in Heaven has actually shown Himself on earth. He walked in the Garden of Eden and talked with Adam. He appeared at diverse times to other persons. And in our day He visited the boy Joseph Smith, who upon his knees, in the grove, pleaded for truth to help him decide which of all the clamoring churches was right in doctrine, and possessed of authority.

Such visits to earth by God have not been casual. They appear rather to have come at great moments, when the divine plan for salvation was to receive new or further impetus.

But, where God dwells are other personal beings; an uncounted multitude form the heavenly host. So the shepherds learned at the birth of Jesus: "Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God." [^2]

Therefore, God may also transmit His will to men, by personal messengers from among the many in the unseen world. In fact, such heavenly messengers have appeared at various times to different persons. They have always come with a special message for those engaged in furthering the divine plan of salvation.

In our modern day, to accomplish the restoration of the Church of Christ, personal messengers were employed by the Lord. John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon them; and, later, Peter, James, and John, the ancient apostles, conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood upon the same young men. At the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, such messengers appeared in fiery power to confer authority upon men called to be human instruments in establishing upon earth, for the last time, the Kingdom of God.

The first great revelation on earth was received by our Father Adam, when he entered upon his earth career. Placed in the midst of a world new to him, he needed guidance. And it was given him. God the Father visited him and explained the purpose of life on earth. The plan of salvation was laid out before him. Thenceforth the knowledge that would lead men to growth and increase, to happiness and joy, has been available to mankind.

That Adam knew the gospel seems strange to many people. There has grown up among Christians the feeling or belief that Jesus, the Christ, brought the fulness of the gospel on earth for the first time. Men speak of Jesus as "the revelation of God," implying that God could not be properly comprehended before the coming of Christ. Really, that would lead to the conclusion that God has favorites—a greater love for His children who live after Christ than for those who lived before His advent. That does not conform to our understanding of the divine nature.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that Adam, the first man, was taught the gospel, in its entirety, including the coming sacrifice of Jesus, the Son of God. Moreover, Adam accepted the gospel, was baptized, and received the authority of the Priesthood.

The story is beautifully told in the Book of Moses as revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith. I can only quote a brief extract:

"And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh." [^3]

"And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water. And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man." [^4]

As a rational mind would expect a rational Being to do, full personal revelation and guidance began with the first man, and has continued ever since. As men, by the wayward use of their free agency, have departed from the truth, the gospel has been revealed again, and again.

There is yet another means by which we may receive divine enlightenment and guidance.

God is a person, of form and dimension. Therefore, He cannot, personally, be everywhere present at the same time. But, from His abode issues an influence, filling all space, and permeating every created thing, animate and inanimate. This influence or medium is called the Holy Spirit. It is not to be confused with the Holy Ghost, the third member of the Godhead. Through the Holy Spirit messages are conveyed by the Father to every creature, and from every creature to the Father. It is the means by which all of God's creations are ever before His eyes and under His control. It is the means of man's constant access to His Father. In the words of modern revelation:

"The Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit." [^5]

Parley P. Pratt, an apostle of the latter days, has enlarged upon this theme in eloquent words: "This Holy Spirit, under the control of the great Eloheim, is the grand, moving cause of all intelligences, and by which they act. This is the great, positive, controlling element of all other elements. It is omnipresent . . . and it comprehends all things . . . It comprehends the past, present, and the future, in all their fullness. Its inherent properties embrace all the attributes of intelligence and affection. . . . In short it is the attribute of the eternal power and Godhead." [^6]

To us, of this day, an omnipresent influence from God, the Holy Spirit, is readily understood. The modern devices for communication at a distance, the telephone, telegraph, or radio, employed in everyday life, or television, which is already here, are poor but helpful comparisons. This address is spoken in the Salt Lake City, Latter-day Saint Tabernacle. The words, by the aid of the microphone, are cast into space. By some space-filling medium, call it what we like, the words are carried far and wide. By proper receiving instruments they may be heard over the continent, in other continents, and on the islands of the sea.

This doctrine of the universal presence of God, through the Holy Spirit, does not bewilder the mind, but seems natural, because it fits into the experiences of life. It clears up many a theological mystery and doctrinal argument.

It is by the Holy Spirit that each one of us is never absent from our Maker. By its presence we know that we are never alone. The line of communication between God and man is always open unless broken by man himself. We are, as it were, always in the presence of our Father in Heaven. Through His Holy Spirit, God is with us always and everywhere.

By the use of the Holy Spirit, the Lord operates the universe, and guides and directs His children on earth. By the inspiration gained from this source, our sometimes indistinct path is often made clear. Many a problem is solved, we hardly know how, by the help of this divine agency. We understand meanings formerly hidden. Many a danger is avoided. By this message-bearer between us and God, darkness is dispersed, and we may always walk in the light. The Holy Spirit is a spirit of revelation. [^7]

Every person can bear witness of help received at various times from forces outside of himself. Such help leads every creative worker to new discoveries and conceptions. In science, art, literature, business, invention, and pioneering, it is evident. And it appears even more frequently in the solution of the more humble problems of the routine of daily life. To that, every thoughtful father and mother may bear witness.

History is full of accounts of such help, inspirations, though only a small fraction have reached print. Some are world famous. Archimedes observed that his leg seemed lighter in the bath, and in a flash recognized the principle of truth, which has been of much service to generations of people. Galileo observed the swinging lamps in the cathedral of his native city, and deduced the laws of the pendulum, which have made our timepieces possible. It is said that Newton was led, by noting the fall of an apple into the formulation of the law of gravitation, which has become the basis for an intelligent understanding of the universe in which we live.

Thousands of men, before, had felt their legs lighter in water, had witnessed the regular swing of suspended lamps, and had observed a falling apple. But, they had seen no more. They were blind to the meaning back of the phenomena. Something more than ordinary power enabled the three great men mentioned to understand the laws in operation. It was by the assistance of the Holy Spirit that their inspiration came, as promised in a latter-day revelation:

"For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man." [^8]

In summary then, we may not know all of God's ways of communication with man, but we understand at least three of His means: By personal visits as may be needed; by special messengers out of the spiritual world; and by the all-pervading Holy Spirit.

Out of this understanding comes the certain knowledge that we are always in the mind of our divine Father; and that He is in touch with us all. He watches over us, and according to His wisdom, if we are willing, guides us along happy paths.

Jesus spoke an eternal and necessary truth when He declared: "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows." [^9] Were not our Maker so in touch with us and His creations, the plan of salvation set up for man's good would be but as a tree that bears no fruit.

Now, the guidance that we may receive from the unseen world, depends also upon ourselves. We must do something to receive the gift. That is the law of nature, as of nature's God.

This is in full accord with daily experience. Gold lies in the mountain; but blasting, hewing, transporting, extracting, refining, and shaping are required before the gold can encircle my lady's finger. It would be foreign to all we know, to expect God to give, and give, when we do nothing in the process.

We must be in condition to hear the divine messages. The musical note sounded on a violin string is taken up by the corresponding string of the nearby piano. This happens only when the two strings are tuned alike, in harmony one with the other. Were it not so, there would be no response. The piano would be silent. Or, the well-trained orchestra rendering a noble symphony in a distant place floods my silent room with melodious sounds, only when I turn the dial of the machine to be in tune with the microphone in the music hall.

Precisely so are our communications with spiritual forces. We must be worthy of the help desired. Unless we are in harmony with divine principles, with God, if you choose, the heavens are dark and soundless. With unseeing eyes and empty minds we are left to fumble along the path. The atheist hears indistinctly when God speaks. Our God will not force His goodness upon us. We must fit ourselves to receive. Then, the gift is certain.

This is well stated by John Taylor, third president of the Church:

"When the light that is in heaven communicates with the light that is within us, when the spirit that dwells in the bosom of the Almighty dwells in ours, and an intercourse is opened between heaven and us, we are then placed in a position to understand that which it would be impossible to comprehend upon any natural principle known to us." [^10]

That is, to receive such inspiration and guidance, we must fit ourselves, body and soul, so that the divinity within us may touch the divinity beyond us—so that the Holy Spirit may impress its message upon us.

The direct way to such harmony that opens the heavens, and lets in light for our daily walk, is through full obedience to truth as it has come to us. We must be seekers after truth; and our actions must correspond with our knowledge. We must be sincere. If we disobey that which we know to be right, if we lie or steal or live immoral lives, when we know that righteousness and honesty and purity are principles of truth, the line of communication between us and the powers of heaven becomes non-conducting. The receiving apparatus is ineffective. The door is closed. And often, the shouting from the black depths below, then overshadows the sweet messages from above.

Guidance in life, and we need it sadly and greatly, depends upon our obedience to every truth known to us. That is one reason why, properly said, obedience is the first law of heaven. By that token the culture of men is the culture of the spirit of obedience to truth. We must come cleansed by obedience to receive help from heaven. The world's distress, past and present, has been caused, first of all, by disobedience to truth.

God has provided means for our guidance on earth and the accomplishment of His purposes. The plan for human salvation has been taught by God, through personal visits on earth, that may be repeated at his pleasure. Messengers, from out the divine domain, may be sent to deal with human problems. But, all the while, the Holy Spirit, issuing from God, touches every human heart, to whisper comfort, to give strength, to give enlightenment, and to assure us that we are in God's memory. That is the doctrine of continuous revelation.

It is a very simple belief. About it, there is nothing mysterious. It can be comprehended. But, it makes the heart beat with joy.

Multitudes testify that by such divine communication, they have lived safer and more soul-satisfying lives, and have been endowed with more wisdom and power to perform the labor of the day.

Have you tried it?

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Moulton, A Treasury of Science, p. 63)
[^2] (D. & C. 88:36-38, 42, 43, 45)
[^3] (D. & C. 29:34-35)
[^4] (D. & C. 38:22)
[^5] (D. & C. 107:84)
[^6] (D. & C. 130:20-21)
[^7] (Mark 16:16)
[^8] (D. & C. 76:10)
[^9] (Matt. 10:29-31)
[^10] (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 45)
