John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER SIX

WHY SHOULD THERE BE ORDINANCES IN RELIGION?

"What is the need of ordinances, rules, and regulations in religion Why, for example, should a person, who leads an ethical, decent life, have need to be baptized to win God's favor?" This is a question frequently asked. Many people are disposed to say that, if they live such lives, religion should make no further requirement of them. Perhaps some of you have this question in your own minds.

This strikes at the very heart of religion. Is our religion man-made or God-made? If man-made, ethics would be a sufficient guide for our conduct; and religious requirements could be set up to suit our pleasure, or could be entirely dispensed with. But, if our religion is made by God, an intelligent Being, our Eternal Father, we would expect a body of divine law, with unchanging demands, to direct our activities, to help us towards our well-being. God, as we know Him, performs His work through unchanging law.

Man-made rules or laws often do rest on sound truth. But they are subject to change with varying opinions, and supposed needs of men. A new philosophy or a new ruler appears, and, presto, a new way of life is substituted for the old one. New deals follow old deals; and soon the new deals are ordered out.

True, moral rules and human laws have done much for society. Ethics has helped to deter men from evil acts; the code of Hammurabi, long before Abraham, brought peace to primitive peoples; and statutes, held in respect today, kept in unity and order the far-flung empire of Rome. Nevertheless, they were all man-made, subject to change, and agreed with God's laws, only as man might decide. But, neither ethics nor man's legal statutes give promise of permanent certainty.

A religion built upon change is unsafe. It rests upon sand; therefore, the storms of life may destroy it. A safe religion must be built upon the rock of certainty, permanence, and invariability. Such a religion is unshaken by the hurricane; it prevails, and gives hopeful assurance, throughout the ages. It enables us to achieve our high destiny.

External nature is characterized by the immutable orderliness that we call law. The earth revolves upon its axis, and moves around the sun in mathematically precise periods of time. The sequences of day and night, summer and winter, do not vary. The movements of all planetary and stellar bodies are so orderly that astronomers are able to predict happenings, years in advance of their actual occurrence. The finding of unknown worlds may even be predicted on the basis of law, as was shown in the finding of the planet Neptune, by Galle, of Germany, after its existence had been foretold by two young astronomers, Adams, of England, and Leverrier, of France. Every child may know, years in advance, coming eclipses of the sun or the moon, which do not fail to occur at the stated time. The regularities, or laws, to which these heavenly bodies are subject, are invariable. Such certainty of behavior appears everywhere, on earth, as in the sky; among the infinitely small, as among the planets and the stars. Apparent deviations merely point to the limitations of our knowledge. Remote or near, the universe is under a reign of law. The vast industrial systems of earth, and every safe enterprise, in any field of activity, rest upon the dominance of law in the world of things, large or small.

This universal reign of law expresses itself also in the principle which we call cause and effect. Under the same conditions our actions bring the same results. A stone dropped from the roof always falls toward the earth; it does not occasionally change its mind and soar into the sky. There is no electric current unless the rotating armature is wound in a certain way. There is no wheat or milk unless the land is properly cultivated, and the cow properly fed. The relation between cause and effect is found also in all the common experiences and things of life. If something is done, a definite result follows. If something is desired, some definite thing must be done.

That the universe is under a reign of law, is the "most important, the supreme, discovery of science." [^1] It has affected the thoughts and actions of humanity. It is the safe foundation upon which all searchers after truth must build. It is, or should be, the basis for every human effort.

The majestic, soul-thrilling order, prevailing in all regions of the universe, has uprooted, and cast into the discard, the superstitions and fears, the capricious gods and goddesses, of an untutored age: it has enabled man to walk courageously, steadily, through the journey of life.

Really, the universe must, of necessity, be orderly and under a reign of law. It is under the dominion of God who sums up all intelligence. And order is the surest mark of intelligence. His very nature is in opposition to chance, disorder, and lawlessness. The law and order, coming out of the divine mind, would be reflected in the works of God. Any other doctrine would deny His existence.

There is nowhere a clearer statement of a law-controlled universe under God's direction, than in the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"All kingdoms have a law given; and there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions." "He hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons; and their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth. . . ." "The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun giveth his light by day, and the moon giveth her light by night, and the stars also give their light, as they roll upon their wings in their glory, in the midst of the power of God." [^2]

Now, as was said in an earlier talk, all things are manifestations of the one universe. The material and spiritual worlds are like the palm and back of the hand. They are as one, and subject to the same provisions of existence. In Henry Drummond's apt phrase, there is "natural law in the spiritual world." Therefore, if the physical world lies under a reign of law, the larger, higher, and more important, spiritual world, must also be subject to law. We cannot conceive of, nor can the mind tolerate, a material world of order, and a lawless spiritual world. Certainly, a lawless religion, issuing from God, would be an absurdity.

Since every physical law issues from God, it must have a spiritual meaning. The Lord has said so: "I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; . . . for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual." [^3] That means, that God's laws penetrate and control both the physical and spiritual aspects of existence.

Spiritual law, binding upon man, if he desires certain blessings, has been repeatedly set forth in sacred writ. Obedience to God's laws is the major theme of ancient and modern revelation. Thus, in our day, the Lord has said, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, "I am your lawgiver;" [^4] and, "None shall be exempted from the justice and the laws of God, that all things may be done in order;" [^5] and further, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it was predicated." [^6]

Naturally, if law prevails everywhere, both in the temporal and spiritual domains, it must do so also in religion, which has for its purpose the full salvation of man, on earth and in heaven. There must exist a series of requirements, specific ordinances, for the conduct of those who desire the blessings connected with membership in the Church of Christ. And they must be of a fixed, invariable nature.

Therefore, it is no more thinkable in the spiritual than in the material world, that these requirements may vary from person to person, from group to group, or from church to church. Once given, they must apply to all, else disorder contrary to intelligent action, would prevail. There is one way, and one way only, for entrance into a God-devised, eternal society, embodying principles of an unchanging nature. There is only one way to win the full favor of the Lord.

Thus it comes to be, in logical, rational order, that immutable, unchanging rules and regulations, call them laws, principles, or ordinances, exist, for the organization and perpetuation of the Church of Christ, and for life within it. These form the framework of religion, the framework of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They must be accepted, and complied with, if the desired rewards are to be obtained. For example, baptism is such an ordinance. It is necessary because, as Jesus taught, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved"; [^7] and salvation for humankind is the objective of the Church. And, by the demand of immutable law, it cannot be set aside.

That makes an ordinance something that we do to attain a desired end. The specific practices in religion, known as ordinances, are performed for the benefit of those who accept them. They have no other purpose. To use baptism again as an example: It is a compliance with a spiritual requirement that leads to membership in the Church, to enhance human welfare, and to ultimate salvation. We want salvation; hence we submit to baptism. Every ordinance has its own phase of our wellbeing as its objective. We obey ordinances to attain the gifts and blessings of religion.

In fact, a religion, a church, is composed of principles and ordinances, which, if observed, will give men joy; such full human joy as can be won in no other way. They are not transient and subject to change. They are expressions of eternal, unchanging law. They root in eternal realities. There can be no departure or variation from them. They are above man's control. Only by obedience to them can we win the reward desired.

The greatest sufferings of the world may be traced to the unholy, destructive doctrine that man need not conform to law, whether of man, nature, or God. Recognize the law, conform to it, obey it; and the law helps, never hinders. It is so in the physical world; it is so in the spiritual world. Direct an electric current through wires, and it may run our machinery; direct it through our bodies, and it may kill us. The lives of the immoral person, the drunkard, the thief, or the liar, teach that evil follows disregard of law.

Conformity to law spells victory; opposition to law means defeat and eventual destruction. We must seek out law; and conform to it, whether in the material or spiritual domains, if we are to be winners in the race of life.

He who tries to live apart from the church, to be sufficient unto himself, by formulating his own peculiar way of life, has failed to grasp the meaning of the reign of law, under which the universe, and all within it, live and move and have their being. He who sets up his own law, and proceeds alone, according to his pleasure, invites disorder, chaos, tyranny, and ultimate defeat; while he who upholds the law, observes it diligently, secures the blessings of victory that flow from order; and he becomes a blessing to himself and to the race of men.

The rigid insistence of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon the acceptance of its basic laws and regulations, call them principles and ordinances, revealed from heaven, and under God's control, is another convincing evidence of the truth of its claims. There can be no hesitation, vacillation, or surrender in the field of truth. We should look with suspicion upon any religious organization that feels itself above law, or that undertakes to make its own fundamental laws. Indeed, in view of the universal reign of law, a religion or church which does not prescribe binding requirements, derived from God, upon its members, is not worth the having. It defies law, and is dangerous. But, really, what thinking person would have a lawless religion, made and changed fitfully, by whims or passing opinions? Religion, to have value, must furnish a safe and constant anchorage on the voyage of life.

All this justifies the existence of principles, ordinances, and guides to conduct, offered by the Church. Without them, you would have the right to question the whole body of claims made by the Church. And, you may safely consider and evaluate every religious requirement placed upon you in terms of law and the rewards of obedience to law. Once convinced of the universality and indispensability of law, the reason for ordinances is understood, and obedience to them becomes a sane performance in an upward, progressive journey.

It is through eternal law, expressed as principles and ordinances, that the Lord of the Heavens accomplishes His purposes. It is by law that religion becomes possessed of strength and safety. It is by obedience to law that we may attain joy on earth and in the heavens.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (D. & C. 4:3)
[^2] (Tennyson, In Memoriam, CXIV)
[^3] (In Memoriam, CXXXI)
[^4] (D. & C. 6:3)
[^5] (Alma 29:4)
[^6] (D. & C. 11:8)
[^7] (Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, 1863)
