John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER SEVEN

THE POWER OF DESIRE

In any discussion of religion there is always likely to be someone who declares that he is not religiously minded, much as he might say, it is difficult for him to learn mathematics. He is likely to add that he leaves religion to some other members of the family.

In many cases this is merely an apology for not attending to religious duties, or for engaging in non-religious practices. More often it results from an imperfect religion, or a misunderstanding of the meaning of religion.

Religion, as a philosophy of life, determines our conduct. As we believe so we act. As we act so we move to success or failure. If a person's religion is founded in truth, its practice leads to human welfare.

Under this definition, all people are religiously minded; for they all, without exception, desire happiness. And, further, by this definition, mathematics and all other academic disciplines, which may be used to attain happiness, become contributory to a religion which has for its objective the happiness of mankind.

They who claim that they are not religiously minded, if sincere, fail to understand, or they overlook, the real cause of their condition. Religious indifference, as all unbelief and doubt, is usually due to a want of a strong, living, continuing desire to know the truth and the foundations of religion. Their desire for that which religion gives is not strong enough to pay the price of religious observance. The desire for transient pleasures is greater than the desire for permanent joy. Thus the way to religion is hindered; and only a weak spiritual life can exist.

We cannot go far in religion, or anything else, for that matter, without desire. The culture of right desires is of supreme importance in a person's life. In the last analysis, the culture of men is the culture of desire. The Lord in the early days of the Church issued the challenge: "If ye have desires to serve God, ye are called to the work." [^1]

The power of desire is beyond question. Desire is like the rudder which directs the course of the ship. One boy desires to become an expert mechanic; another looks forward to a legal career. Twenty years later both are probably engaged in the work of their choice. For good or evil, our desires determine largely our careers, present and future.

One young man desired to know whether sound waves, impressed on wax, could be reproduced; and showed that it could be done. Edison then laid the foundation of the reproduction of sound, which has reached into the heart of radio, with all its mysteries.

Another young man desired to know why his supposedly well-fed chickens died; and, as the result, Eijkman made possible our marvelous, expanding science of nutrition, by which the life-line is lengthened, and the days of life made more enjoyable.

The colonists of America, fighting and redeeming the wilderness, desired liberty, the first right of man; and the Constitution of Freedom was written, upon which has been built a nation of freedom, an example to all who are oppressed.

Joseph Smith desired to know the truth of religion; and the glorious vision came, which initiated the restoration, in its purity, of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Out of the same desire for truth, Brigham Young became convinced that Joseph Smith's vision actually occurred; and multitudes of people, impelled by the same desire, have come to accept the restored gospel as divine truth, and have walked in its light thereafter.

Earnest, expressed desire lies behind all progress and attainment, whether of person or group, whether scientific, political, social, or religious. They who walk through life without desire, are pitiful victims of every passing storm. They are soggy driftwood upon the sea of time. Meanwhile, thousands of men, often of average power, impelled by consuming desire, self-taught and self-made, hewing their way through difficulties, have risen to distinction and leadership. Their story forms an inspiring and entrancing chapter in human history.

Abraham Lincoln is a glorious example of the power of desire. By the fitful light of the open fireplace he read and studied his meagre collection of books. The burning desire within him ignored all surrounding discomforts. He dreamed of a better and more useful day in his life.

"But on his forehead sat a fire . . . Submitting all things to desire." [^2]

That was the foundation of Lincoln's success.

Naturally, common sense must prevail in our desires. What we all want is happiness, and legitimate means to secure it. To desire a million dollars may be an unworthy desire; but to build a business successfully for our own support and the support of others, would be a worthy one. And the business might yield a million. Darius Green had a strong desire to fly, but began by defying the law of gravitation; therefore, he failed.

However, let it not be forgotten, in this world of negatives and positives, that desire may lead to evil as to good; it may be a curse as well as a blessing. Then desire is converted into lust. Lying, stealing, immorality, murder, may be traced back to unholy, poisonous desires. The lust for money, fame, or power, has defrauded the widow, ruined the reputations of honest men, murdered the innocent, and committed every unspeakable crime. In business and the professions, among legislative bodies, and in halls of justice, the disgusting trail of improper desire, or lust, is often plainly seen.

Napoleon, lusting for personal glory, careless of human life, set back by decades the progress of Europe. Hitler, lusting for power over others, and using a devilish philosophy of the worthlessness of the common man, nearly wrecked Europe, and certainly delayed its progress for a generation of time.

This makes it of the utmost importance, in building a life, that we set up and cultivate proper desires. A man's desires should be his first concern, for no person can rise above his real desires. Neither can a nation rise above the assembled desires of the people. This is, of course, what Emerson had in mind when he urged every one of us to "hitch his wagon to a star."

Of course, desires are of value only when they drive us to action. Will must accompany desire. Then high resolve is born. Desire is the design; will the execution of the design. Desire sets up the goal; the will drives us towards it. Desire alone is helpless; the will spurs us into achievement. When desire and will move together, in the right direction, we become strong and conquering. We must seek the culture of desire and will together; otherwise both may become worthless. But, if they are trained together, they may become, to all practical purposes, as one united force in achieving our destiny.

Tennyson understood:

"O living will that shalt endure When all that seems shall suffer shock, Rise in the spiritual rock, Flow through our deeds and make them pure." [^3]

A worthwhile desire initiates action—self-effort. Desire and action must be invariable companions. The hopeful painter must turn to his brush; the sculptor to his chisel; the astronomer to his telescope; the chemist to his test tubes and balances; and the student to his books. To know the Bible, we must read it; to realize the value of Church attendance, we must attend meetings; and to be assured of the value of prayer, we must speak to God on our knees. If we wish to hitch our wagon to a star, we must resolutely set out to reach the star, so that the proper connection of the star and the wagon may be made. To achieve great things one must have a desire, so fierce, pounding, and fearless, as to drive us into action. To the early Saints of this dispensation, the word came, "Whoso desireth to reap, let him thrust in his sickle with his might . . ." [^4]

The easy flitting wish that comes and goes with every new experience is of little value. It usually results in weakness. Too many of us spend our hours wishing for heaven, when an active desire for simple earthly blessings might form rounds in the ladder to celestial glory. Too much wishful thinking, without resulting action, like too much candy, both sweet, causes illness.

It is the unfailing experience of mankind that every person may realize his desires, if they are strong enough to lead him into vigorous pursuit of them. When truth has been sought, it has been found; when rulers have desired peace, prosperity has beckoned; when learning has been desired, light has come; when freedom has been the desire of a nation, the brotherhood of man has advanced. It would be possible to read every historical event in terms of the desires of those concerned. This is in conformity with the Lord's own words, as declared by the ancient Nephite Prophet Alma, and recorded in the Book of Mormon: "He granteth unto men according to their desire, whether it be unto death or unto life; yea, I know that he allotteth unto men according to their wills, whether they be unto salvation or unto destruction." [^5] In our own day, the Lord has repeated the promise, "Even as you desire of me so it shall be done unto you." [^6] This promise has been fulfilled for multitudes of people.

It is a remarkable fact of experience that those who diligently pursue the realization of a worthy desire, usually receive much more than they expect. One desires actively a simple truth, and vast dominions of knowledge are opened to the seeker. One discovery leads to others, until they tread upon the heels of one another. The children of active desire are without number.

History is replete with such cases. The chemist, John Dalton, perplexed by rational numbers appearing in the analysis of a few substances, conceived and founded the atomic theory with its vast implications. The physicist, Sir William Crookes, pursuing the meaning of lightflashes in an electrically-connected vacuum tube, opened the path to an unknown world in which radio, electrons, and revolutionary laws of mechanics, are pointing to undreamed-of fields of knowledge. The monk-botanist Mendel studied the progeny of sweet peas, and discovered laws of inheritance operating in every living creature—plant or animal.

Joseph Smith, the Prophet, desired light on what at first seemed a small, personal problem—which of several contending religious sects was right. Flowing from that desire, came knowledge relative to the whole gospel, the one gospel, and its structure; as also of the origin and destiny, the duties and rewards, of man on earth. The secrets of eternity were opened to him and the people.

Abraham Lincoln, the backwoods boy, sought learning as a preparation for his life's work, and sought to base his life's actions on principles of liberty and justice, derivatives of truth. This desire ever drove him onward and forward, sometimes in battle array. Therefore, destiny could call him to be the welder of the unhappy division of a great nation, so that, in his own words, "This nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth." [^7] It seems a far cry, yet the labors of the Emancipator were but the flowering of the desire of the boy with his book by the flickering fire of the hearth.

To all this, the individual who professes that he is not religiously minded, answers that he has no desire for further religious experience, and moreover that he does not know how to awaken such desire. But, as already said, as to desire, he is probably fooling himself, for he, in common with all of us, does desire what religion may give and does give—happiness beginning with peace in one's heart.

Desire, and the accompanying will, may be cultivated, for religion as for other human interests. A desire may be ever so small, but, if repeated again and again, and each time put into action, it will increase steadily, far beyond its original bounds. It may be made to grow, little by little, into mighty power.

To accomplish that, as any other worthy object, one must turn to God for help. If that is done, the end is sure. No man is mighty of himself.

Prayer is and always has been the highway to eternal truth, and strength, and achievement. If ever so small a desire for religious truth leads to ever so humble a prayer, a good beginning has been made. Desire has been stimulated; the will has been strengthened; the next prayer will be stronger. Gradually the person will be led to study the precepts of religion and love to practice them. At last he will learn the true meaning of being religiously minded. He will discover that his soul is fed, and his life brightened, by that which he formerly rejected. He, and his loved ones will be happier for his new life. But, unless he will make the simple effort of seeking help from divine powers, he will make no progress. Even the heavens stand helpless before an unwilling person.

Prayer must not be a demand, but a plea for help. A slip of a girl won the first prize at a musical festival in the Salt Lake City Tabernacle. A friend, congratulating her, asked, "What did you do in preparation?" "I prayed." "You prayed to win?" "No, I prayed to be able to do my best." The voice of human experience tells us that prayers uttered in that spirit are always answered, when and how according to God's higher wisdom; but always answered.

People who achieve worthily, who bless their generation, are prayerful. The testimonies of answers to prayers are innumerable. Lincoln, in the agonizing years when brother was pitted against brother, turned for help, in prayer, to God.

All of us, whether we think we are "religious minded" or not, need the power that comes from prayer. The world has need of a prayerful humanity. In the spirit of prayer, the tasks, humble or great, of individuals and of nations, should be performed. Those who pray go at their work with greater hope, whether in the home, shop, laboratory, or office. There is joy in a family that kneel daily around the table in united prayer. The king or president, ruler or local authority, who does not lay his problems, sincerely, simply, before his Maker, is an untrustworthy, dangerous leader. A prayerless people always move, toward destruction.

Righteous desire, backed by a ready will and honest prayer, works wonders in human lives. It reveals truth. It trains the will for righteousness. It leads to increasing accomplishment. It is protection amidst the temptations and storms of life. It places man on the road to abundant joy. In the end it lifts man to a place near the gods.

When such desire is coupled with obedience to law, the gates of heaven are thrown open, and we may, secure of the outcome, advance to our high, eternal destiny.

A man's prayerful desires, were they fully known, are his truest measure. The truest measure of a nation is its national desire, addressed to God. The progression or retrogression of the race is but a reflection of the combined desire of the multitude. As our desires are, so are we.

This measure of men is recognized by Divinity, itself. When the selection of the first quorum of apostles in this dispensation of time was authorized, the Lord declared, "By their desires and their works you shall know them." [^8] This test is of universal application.

For us, individually, who are laying the foundations of faith, the promise, made through the latter-day prophet, should ever be borne in mind, "According to your desires, yea, even according to your faith, shall it be done unto you." [^9]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (I John 4:16)
[^2] (John 3:16)
[^3] (Macbeth, Act 4, Scene 3)
[^4] (Macbeth, Act 5, Scene 2)
[^5] (I Cor. 13:13)
[^6] (D. & C. 4:5)
[^7] (Luke 9:26)
[^8] (D. & C. 18:38)
[^9] (D. & C. 11:17)
