John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER EIGHT

THE CREATIVE, SUSTAINING POWER

In building a religion one question appears and reappears: "Why is man on earth?"

Stripped of all incidentals, the answer may be simply stated: We are on earth because of God's love for us, His spirit children.

Love is the impelling motive in God's relationship to man. It is the force or power which gives life to the plan of salvation. "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him." [^1]

Could we see more clearly, perhaps we should discern that love is the creative and supporting power of the universe, to its uttermost bounds. Without love, there would be universal quiet, silence, and extinction.

Love alone explains the gospel. For love of us, Christ hung upon the cross. Love, with its children, goodwill, kindness, charity, and mercy, make life on earth tolerable, and it will redeem us at last. Love is the beginning and end of God's labor for man. Whatever is of God is founded in love. It is this principle that supports every doctrine and activity of the restored gospel.

We need but read human history in the light of this principle to learn that human affairs are worthy only in the proportion that goodwill, or love of others, is imbedded in them. That should be the first consideration of ruler or people, in weighing the merits of any proposed action.

The supreme importance of love makes it desirable, yes necessary, to be able to recognize it. The full and essential nature of love we may not understand. But there are tests by which it may be recognized.

Love is always founded in truth. It is organically a part of truth. Lies and deceit, or any other violation of the moral law, are proofs of love's absence. Love perishes in the midst of untruth. That is a simple test of the presence of love. Thus, the lover who falsifies to his loved one, or offers her any act contrary to truth, does not really love her.

Further, love does not offend or hurt or injure the loved one. By that test any human venture, past and present, may be measured for its real value. Cruelty is as absent from love as north is from south, as truth is from untruth. Let the lover and the loved one heed this test.

But, love is a positive active force. It helps the loved one. If there is need, love tries to supply it. If there is weakness, love supplants it with strength. The loved one is upheld; she may lean safely upon the shoulder of true love. This applies to any human venture or relationship. Love that does not help is a faked or transient love.

Good as these tests are, there is a greater one. True love sacrifices for the loved one. That is, love gives of itself to its object. That is the final test. Christ gave of Himself, gave His life, for us, and thereby proclaimed the reality of his love for his mortal brethren and sisters. The mother gives of her own flesh and blood, and jeopardizes her very life, for her child. In family relationships there must be mutual sacrifices among husband, wife, and children, else true love is not there. To give to the loved one that which we would keep for ourselves, is the truest measure of our love. "For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son." [^2]

Statesmen, and all who deal with humanity, should take notice of this greatest test of goodwill. Unless treaties among nations give to others something dear to the contracting parties, they are only "scraps of paper." Only as they, who write the treaties, observe this principle of sacrifice, will their documents and agreements have lasting value. All, who wrestle with problems of peace, should heed the supreme test of sacrifice.

There is a fable abroad that love is unmanly, is weak and fearful. Quite the contrary is true. Love is courageous. It knows no fear. Witness a mother's battle for her child. There is no true courage unless love gives it power. Love proceeds to its task without question. In all its labors, it builds, constructs, creates. The great achievements of men root in a love willing to give of itself, willing to sacrifice.

It is illuminating to read history in terms of love. We soon find that battles are won, in the end, only by love. Today it is the love of liberty and truth that gives us courage in this war to sacrifice our very lives.

Hate, the opposite of love, is cowardly. It is full of fear. It lives by stealth and deceit. It sneaks about and, like hyenas, feeds on rottenness. It destroys and tears to pieces. It spells ultimate disaster for the individual or nation that engages in it. It is never a final victor; for it battles only for selfishness. It would "uproar the universal peace, confound all unity on earth." [^3] Hate of the foe never leads to victory. Therefore, it has recourse to destruction and murder, as in Macbeth.

". . . . Now does he feel His secret murders sticking on his hands; Those he commands move only in command; Nothing in love." [^4]

Of all the means for conquest given to man, whether of nature or self, love is the most powerful. "And now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest of these is love." [^5] Love qualifies men for the work of God, declared modern revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^6]

In daily life the most evident product of love is tolerance. Tolerance means that we allow others to believe and act, unhindered, provided they do not interfere with our beliefs and acts. It also means that, similarly, we do not infringe upon the rights of others. Tolerance is the first step towards love among mankind. Only on the basis of tolerance for one another's personalities and beliefs, can we work and achieve together.

Intolerance is of the devil. Satan has used intolerance in all ages, to achieve his purpose, to shape men into his own evil and truth-denying pattern. Intolerance and bigotry form the blackest chapter of human history. It has been the enemy of love, and of love's sweet fruits, from the beginning.

The manner of intolerance never varies: hissing, spitting, clawing, killing where it dares; and skulking, leering, maiming in the dark, when its cowardly soul feels itself in the minority. One cannot reason with intolerance. It is the jungle beast in the world of thought; it is the vulture fattening on putrid beliefs. Where intolerance is, there is stagnation. The memory of man's deeds of intolerance cannot be erased from memory. We blush for shame at the recollection of them.

Because men have not conformed to the procedures, practices, or beliefs of those in power, they have been disgraced, beaten, tortured, and killed. Honest, peaceloving people, who held to their convictions, have been driven from house and home, often to suffer and die; God-fearing women, charged with witchcraft, have been hung; believers in a new scientific discovery have been burned at the stake. A riot of evil has been the brood of intolerance. It is inconceivable that man, made in the image of God, would stoop to such hand in hand association with Satan, the father of lies and sin.

The list of the crimes of intolerance is too long for recital. In America they began with the first settlements. For example, only those who believed as the majority were permitted to be freemen. Laws were passed excluding from the rights of citizenship, immigrants who differed on the doctrine whether salvation issued from grace or works. Quakers were scourged. Baptists were obliged to seek other places of residence. In New York, Jews were compelled to live in isolated groups. Catholics were deprived of their civil rights. The atheist could not be admitted to the colony. Such intolerance led easily to a bitter conflict among the creeds, and an incredible assortment of bigotry and crazes.

These cruder forms of intolerance gradually disappeared. But the intolerant spirit remained. It entered politics and social relations. In turn, Catholics, Masons, Jews, Negroes, and Mormons, were persecuted. When mistakes made by these groups did not seem sufficient evidence, tall tales, deliberate falsehoods, were invented, and circulated. The persecutors were organized as Nativists, Know-Nothings, the American Protective Association, the Ku Klux Klan, the Invisible Empire, and many others, professing to purify the nation, but, in reality, conceived by intolerance.

Such intolerance did not originate in America. It has been active in every land. In Europe, in which most Americans have their roots, it has raged in its most unabated and horrible forms. One need only remember the witch hunting and hanging and burning in England; the unspeakable, devil-inspired Inquisition, with its monstrous devices for human torture. The "five cornered" museum in Nurnberg displays a collection of instruments for torture, culminating in the iron maiden, a hollow figure, the front swinging on hinges, studded with spikes to pierce eyes and nose and every vital part of the body. Into this figure the victim of intolerance was forced, and the spiked front slowly closed!

John Huss was burned at the stake for daring to teach that members of the church should partake of both emblems of the sacrament; Servetus for clinging to the spirit of the scripture; Joan of Arc for no detectable crime whatever. Their ashes, and the ashes of a multitude of the victims of intolerance, cry for a day of tolerant living together of honest men and women.

Worst of all, these crimes have usually been perpetrated in the name of God. It has been made to appear that it is incumbent upon us to force men, if needs be, into the acceptance of truth. That is not the Lord's way. He leads men to conversion. It is the devil's favorite deceit, to make evil appear as coming from the Lord. Man's intolerance is an ugly story. Perhaps enough has been said.

The Latter-day Saints are a tolerant people. First, because the restored gospel prescribes love for one another as a law of action. Second, because they know intolerance, and have suffered and bled from it.

Few people, if any, have been so subjected to intolerance. Their prophet and patriarch were murdered in cold blood. The plains of Missouri ran red with the blood of the Saints. They were hounded from Nauvoo. They have been persecuted with a fury born of hell itself. They were driven from place to place. They were robbed of their possessions, time and time again. Brigham Young claimed that he had left five successive homes to persecutors. At length, to find a refuge, they toiled across the desert, left thousands in graves by the side of the trail; sought out what was held to be the most inhospitable desert section of the country, and made it to blossom as the rose—only to be subjected again to furious persecution, led chiefly by men who professed to be followers of Christ.

And all this, when the matter is sifted, because the Latter-day Saints declared that God can speak to His children; and that, in fact, He has spoken to men in this generation, and has authorized the establishment of His Church in its purity.

Yes, despite all this, there can be no feeling of hate or revenge among Latter-day Saints. They forgive their persecutors. They know that only love, bearing truth, will triumph in the world. They are and will remain a tolerant people. They yield to every man the freedom and protection they themselves desire. They say only, "We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may." They plead with all men to live together in tolerance.

Yet, tolerance must not be misunderstood. Tolerance does not mean surrender of any belief. Tolerance is not a compromise with practices in which we do not believe. There is always a temptation to do as others do, in order to secure and keep their goodwill or friendship. That is not tolerance; it is surrender; and surrender is the coward's way to peace. Indeed, the highest respect from any man is gained by close adherence to the principles which we have found to be true. Strong men hold with the grip of conviction to eternal truth; but allow all men the privilege of believing as they choose. A Word of Wisdom keeper does not need to accept the cocktail or the cigarette to keep friends. If the friends are worth the keeping, they will respect the man who walks according to his convictions.

Sometimes, also, the law of love is so misunderstood as to lead to neutrality, for fear the feeling of others may be hurt. When questions arise, the answer is neither yes or no. Instead, silence. Such neutrality is akin to crime. There is nothing neutral in the field of truth. There is either truth or error. Whenever conditions require, the truth should be spoken. To remain silent is a concession to error. Every man, when the demand for expression is made, must take sides for the right. The Lord has said it:

"For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory . . ." [^7]

Only by love can intolerance, strife, and jealousies, discord and warfare, be banished from among men.

Only upon a foundation of love can a safe religion be built.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (I Cor. 6:20)
[^2] (2 Nephi 2:25)
[^3] (The Primacy of Faith)
[^4] (James 2:17-26)
[^5] (Matt. 7:21)
[^6] (D. & C. 82:4)
[^7] (John 14:2)
