John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER TEN

SIMPLICITY IN RELIGION

It is believed by many that religion and mystery are always associated. This has made religion distasteful to people who seek for truth; and properly so. A correct and really acceptable religious faith must be built upon that which is known. Mysteries belong to the unknown.

The doctrine that religion must be built upon the known, removes from religion the mysterious and complex. Religion then becomes plain and simple. Simplicity and plainness are always marks of truth.

The person who begins with mysteries, never finds true religion. He soon becomes lost in the mysteries. A mystery cult never satisfies the longings of the soul. Only as we cling to the known, will the gospel of Jesus Christ be understood.

The story of an ancient philosopher points the way. Walking on the sands of the ocean shore, he pondered, without success, upon the mystery of existence. Nearby he saw a child who was diligently carrying water, in a large spoon, from the ocean, and pouring it into a small pit, dug in the sand. Becoming interested in the child's play, the philosopher asked, "What are you doing?" The child answered, "Don't you see, I am emptying the ocean." The child, so the legend goes, was an angel in disguise, sent to teach the old man the futility of trying to understand all things.

Nevertheless, though the infinite universe presents many unsolved problems, we do not walk blindly on earth. We have learned much; a little here and there, somewhat imperfectly from our own study of nature, and more perfectly from divine revelation. We are growing in knowledge. Every day brings its discoveries, with answers to many a debated question. Throughout endless time, knowledge will be added to knowledge, the unknown will recede, until all things will be revealed. We must patiently understand that some knowledge must be left for the ages to come; until the promised time when we shall see and know more clearly.

The essential thing for us to keep in mind is that any acceptable enterprise must be built on what we know. The railroad train cannot cross the river safely unless the bridge is built with the knowledge of the strength of materials. Sound knowledge comes only as we proceed from the known to the unknown. By that process, there need be no end to man's conquest of the infinite unknown. This must remain a basic principle in building a religion. Stepwise, using approved means and methods, and begining with dependable knowledge, we may move into the realm of higher religious knowledge and comprehension. In every science, in every orderly discipline set up by man, this has been found to be the method that leads to conquest.

Religion, which encompasses all truth, can be no exception to the rule. What we know, and therefore can understand, must be the basis of a satisfying religion.

The Lord has declared it, "Now, behold this is wisdom; whoso readeth, let him understand and receive also; for unto him that receiveth, it shall be given more abundantly, even power." [^1]

It would be well for mystery-seekers to remember Jacob, the Patriarch. "He dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven." [^2] Note well that the ladder was set up on earth.

When this process is reversed, when men begin with the unknown, in building a religion or a house, disorder and uncertainty are invited. Progress is stifled. Facing the unknown, that which is not understood, the mysterious acquires a pre-eminent place. Superstition soon follows. Reliance is placed more and more upon the magical, upon foretelling and fortune-telling, whatever the method proposed, but always of a mystical nature. Endless speculation about the unknown, about matters remote from human understanding, absorb the interests of men.

Omar Khayyam, in common with all honest men, expressed the result:

"Myself when young did eagerly frequent Doctor and saint, and heard great argument About it and about; but evermore Came out by the same door wherein I went. [^3]

Men who begin with the unknown have no anchorage to the known. Consequently, they do not and cannot see alike. They come to different conclusions. Discord arises. Each one of the innumerable sects or cults that draw their very breath from mystical sources, lays down a different explanation for the same thing. Since they deal with the mysterious, their language is not clear. There is a fog about their doctrine and practices. In the hope of closer association with the dreamy unknown, all manner of devices are employed for harmony with the oft-dreaded unknown.

Organizations which revel in the unknown, are invariably alike in one thing. They betray weakness in providing for man's full joy on earth. Usually, they obscure the urgent needs of today, by pictures of a glorious hereafter. That is a poor substitute for bread, and the other comforts of body and spirit needed on earth. Emotional fervor cannot successfully replace intellectual certainty. A religion resting on the mysterious, cannot long satisfy mankind, endowed with faculties to discover truth.

If religion is only a mystery cult, it has no place in this day of enlightenment, when the way to truth has been well paved with experience. If it does not dovetail into all I do, I must question its value and validity. Since it is the greatest truth, it must include all lesser truths, which may lead to it. Only as religion becomes plain to the human mind, enlarged and made clearer by every new discovery, and made usable in daily life, will true faith develop, with its following of joy, hope, and courage.

The failure to recognize that the mysterious cannot be made a safe basis of religious life has led to vast disaster. From the beginning of time this near worship of the mysterious has been an evil in the land. It has led to unutterable confusion. In ancient days, before Christ, people bowed down in worship before man-made figures, supposed in some way to possess power; pure young maidens were sacrificed in bloody rituals to win the favor of the unknown, mysterious gods; moral orgies, in "the high places," so revolting as to be beyond decent language, were believed to appease these mysterious powers. Even among the followers of Christ, the cult of the unknown, or mysterious, has caused innumerable heresies and schisms. Within a generation after the Savior's death, useless speculations divided the people. Even that which was clearly revealed was made to seem mysterious. The Gnostics declared their belief in the message of Christ, but asserted that He was but an "emanation" from God, one of many, a mere phantom. This cancelled out the doctrine of the atonement. Others wrestled with the Fatherhood of Christ, and decided that He was born of mortal parents, but that, at his baptism, He became spiritual. This destroyed the divine relationship between God and Jesus. Others wrestled with the problem of good and evil, clearly explained in the gospel, forgetting the simple duties of the day. Council after council was held to harmonize the contending opinions; which succeeded only in increasing the confusion. For example, in the Athanasian Creed: "We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons nor dividing the substance . . . the Father incomprehensive, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible." Or, the famous phrase from the Nicene Creed, speaking of Christ, "God of God, Light of Light; very God of very God."

In the presence of the clear and simple teaching of Jesus Christ, such erroneous doctrine and confusing, "incomprehensible" language seem unforgivable.

In our own days, the cult of the mysterious unknown seems to have increased. There are hundreds of Christian sects. These differ chiefly in mystical interpretations of Bible passages or gospel doctrines. About their opinions, they wrangle incessantly, without ever coming to agreement. As these religious abberations are examined, it is evident that the real cause of the disagreements is a failure to understand the gospel in its entirety. Departures from the truth have left the gospel structure incomplete, therefore unsatisfactory, and searching minds have tried of themselves to supply the missing parts. They are much like the shipwrecked sailor, clinging to a rocky, barren reef on the stormy coast, when just beyond lies the fertile, pleasant land. It is only when the gospel is accepted in its entirety, that it is seen to be simple, easily understood, and becomes satisfying.

A major result of basing religion on the mysterious unknown and the far away, is the formation of a priestly caste of professional teachers and interpreters of religion. The formation of such a professional group is almost a necessary result if religion is not plain enough to be understood by every intelligent, truth-loving individual. But, it is contrary to the method of Jesus, who trusted everyday men, many of them toilers with their hands, to teach the gospel.

There can be no objection to someone who may teach religion to beginners. But, if the teaching has been well done, there should be no need of continued special interpreters. When one has learned arithmetic, the teacher's work is done. Thereafter, the individual uses his knowledge according to his needs or desires. He may need to be reminded of his duties over and over, but the next door neighbor, who also understands gospel requirements, may do that. The existence of a clerical class is a tacit admission that things religious are beyond the understanding of those of us who belong to the common run of people.

If religion is so far beyond human understanding that another, however good, must stand between us and God, we cannot worship in spirit and in deed. If it be so, we must bow before authority which has no credentials, for we cannot understand them. That, modern, intelligent man cannot do. That removes him from God, when his utmost need is to be near to his Father in heaven.

Instead of lining its doctrinal structure with mystery, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches, first, that the gospel, as far as revealed, is so simple that it may be comprehended by any normal mind; and, second, that its importance, as the philosophy of life, requires every person to know for himself its truth, principles, and practice.

In harmony with this view, and the express revelations on this subject, both in ancient and modern times, there is no priestly class in the Church. Every man who lives righteously receives the Priesthood. All are priests. This makes the whole body of the Church a priestly class. It emphasizes the essential simplicity of the gospel, a characteristic of truth. The shoe maker and the college professor, the fisherman and the tent maker, if members of the Church, hold the Priesthood, and are probably equally able to explain and defend the beliefs and practices of the Church. By this universal Priesthood, in collaboration with the women, equally well informed, all members of the Church are taught the gospel from infancy up. During more than one hundred years of experience, it has been shown that no special priestly class, to teach the principles of religion, is needed any more in our day than in the day of the ancient apostles. The officers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are administrative officers. The teaching of the gospel is done by the whole Priesthood.

It may be objected by some that ancient Israel had its priestly class, the Levites. But, as shown by the Bible and modern revelation, it was only after the unwillingness of the people to obey the law, that the Priesthood was withdrawn from the body of the people, and a part, the lower part, confined to the Levites. [^4]

Another error has come from the attempt to look upon religion as remote from daily experience, foreign to the duties of the day, and in the region of the mysterious. In such organizations there is little appeal to the intellect. Reliance is rather placed upon the emotions to keep people close to religion. The emotions have their place in religion, as in other human concerns, but not to the exclusion of reason. Religious aberrations have arisen as a result. For example, the priests wear special clothes, designating their profession; and in their religious service, frequently don vestments, heavily adorned. Instead of the simple, soul-piercing word of truth, have come incantations, intonations, rituals, and image worship. A host of man-made devices, with "words tabooed, and words sacred," have become stepping stones to mystic beliefs. Such emotional appeals are offered instead of a plain, direct, understandable worship of God. Superstition and hidden fear are the natural fruits of such worship. It is difficult to believe that in a day of enlightenment, men try to clutter up religion with emotional appeals through outward forms. Robes and rituals do not feed soul-hungry men and women, who in their souls' need assemble to be near a loving God.

The Latter-day Saints worship simply. There is singing, praying, and speaking, but no specific ritual. There is no clerical garb. The sermon is delivered by one of the members, sometimes warned in advance, more often called to the service without warning. Since the gospel includes all truth, the theme may be drawn from any needs of man—whether on earth or in heaven. If the daily life of the speaker is righteous, his words will touch hearts that need the message. Eloquence and academic learning are not required, so much better if they are present; but the sound truths of the gospel are best explained under the guidance of the Spirit. Every speaker tries to follow the prescription of the Lord, given in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "And now come, saith the Lord, by the Spirit, unto the elders of his church, and let us reason together, that ye may understand; let us reason even as a man reasoneth one with another face to face. Now, when a man reasoneth he is understood of man, because he reasoneth as a man; even so will I, the Lord, reason with you that you may understand." [^5] The presiding officer conducts the meeting as the Spirit may direct him. The beauty of the service lies in its simplicity and truth.

In harmony with the prime purpose of meetinghouses, they are simple. In design and materials they may agree with the best standards, but there is no attempt at useless adornment, or inner beautification that would distract the mind from the service itself. Stained glass and a vaulted ceiling are not substitutes for the living word of God. The hundreds of Latter-day Saint meetinghouses are proofs of the loving devotion of the people to religion, and to beauty; but it should also be noted that they are so planned as to meet the needs of the group. There is no space left for mere show. In the temples of the Church, much larger, constructed under the laws of beauty, every room is likewise designed for a definite need. There is no wasted space for show.

It was in a day of revival, when men's emotions ran high, that Joseph Smith, the Prophet, went to God for help. Emotional ebb and flow could not give him the knowledge he needed. His prayer was answered. God and His Son Jesus Christ stood before him. From that beginning grew the Church. The Church has ever been doubtful of excessive emotional fervor as a way to truth. Its strength lies in true knowledge.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints seeks to be simple and understanding in its teaching and simple and direct in its worship, so that people may come to an understanding; and that the Lord may be pleased with their efforts. The Church believes that only by clearness and simplicity, marks of truth, can the truths of religion be effectively presented to seeking humanity.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (John 10:38)
[^2] (Hebrews 11:1)
[^3] (Alma 32:18, 21, 26, 29)
[^4] (D. & C. 29:46, 47)
[^5] (Tennyson, In Memoriam)
