John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER ELEVEN

ETERNAL PROCESSES

There has grown up the belief that the usual methods for approaching truth cannot be employed in religion. It is sometimes added that religion does not employ logical processes; that its requirements are of the hit-and-miss variety. This is not and cannot be so, first, because we have no other avenues to the kingdom of truth, whatever our search may be, than our natural faculties; and second, because, in religion there is a place for every truth, however garnered by man.

All human powers may be used to establish and defend religion. In the pursuit we may use to the full our physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual equipment. Our traditional five senses, which deal more directly with the external, material world, may be used effectively in religion as elsewhere. From the immediate world about us, much religious evidence and experience may be garnered, for the mark of the Maker is upon all creation.

The Lord Jesus Christ, Himself, made this matter clear. When He stood before the unbelieving, disdaining leadership of the Jews, He declared, "Though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know, and believe." [^1] That is, whatever comes within our experience may be used in building our religion.

The pattern of finding truth is the same in every field of knowledge. It is universal. Just as the impress of God is upon every created thing, it is upon every process leading to truth. There is no possible substitution. In short, religion cannot be set aside, as something peculiar to itself. The powers used may vary, but in method, substance, and effect, it falls into the universal pattern of truth and truth's discovery.

The equivalence of methods and processes in finding spiritual and natural truth is clearly brought in the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. They illustrate well, the easily understood, logical nature of religion.

As the foundation of the gospel are two principles—faith and repentance—and two ordinances—baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost. The counterparts of these support every search for truth, in every domain of truth, in science as elsewhere.

Faith is the first principle of revealed religion. It is a form of knowledge. The facts of experience, called knowledge, usually pertain to the visible world around us. When we venture into the unseen world, by the use of our subtler faculties, the knowledge thus gained is usually spoken of as faith. Paul made the distinction clear in his famous definition: "Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." [^2] Faith then becomes knowledge of a certain kind, won in a certain way. It makes known that which was formerly unknown. When the work of faith is finished, all will be known. [^3]

Paul's definition makes faith also a moving force. There can be no faith unless we venture out to discover the "substance hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." It implies that we must seek faith for ourselves, or it will not have value, or come to stay. Faith is a product of individual action. Like all other good things, it is a reward of self-effort. It must be found by one-self. It cannot be borrowed or stolen from another.

This definition also gives the assurance that the "substance" desired may be discovered. Otherwise, the words would be empty of meaning. With this assurance, untold millions of people have explored the unseen dominions of existence, and have discovered truths to brighten and make their lives beautiful. With each new, small gain, faith has been added to faith, until vast possessions and visions of new knowledge have been opened to the human mind.

The more faith is examined, the more it becomes an active, prayer, hopeful force, that drives us, without doubt, to an active search for truth. It is a universal principle that leads to human progress.

Faith or its equivalent is the first principle in every human pursuit. Every onward step implies faith. The scientist in his laboratory performs his experiment with the assurance that something will be learned from it. Newton made his calculations that gave us the law of gravitation, with the assurance that, by so doing, he would learn more than he knew about planetary and stellar worlds. Every inventor, builder, artist, or statesman employs faith in his toil. Therefore, we have our great, advancing civilization.

There was a time when it was believed that only visible things could be known. During that time there was little advancement. Our present progress, when the common things about us are made into most marvelous creations, began when the fearless confidence was begotten that the unknown could be made known. The man who out of black coal tar secured dyes rivalling the rainbow tints, or rubber comparable to the natural product, or a vitamin for the support of life, or a sulpha drug to combat disease, labored with faith in man's power to know the unseen. The last century has been incomparably an age of faith.

Without faith we not only do not increase, we may decrease. The business man unable to visualize the probable results of his work becomes a mere blunderer. Or the one without confidence in his venture, becomes harassed with fear. Without faith, the chemist would not fill his test tube, the astronomer would not look through his telescope, the business man would not replenish his stock, the painter would leave his brush on the palette. All would stagnate. Success does not wait on blunderers or fearful ones. The fruits of faith are confidence, courage, certainty, progress—all vital elements of success.

The supremacy of faith in all human affairs is universally recognized. Faith is understood to be the first guiding principle of life, the motive power of achievement. Whether in science, business, the professions and the arts, or in religion, faith is the basic principle of action. The entrance into the house of truth is the same, whether it be the cottage of science or the palace of religion.

Repentance, the second principle of the gospel, follows faith, and is a product of it. To know a thing, to believe in it, is not enough. Knowledge must be used, if it is to be made alive. One who respects the new-found truth, refrains from doing anything in opposition to it. If he has done wrong, he does it no longer. That is repentance.

The fully repentant person goes yet further. He not only turns away from erorr, but proceeds to do that which is right. Full repentance cannot be static; it must be active if it is to shape men's lives into harmony with truth. It must lead to obedience to law. Thus, repentance is of a two-fold nature. It is a turning away from evil, and towards the right; from darkness to light; from quiescence to action. Repentance may be called active faith. Such repentance gives life to faith. There can be no complete faith without repentance.

Moreover, to be effective, repentance must not be postponed. When truth comes, it must be obeyed, else there is no repentance. Today is the day of repentance. Someone has said that people who calculate on an eleventh hour repentance, generally die at 10:30.

The principle of repentance is not peculiar to religion. Its equivalent exists in every human activity. The pattern is the same. When he learns better, the farmer no longer plants poor seed; the merchant no longer stocks goods not bought by the customers; the doctor lays aside old methods of treatment; the artist avoids paints that fade; and so on over the whole range of man's concerns. This is turning away from error. There is a type of repentance in every industrial and scientific organization. If men want to succeed in any enterprise, they must practice repentance. Unless men laid aside poor methods for better ones, there would be no progress. Faith is complete when it walks with repentance.

Truth, when discovered, must be accepted and used; otherwise it is valueless. Only when we conform to truth, can more truth be expected. This doctrine leads us into the domain of ordinances and their equivalents.

The repentant person seeks out the ordinances of religion, to obey them. Baptism, the first ordinance of the gospel, is faith and repentance in action. It is a surrender to law. It is proof of our acceptance of the gospel. In the divine plan, it is the first evidence of full obedience to gospel requirements. It is the beginning of progress within the Church of Christ.

Baptism is an ordinance of great symbolic beauty. It does more than make the candidate a member of the Church. It is an acknowledgment that we believe the gospel to be of divine origin, therefore true. It may also be viewed as an agreement between man and God, that the candidate will keep all the laws and regulations of the Church. The act of baptism serves as the signature to this contract. Our baptism further acknowledges the leadership of Jesus Christ. To be immersed in water is a symbol of His death, burial, and resurrection, by which His position and vicarious service are accepted, and the promise of the resurrection is received.

In addition, and this gives joy to weak man, baptism carries with it forgiveness of past sins. The candidate comes out a cleansed man, in a high spiritual sense. He may have to pay the physical price for his mortal errors. But, his sins will not now prevent him from entering the highest glory in the kingdom of heaven, provided he live, henceforth, according to the law.

Above all baptism represents eternal law. Baptism is necessary for salvation. No round-about way exists. It is the sign of obedience, by which, alone, man may be in harmony with truth.

In passing, it may be observed that the true meaning of baptism itself refutes the practice of infant baptism. Infants can neither understand the ordinance, nor give assent to its meaning. And, to have someone else, a godfather, take the responsibility for the child does not improve the matter. The doctrine of the gospel, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, sets forth the true condition of infants: "But, behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me." [^4] Consequently, the Church does not baptize children, until they begin to be accountable.

The act of baptism has its counterpart in all that we do, however humble the pursuit. Turning away from error must be followed by the use of truth. After better knowledge has been gained, the farmer uses the better seed that has been bred; the merchant seeks out goods wanted by his customers; the doctor uses improved methods of healing; the artist uses more resistant paints; the scientist conforms to the truths he discovers, that he may learn more—and all are profited thereby.

Such obedience to discovered truth is indispensable to welfare and progress. Men may want to do things in a certain way, but unless the performance is in harmony with law, the desired results will not be obtained. We may know the explosive nature of powder; but unless a a correct drill hole is made to confine the powder, the rock is not blasted. The men who have served the world best, have been careful observers of the law. Unless human concerns are made subject to the equivalent of baptism, that is, unless they conform to law, they have no lasting value.

After baptism, and as a consequence or reward of his faith, repentance, and obedience, the candidate receives the gift of the Holy Ghost. By this act, his entrance into the Church by baptism, he is confirmed a member of the Church. He is further given official association with the enlightening power that proceeds from the Holy Ghost. Thereafter he may walk in fuller light, with more power, into never-ending progress. Light may be added to light, knowledge to knowledge, truth to truth, power to power. That is his rich reward.

In every pursuit, outside of religion, as usually defined, when law is discovered, and obeyed, there is certain reward. The essential feature of the second ordinance of the gospel appears wherever men seek and honor truth—wherever eternal law is obeyed. The reward never fails. When the armature of the dynamo is wound correctly, there is light in the city; otherwise there is darkness. When sanitary laws are obeyed, health increases.

Now, to summarize: The first principles and ordinances are necessary, logical steps to truth and progress. In their essential meaning this is true not only in religion, but in every pursuit of man. Faith, repentance, obedience, and the consequent enlightenment, are eternal, unchanging principles determining human increase of every name or nature. They are represented by equivalent operations in every search for knowledge; in every attempt to use natural or spiritual forces for man's benefit.

As all creation bears witness of God, so every process in nature is but a replica of the processes which, under the plan of salvation, lead to ultimate truth and everlasting joy. All progressive action follows one pattern. This is true with respect to every gospel requirement. Carefully examined, every such requirement will be found to have a logical place in religion, and possess an eternal meaning, usable in every human pursuit.

Such an examination of the laws of religion leads to the conviction that there is constant unity in the universe, whether natural or spiritual. The truths of religion are brought into our everyday tasks, for they belong to our every activity. There can be no essential separation between duties religious and duties for our material support, for the same laws are everywhere in operation. Our daily tasks, on the farm or in the office and laboratory, then have religious meaning and significance. Religion is no longer remote, but with us in all that we do, ever near us. That means also that if we seek the higher reward, in any activity, we must employ the principles of religion, and tread its path.

The poet has stated well this universal unity:

"One God, one law, one element And one far-off divine event To which the whole creation moves." [^5]

To trace this unity in all human knowledge and action, is a most fascinating study.

One thought remains: That the universal, eternal principles and ordinances, discussed tonight, and which lead everywhere, logically, to truth and human welfare, are made the foundation blocks of the gospel structure, is another evidence of the truth of the system of belief presented to all mankind by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Matt. 10:29-31)
[^2] (Matt. 6:11)
[^3] (Discourses, p. 12)
[^4] (Exodus, chapters 24-27)
[^5] (D. & C. 124:22, 56, 60-78)
