John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER TWELVE

AN EVERYDAY RELIGION

An everyday religion is one that concerns itself with all our needs whether of body, mind, or spirit; whether of Sundays or weekdays. It gives a religious meaning to our every act. It is often called a practical religion.

Jesus said, "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows." [^1] This assurance of the everpresent watch care of the Lord gives transcendent comfort to weak man, and makes the plan of salvation an everyday religion.

Religion is not, and should not be, confined to affairs ordinarily called spiritual, and to matters of the hereafter. The Lord taught us to say, "Give us this day our daily bread." [^2] This refers clearly to the material tasks of making a living. The request, "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us" enters the field of daily relations with our fellows. Both these requests are of an everyday character, and intensely practical. Brigham Young said, "The religion of Jesus Christ is a matter-of-fact religion, and takes hold of the every-day duties and realities of this life." [^3]

Ancient Israel was commanded to build a tabernacle. The Lord revealed to Moses the detailed pattern according to which the sanctuary and its courts should be constructed. The dimensions of the ark of the covenant were stated, the kind of wood to be used, the covering of gold, and the design and placing of the cherubim. [^4]

In our own day, Joseph Smith was commanded to build a house for the accommodation of visitors to the city of Nauvoo. The method of financing the building was given, limitations to the amount of stock an individual might hold were set forth, the name of the house was given, and other practical matters concerning the building were mentioned. [^5]

These and numerous other divine messages of the kind testify to the concern of the Lord for the everyday affairs of His children on earth. They assure us of the help of the Lord, as may be needed, even in the details of our daily toil. They set up an intimacy between God and man, which gives courage and comfort to struggling humanity. We should be poor, indeed, did not the Lord help us in our small, temporal, material attempts. A religion which would teach otherwise would certainly not be worth the having.

Besides, who would care to worship a god enthroned in some distant place, careless of the needs of his children, indifferent to the very demands which he himself has imposed upon them! There would be no joy in the worship of such a god. The occasional divine revelations that deal with things of earth, as we view them, open our understandings to the close relationship we bear to our Father in Heaven. A God who is with me to help me in all that life requires of me, who makes every day a holy day, because He is there, invites my love.

Following this divine pattern, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints takes an active interest in all the interests of its members. It attempts, without apology, to find ways and means for helping the members in the labors of their lives, in developing their latent powers, and in teaching them how to secure their natural and proper wants; in short, to be useful in their lives. It tries to give light to life in its many ramifications. It is frankly a practical religion.

For example, the human body must be healthy, or life is unhappy. The Church, therefore, urges its members to obey the laws of physical health. It teaches its members to observe the Word of Wisdom, a revelation received by the Prophet Joseph Smith, [^6] to refrain from the use of things deleterious to the body; and to use foods that conserve bodily strength. Hence, the Saints are asked not to use alcohol, tobacco, or hot drinks, in the sense of unnaturally stimulating beverages; but are advised to eat fruits, grains, vegetables, with a minimum of meat. Such care of the body is part of the religious life. Never before, as in this day of unprincipled license in the use of alcohol, tobacco, coffee, tea, and cola drinks, has the Word of Wisdom been so sadly needed. And, the astonishing, almost unbelievable, health and longevity records of the Latter-day Saints are proofs of the efficacy of the health code known as the Word of Wisdom.

Likewise, the Church, recognizing the necessity of mental culture for the full life, has ever fostered education, and under the religious banner; for it declares that "the glory of God is intelligence." [^7] It has organized schools, founded colleges and universities; and has used these institutions so well that the Latter-day Saint students in high schools, colleges, and universities, and graduates therefrom, exceed by far the number from any other group of people of like number. And, the Church has in full operation the most successful system of supplementary religious education in the country. There is a dramatic, stirring picture of the School of the Prophets, of a hundred years ago, the precursor of the adult education of today, in which men of every age, converts to the Church, battling with the frontier for a living, assembled to obtain the rudiments of education—including even the study of Greek and Hebrew. Joseph Smith, an unlearned youth, sought knowledge to such an extent that at his death, in middle life, he was acquainted with several languages, with history and law; and by the standards of the day, could be accounted a fairly well-educated man. The cultivation of the mind is looked upon by the Church as part of the religious life.

Provision is also made by the Church for the social welfare of its members. The theatre, music, and literature have been cultivated. The pioneers, crossing the plains, dared the rigors of the journey with evenings of song, and play, and dance. Excellent recreational programs are carried out in the hundreds of Church recreation halls. Clean recreation, conducted in the name of the Lord, is looked upon as a religious activity.

So, also, in the economic field, the Church has ever sought to secure support for its people. Lands have been colonized, and hundreds of villages, towns, and cities founded, from Ohio to California. The trail of "Mormon" history across the country is marked by economic development. It was the Church, under its religious impulse, that made possible the conquest of the intermountain wilderness, and the building of permanent communities in defiance of the desert. Today, the much-advertised Welfare Program of the Church, fitting present needs, is but a part of the economic endeavors of the Church. The Church believes that a person's efforts to provide economic support for himself and his family is, or should be, but an aspect of his religious life.

Now, to bring religion into all we do, to make every day a holy one, what have we to do?

First, our acts must be righteous. The commandments of the Lord must be observed in all that we do. Then, the Lord can and will help us, so that we may fit our daily duties into religion. Under the eternal law, if we are unrighteous, if we violate the law, we have no claim upon the help that comes from God. Our days will not be holy ones. The influence of evil will discolor our every act.

Second, to make our acts acceptable to the Lord, we must ever, in our incomings and outgoings, in our hopes and aspirations, have before us the upbuilding of the kingdom of God. The spirit of our religion must suffuse, color, and direct our labors. In making a living, as in all that a Latter-day Saint does, he hopes to help establish on earth, the kingdom of God, for the benefit and blessings of all the world. He forgets himself in the cause. He does all in the name of God, and for the consummation of His ultimate purposes. Therefore, the making of a living, or study, or exercise, or recreation, becomes acts of worship. The failure to do this leads to religious impotence.

This doctrine applies to all the vocations of man. It is reasonable. Who would really trust himself to a physician, who, ignoring the sacred ideal of his profession, thinks only of the money he will make in serving the sick? What honest man could care to employ an attorney whose only aim is money or fame, instead of full justice for all? What would be our opinion of the merchant who for gain would prostitute the high ideal of commerce as a means of public service, by deceiving statements concerning the goods he sells? Would parents feel easy to have their children under a teacher who thinks only about pouring chemistry, say, into them, without thinking of their character development? The value of professional men, merchants, artisans, or farmers may best be measured by the spirit that drives them toward righteousness. And no man has really found religion, who does not forget himself in the Lord's cause. He is the man who may hear respectfully a sermon on honesty on Sunday, yet finds lusty joy in putting over a shady business deal on Monday, and defrauds the widow on Tuesday. He is dangerous to society.

Unless a man learns to forget himself in his work, the results of his labors will be barren of human value. They whose names linger through the generations of time have placed their work above any type of remuneration. Their efforts are written upon the tablets of eternity. And, it yields more satisfaction. Sterling Elliott, whose invention of the steering knuckle made the self-propelling vehicle, the automobile, practical, said that it was more fun to put salt on the tail of ideas than to put money in the bank. Service and love demand self-for-getfulness. But, the reward of such service is sure.

Thus, as an illustration, the Latter-day Saint farmer turns the furrow, plants the seed, and harvests the crop, to support his family, educate his children, send them on missions, and participate in the activities of the Church—that, thereby, the cause of the kingdom of God may be served.

With the power of that spirit, the Latter-day Saints, in the midst of their poverty, built the Kirtland and Nauvoo temples, faced the bitter trek across the plains into an uncharted desert, again to build temples, homes, and whatever was needed to foster God's kingdom on earth. Without that consuming desire, they would have sought the easier lives in their native territory. But without such a driving impulse, a religion is empty and hollow. Only as man is in cooperation with God, to accomplish the divine purpose, do religion and the religious life have savor.

Life's duties, performed under such an objective, make every day a holy one. They give zest and color to life.

When all this has been said, we must remember the divine command: "Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy." [^8] It was given to Adam, it was thundered from Sinai, repeated by the Savior while He was on earth, and restated by revelation when the Church of Christ was restored in our day. To Joseph Smith, the Prophet, came the command:

"And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day; for verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High; nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times; but remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full." [^9]

By this command we are required to devote one day a week wholly to communion with God. Our usual labors should be laid aside, and the day dedicated to worship. Naturally, it is not expected that we shall be in meeting all day; but the spirit of worship may be in all that we do—walking, conversing, reading, writing, or doing necessary chores—if we refrain from doing things that would lead our minds away from worship. It should not be a sombre day, for we are directed to "do these things with thanksgiving, with cheerful hearts and countenances, not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with a glad heart." [^10]

The benefits from the observance of the Sabbath are many. The directing of our minds, one day a week, in prayer and worship toward God, enables us to grow in understanding of Him, and in strength to walk in His ways. Spiritual power comes from Sabbath keeping. Further, the complete change of occupation yields physical and mental health and strength. The body is rested from its usual toil, the mind from its anxieties, and both become better fitted to enter upon the duties of the following weekdays. Other great rewards are promised those who keep this day holy—even "the fulness of the earth." [^11]

The world has largely forgotten the holy spirit and purpose of the Sabbath. All manner of alluring amusements, contrary to the Sabbath spirit, are in full operation. Sunday has become a playday instead of a worship day. A hurried attendance at Church with an impatient weather eye on the following golf game, or picture show, or some other amusement foreign to the Sabbath spirit, is not worship, but an offense to God. And, those who are Sabbath violators fall easily into other destructive habits. Throughout the world, individuals, families, and nations are losing blessings, greatly needed, by their constant Sabbath breaking. Our own nation is one of the chief sinners. Undoubtedly, many of our present troubles, within and beyond our borders, may be traced to our flagrant disregard of the sanctity of the Sabbath day. In this, as in all His commandments, God "will not be mocked." He has spoken, and if the Sabbath day is not observed, His blessings will be withheld. The petitions of a Sabbath-breaking nation for divine help is a ghastly farce. This should be taken to heart by all of us.

So, then, the Latter-day Saints believe in an everyday religion, touching our every need. We believe that by allowing the spirit of religion to enter every duty, every day becomes a holy day. The very revelation on the Sabbath day declares that "thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times." [^12] Sunday is different only in that it is consecrated wholly to the formal worship of the Lord. Those who feel that worship on Sunday begins and ends the week's religious life are far from the truth. There is no place in religion for the Sunday fallacy, which relegates religion to Sunday worship, and refuses it entrance to weekday activities.

When we, and all mankind, so live that our religion penetrates every action; when every day becomes a holy one; when our religion becames truly an everyday religion; there will arise the new heaven and the new earth, of peace and prosperity, which the Lord has promised, and of which the ages have dreamed. Perhaps in this day of blood and horror, an everyday religion is the world's first need.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Farrar, Eternal Hope, Preface.)
[^2] (Psalms 57:10)
[^3] (An excellent brief summary is Edward Hicks, The Life Hereafter.)
[^4] (D. & C. 128:15)
[^5] (Discourses, Ed. 1941, pp. 387, 389)
[^6] (John 3:1-6)
[^7] (Mark 16:16)
[^8] (Lev. 16:30)
[^9] (I Peter 4:6)
[^10] (I Cor. 15:29)
[^11] (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 193)
[^12] (D. & C. 59:11)
