John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

ETERNAL HOPE

In earlier talks we have had much to say about our eternal nature, and the eternity of life. We have concluded that death is not the end of life, but that we continue as living, personal beings after our journey on earth has been completed. That has been the faith, or the hope, of the multitudes who have lived on earth. That is as certain knowledge to all who follow Christ.

All of us have wondered about the conditions in that life after death. It is a universal question, which has been in the minds of people from the beginning of time. Yet, though it has occupied the attention of all thoughtful people, there is no unanimity of conclusion. The mass of books and sermons on the subject, rather, show a wide disagreement.

In later Christian times it has come to be believed that all who die will be classified as the saved and the not-saved.

The saved, so the majority of Christendom has been taught, will, throughout the eternities, surround the throne of God, and sing praises to the Almighty Father. The not-saved will be relegated throughout eternity to outer darkness and be subject to never-ending punishment.

This crude, unnatural belief, unacceptable to Latter-day Saints, rests upon the doctrine that at death every opportunity to win salvation had ended. Henceforth there can be no change or progress. Whether or not a person had heard the gospel in life does not matter. Willy-nilly, the story ends with death. Saint and sinner, believer and heathen, are judged by their conditions at death. Their place is then forever fixed, as taught in the old jingle:

"As the tree falls, so must it lie; As the man lives, so will he die: As the man dies, so must he be All through the days of eternity."

Naturally, many thoughtful men, believing in a God of love have questioned the correctness of a doctrine that closes the doors of salvation at the moment of death. Such a doom was especially repugnant, since the vast majority of those who have lived on earth have not had the opportunity of embracing the gospel. And many who had sinned might have repented, had they lived longer. There was an incredible injustice in such a proceeding. People, faced with so heartless a doctrine, cried out of their hearts, "Is salvation possible after death?"

The acceptance of this challenge, the attempt to answer this question, among English-speaking people, forms the most interesting theological story of the latter half of the nineteenth century. Among the laity, protests had arisen against many religious doctrines imposed upon the people. At last, even members of the clerical class began to question the acceptability of some of the religious dogmas of the day. Among the outspoken books thus produced was one called Essays and Reviews, published in 1860 which attempted, frankly, to liberalize the religious views of the people. Since its seven authors were prominent ecclesiastics, the book carried great weight, and was circulated in successive editions.

This was followed, in 1878, by an epoch-making, dogma-shattering book, called Eternal Hope, by Rev. F. W. Farrar, Canon of Westminister. In five scholarly, searching sermons, he discarded the common view of the day that there is no possibility of salvation after death.

On scriptural grounds, and with scriptural evidence, he taught instead that while we cannot, in the hereafter, avoid some punishment for our sins, the path of repentance may never be closed to us, whether on earth or in heaven. He declaimed against the "tyrannous tradition," "that at death there is passed upon every impenitent sinner an irreversible doom to endless tortures, either material or mental, of the most awful and unspeakable intensity." He showed that the word in the Bible translated "damn" means "judgment," the word "hell" means "the unseen world," or "the world beyond the grave," or "the grave." He pointed out that the doctrine of final judgment at death is utterly out of accord with the nature of a merciful, loving God. He quotes with horror from a sermon by a contemporary, who, speaking to the sinner, says:

"Thou wilt look up there on the throne of God and it shall be written 'Forever!' When the damned jingle the burning irons of their torments, they shall say 'Forever!' When they howl, echo cries, 'Forever!'—

" 'Forever' is written on their racks, 'Forever' on their chains; 'Forever' burneth in the fire, 'Forever' ever reigns." [^1]

At the end of his sermons Dean Farrar cried out, with David, "The greatness of His mercy reacheth unto the heavens, and His truth unto the clouds." [^2]

In support of Dean Farrar's views, there was published, in 1884, The Spirits in Prison, a book by Dr. E. H. Plumptree, Dean of Wells. In this volume, Dean Plumptree probed with masterly skill into scriptural and historical evidences. He marshalled a mass of facts and opinions. He concluded that there is hope beyond the grave.

By this time, the fearless attitude of Dean Farrar and other writers gave courage to many who had not dared to oppose the dogma of the day. The man on the street who had resented the old doctrine of no hope after death, pounded into him from the pulpits, dared at last to speak his mind. After all, the common man, who numbers many, had more at stake than the small group of professional preachers.

So, the prodded preachers on the other side, spoke up in defense of their views. In 1886 there appeared a symposium on the question, "Is salvation possible after death" by thirteen notable clergymen, under the title Future Probation. Through 324 pages they agree and disagree, quibble and reason. "With stammering lips and uncertain speech" they admit that the old doctrine, perhaps, is not sufficient; but, if there is a future probation, what is the nature of it? Will all, ultimately, be saved; or will the wicked be destroyed and pass out of the picture, or is there a purgatory in which the sinners who are capable of being purified, are detained and punished for a while? There is much royal quibbling in the book about these alternatives. The essays are filled with words, and more words, and the learned essayists come to no conclusion.

Since then, many have preached and written on the insistent question about life after death, but few, for fear of burning their theological fingers, have ventured to declare that there is no possibility of salvation after death. [^3]

The whole controversy might have been avoided if men had heeded the simple doctrine of truth, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith and published to the world a quarter of a century earlier; a doctrine which taught that in the other world men may repent and progress, and, under certain conditions, may win all the blessings of salvation. That is, salvation is universal. Joseph Smith, in discussing this doctrine, stated that the salvation of the dead "is necessary and essential to our salvation, as Paul says concerning the fathers—that they without us cannot be made perfect—neither can we without our dead be made perfect." [^4]

But how could learned preachers give heed to a humble truth-seeker, even if he had found the truth! It was not the first time that prejudice had overshadowed truth.

Brigham Young, discoursing on the same subject, said, "The salvation that Jesus has purchased will reach the whole human family. . . . Our religion . . . does not send a portion of the people to howl in torment for ever and ever, but it reaches out after the last son and daughter of Adam and Eve, and will pluck them from the prison, unlock the doors, and burst the bonds and bring forth every soul who will receive salvation . . . All who have lived on earth will have the privilege of receiving the Gospel. . . . The economy of heaven is to gather in all, and save everybody who can be saved." [^5]

Nevertheless, in the controversy, even the advocates of the possibility of salvation after death found it difficult to explain one condition set up by the Savior.

When Nicodemus, "a ruler of the Jews," asked Jesus for guidance, he received as answer, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." [^6] On another occasion Jesus said to His disciples, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." [^7] Baptism was made, and remains, an essential condition of salvation, one of the unchangeable, necessary requirements.

Then, for the dead who have not been baptized, the question was asked whether the requirement of baptism might be set aside for them. It was often added, that if one ordinance of such importance could be set aside, why not other requirements? Thus, the whole structure of the gospel was endangered. We should have one law for the living, another for the dead.

This could not and cannot be. Really the answer should have been found by Christians long ago. Through the whole of Hebrew and Christian history runs the doctrine of vicarious service. If a person cannot help himself, others may do the work for him, and such work becomes effective when accepted. Jesus, the Christ, rendered by His death vicarious service for all His brethren and sisters of earth, living, dead, or yet to be born. Why cannot we, then, who live, perform necessary labors for the dead, so that the law may remain honored?

Vicarious service in religion dates back to earliest recorded history. It has been practiced in most nations. It was a principle well understood among the Hebrews. For example, in Leviticus, "For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord." [^8]

Vicarious baptism for the dead was practiced by the early Christians. These baptisms for the dead were performed so that the dead, not having heard the gospel on earth, or having rejected it on earth, but accepted it in the spirit world, might, by their acceptance of the vicarious baptism in their behalf, conform to the law of salvation. Peter the apostle says, "For this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh." [^9] Paul the apostle, speaking of the resurrection, declares vicarious baptism for the dead to have been a Christian practice in his day. "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?" [^10]

Numerous statements in the works of the Christian Fathers make it clear that the doctrine of baptism for the dead was understood and practiced in early Christian days. This is agreed to by practically every competent student of ecclesiastical history. Several churches existing today agree to the principle, on the strength of early Christian records, but fail to practice it. Paul refers to baptism for the dead as an established practice among the Corinthians; and Eusebius really vouches for the practice of the true faith among the Corinthians. True, along with the general apostasy from the true Church, the principle of baptism for the dead, in common with other principles, was perverted, as when the dead body itself was baptized. But, that baptism for the dead was practiced by the early Christians should no longer be in dispute.

It remained for the Prophet Joseph Smith to revive the forgotten or forsaken doctrine of salvation for the dead. Under revelation, he placed the condition of this ordinance before the world in great plainness. All who are born on earth have claim upon salvation if they will accept the divinely established conditions thereof. Moreover, it is required of us, the living, to perform this vicarious service for the dead, to become effective only if the dead accept the gospel. The Lord's plan of salvation for His children cannot be finished until the necessary ordinances for salvation have been placed within the reach of all, living and dead. To quote the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"This doctrine presents in a clear light the wisdom and mercy of God in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the dead, being baptized by proxy, their names recorded in heaven and they judged according to the deeds done in the body . . . Those Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives do it at the peril of their own salvation." [^11]

This doctrine, old but revealed anew, clears away the fog which has obscured man's comprehension of the love of God for His children. It removes the misery which has filled human hearts when contemplating the fate of loved ones who had committed sins, small or great. It explains how those who die without having heard the gospel, may be judged with those who have had the opportunity. The doctrine of no chance for salvation after death, has come from the evil one, whose chief joy is to fill the souls of men with anguish and fear.

This, of course, does not justify the rejection of the gospel, until after death. They who hear the truth and reject it, will receive dire punishment. They will of necessity be retarded in their progress in the hereafter.

The glorious doctrine of vicarious service for our dead, is part of the doctrinal foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. To secure the names of our dead, as far back as the records go, a splendid genealogical organization has been created, perhaps the largest, in membership, in the world. Besides, there are thousands of individual workers in the field, throughout the Church.

The spirit of the work has gone beyond the Church itself. During the last hundred years, there has been a world-wide interest in genealogy, which has resulted in the publication of libraries of books giving the names and vital data of the dead, back to the beginning of recordkeeping for the common people, about three hundred years ago. As for the records of the dead before that time, we wait for the day when all things shall be revealed. We do our duty now as far as is possible.

To perform the sacred ordinances for the living and the dead, great temples have been erected. In them many millions of the dead have received by proxy the ordinances which will enable them, if the work done here is accepted by the dead, to win salvation in the kingdom and presence of God. In the temples, husbands and wives, parents and children, living and dead, have been sealed, for time and eternity. Thus, the chain of love is knitted together, from the beginning to the end.

Those who participate in this work, whether in genealogy or in temple ordinances, bear testimony to the exquisite joy they find in the labor. There can be no greater satisfaction than that which comes from helping another, who is helpless, into eternal happiness.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints offers, through the ordinances of the priesthood, eternal hope for salvation, to all who have lived, who live, or who may live upon earth.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Stefansson, The Standardization of Error, p. 17)
[^2] (I Samuel 28:7-20)
[^3] (Genesis 2:21-22)
[^4] (Moses 5:7,8)
[^5] (Moses 8:16, 19, 24)
[^6] (Galatians 3:8)
[^7] (D. & C. 84:23; 124:38)
[^8] (Jacob 7:6)
[^9] (Matthew 3:15)
[^10] (Moses 5:13)
[^11] (Moses 7:48)
