John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

THE TRAIL OF HUMAN ERROR

Man has frequently and often deliberately departed from truth. The battle between truth and error, existing side by side, is the story of religion on earth.

The first kind of human error, and the most pardonable, results from the limitations of our senses. Facts of observation, if carefully made, are reliable. But, to the eye, the woman, half a mile away, may not, after all, be our sweetheart; or the distant tree may be an oak and not a chestnut; or the poor lenses in the telescope may not reveal the mountains on the moon. The extent and accuracy of our knowledge are limited by the keenness of our senses, or aids to our senses. Errors, due to our imperfect physical constitution, have done harm, especially in earlier days. Such errors of upward-striving man are forgivable. At the worst, they are pathetic in their unintentional departure from truth, and the consequent possible injury to innocent people.

Another kind of human error is unpardonable. It results from the carelessness of the observer, or the willingness to take the word of someone else. For example, since the days of Pliny, 50 B. C., it has been taught and believed that the ostrich hides his head, usually in the sand, when frightened. This is not true. It has been denied by zoologists, hunters, and owners of domesticated ostriches. Yet the fiction goes merrily on. We would rather take the word of some ancient, careless observer, than to discover the truth by our own careful observation, or to accept the new truth when it comes. [^1] Such errors become dangerous when important matters are at stake.

More dangerous errors have crept in when men have attempted to explain their observed facts. Theories, resting upon verified facts, are perfectly proper; but at the best they are shrewd guesses; subject to change with increasing knowledge. They become misleading, dangerous, when proper distinction is not made between them and facts. History is filled with interpretations, or inferences, innocently or foolishly made, that have been shown to be false. When men have clung stubbornly to outworn theories, unpardonable evil has often resulted. Bruno was burned at the stake, and Galileo was near the same end, because they believed, on evidence convincing to them, that the earth revolved around the sun.

False theories have been many. Here are some: There was a time when it was believed that the sun revolved around the earth, to give night and day. Now, we know that the earth revolves upon its axis, and moves around the sun. It was held for centuries that the earth was fashioned at once with mountains and valleys. Today every schoolboy observes the earth-shaping forces, heat and cold, ice and running water, and others. The ancient Greeks believed that matter was composed of four elements. Now, we know that there are ninety-one or ninety-two elements which by their combinations give us the known thousands of substances. Until a little more than a hundred years ago, it was believed that when things burned, a hypothetical substance, phlogiston, escaped from the burning substance. Then it was shown that combustion is due to the union of the gas oxygen with the substance burned. For many years it was taught that the blood in the body was stationary, but ebbed and flowed with the delatation and contraction of the heart. Now we know that the blood circulates throughout the body. Within the memory of living men, Pasteur overthrew the theory of spontaneous generation of life.

Perhaps the worst result of carelessly-made theories, or the careless handling of theories, is a great body of superstitions, and other aberrations of the mind. The savage, hearing a rustle in the forest, sets up the inference that some supernatural being is present. A man of little enlightenment, hearing a wailing gust of wind through a crack in the house, thinks it to be a warning of death for himself or his loved ones. The howling of a dog becomes an omen of disaster. Soon a flood of superstitions engulf such unwary believers.

Thus have come beliefs in fairies, elves, demons, vampires, and other man-made, nonexistent, supernatural beings. Thus have come also beliefs in occult powers exercised by persons specially endowed, such as the oracles of the past, witchcraft, necromancy, sorcery, and others. Such beliefs have led naturally to a multitude of devices for foretelling the future, among them such absurdities as fortune-telling by cards, or by the lines in the hand, or by astrology, the conjunction of the planets at the time of a person's birth.

These deceits are ancient. For example: The witch of Endor [^2] causing Samuel the Prophet to appear to King Saul, was a simple fraud. She did not have, nor could she have, such power over a man holding the Holy Priesthood. But, in collaboration with the father of lies, she may have made it seem as if Samuel appeared. She was one of the age-old group of deceivers. Such error lives by deceit.

Such nonsense, from fairies to astrology, begins as false interpretations of insecure facts, which, when cultivated, leads to pure inventions by ignorant or dishonest persons. Most of them are efforts to delude people for gain. All have done irreparable harm, in that they have clouded the thinking of uninformed people. They are a part of the determined, defiant attempts of the powers of evil to deceive us. Such opposition to truth cannot be tolerated by Latter-day Saints.

The danger of deceit through superstitions still remains with us, as witness the prolific sales of magazines on astrology. There are foolish people today who will not sit thirteen at a table or walk under a ladder. Yet the danger of such errors is less than formerly. The day of enlightenment in which we live has chased away much darkness.

In the field of religion there is an abundance of theories and false interpretations of facts. There are, therefore, a great variety of cults and sects, all flying the banner of religion. This may be due to the persistent feeling that religion is wholly a matter of opinion, unprovable by the mind of man.

Religion has little value in human life unless it is based on facts. True, in this realm, facts are often won by the use of our higher powers, those that transcend the traditional five senses of man. That does not lessen their value.

Here is an example of a misinterpretation of a clear enough statement. The Bible says, "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; and the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man made he a woman." [^3] This statement was long and diligently interpreted, or misinterpreted, to mean that men had one rib fewer than women. It became a doctrine of the schools as well as of the church; and was taught for hundreds of years. It was, therefore, a shock to the people when Vesalius reported, from actual dissection, that men and women had the same number of ribs. In fact, the discovery cast considerable doubt upon Vesalius' theological orthodoxy!

The "rib" story is clearly a figure of speech, with a sound, reasonable meaning. Freed from false interpretation, it is a sensible statement, acceptable to thinking men. Every child born on earth is begotten by an earthly father.

There can be no objection to speculations within the theological field, but Latter-day Saints deprecate the frequent fault of not distinguishing between fact and theory, between truth and its assumed meaning. Error, man's constant enemy, cannot be defeated, unless men cling to simple truth. When that is done, the errors of the ages will vanish.

However, the chief cause of religious error is due to man's deliberate disobedience to the commandments of God. He has often dared, chiefly through false religious leaders, to change the principles and practice, the doctrine, of the gospel. Men have chosen immediate alluring, but transient satisfactions, requiring neither self-effort nor self-control, in preference to the lasting, joyous happiness that follows firm obedience to divine law, built upon self-effort and self-control.

Such perversions have not come because gospel truth has not been available. It is an error to believe the gospel began with Christ on earth. Adam was taught the gospel, including the coming sacrifice of Jesus the Christ. [^4] Noah taught it to his people. [^5] Paul says that the gospel was taught to Abraham. [^6] Moses knew it and, under divine direction, taught it to Israel in the wilderness. [^7] It was known to the people on the western hemisphere. [^8] Jesus Himself restored it, as He came to fulfill all righteousness. [^9] God has ever attempted to keep His children familiar with the truths known as the gospel, truths necessary for happiness on earth and in the hereafter.

But, no sooner had man come on earth, than the powers of evil began their work, tempting men to disobey and distort the principles of the gospel. The Book of Moses, revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, says: "Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." [^10]

Throughout the course of human history, over and over again, men have rejected truth and accepted untruth. It is a black and wearisome story, a grievous and pitiful chapter in the story of human error. Heaven and earth have suffered over humanity's disregard of truth. The earth moans, "Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" [^11]

The true Church of God is the organized institution, through which the Lord delivers His messages and seeks to achieve His purposes on earth. It is composed of men and women who have accepted the gospel, and have submitted to its requirements. The only possession of the Church is a series of principles of truth, and ordinances resting upon these principles, and an organization to which Priesthood power has been given. Its only purpose is to teach the gospel for man's benefit, and to preserve its doctrine and practice in human lives. Its only authority is to spread gospel truth over the earth, and to perform the necessary ordinances of the gospel for those who believe. It can act for God only under gospel law.

Consequently, should the Church pervert truth, change divinely revealed ordinances, and set up its own devices instead, it would lose its power and authority. These have been conferred upon the Church to be used only in compliance with the laws of the gospel. They cannot function under any other doctrine. If the Church deviates from the God-ordained principles and practice, it has lost the kernel of truth, and holds only the shell of a man-made organization. It is then no longer acceptable to God; it is then no longer the Church of God. Indeed, it dies; for disobedience to God's requirements is sin, and sin is as a killing poison to all things spiritual. It follows that the Lord, in His due time, must then re-establish His Church, and restore its necessary gifts.

Any human institution operates under similar conditions. If it does not abide by the required principles and practices, it loses its charter of existence. A police officer, who breaks the law, soon loses his badge. That principle applies with more certainty in a divinely-created organization. It is not conceivable that the Lord, who set the work on earth in motion, would pay no further attention to it, but allow the Church, His representative, to go its own way.

The Church restored in the days of Christ fell into deep error. Even a casual study will show how gospel principles were changed in early Christian centuries. A little reading of ecclesiastical history will reveal how the primitive Christian Church departed from truth, by which it forfeited its rights and claims. Earthly kings and evil men vied to rule it. Its divine origin was often forgotten. The doctrine of the Godhead was corrupted, divine authority was rejected, church organization and government were distorted, the simple church ritual was perverted, the spiritual gifts of the Church were lost, and the body of Church doctrine was greatly changed. It became a complete apostasy. Divine authority could not rest on such a foundation.

The danger of apostasy has always been recognized. Paul declared, "Woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel!" [^12] "There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." [^13] Less than a hundred years after the crucifixion of Jesus, Polycarp pleaded that "leaving the vanity of many, and their false doctrines, let us return to the word that was delivered to us from the beginning." [^14] And, in the early Christian centuries, there was a succession of councils, which, in attempting to reconcile contending personal opinions, departed far from the simple, easily understood gospel doctrine, intended for all, humble and great.

The apostasy of the primitive Church was recognized by many. Sincere, honest men called attention to these departures from gospel truth. John Huss pleaded for the proper administration of the sacrament, and was burned at the stake. Martin Luther, with others, rebelling against the untruths and mysteries foisted on the human mind, initiated the Reformation. George Fox, Swedenborg, the Wesleys, Edward Irving, Alexander Campbell, are among the better known of the many who have pleaded for a return to the principles and practices of the Church as founded by Jesus the Christ. Today, the hundreds of churches, claiming loyalty to Jesus Christ, present differing paths of salvation. Some claim preeminence because of their age, as if continuity of error, rather than adherence to truth, is an acceptable criterion; others because of the greatness of their originators, as if men rise above God. They are really proofs of departures from truth.

In our day, as prophesied by John, [^15] the Lord has restored His Church. The Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith, a clean-souled boy in search of the true church. He was told that "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." [^16]

The Church, then re-established, rests its claims upon direct, divine revelation, not upon the views of any man or set of men. It knows that men may err, but that truth is unchanging. It possesses divine authority. It clings, principle for principle, ordinance for ordinance, to the Church as taught to Adam and others, and re-established by Jesus Christ Himself. Its doctrine is therefore plain and simple. It has no theories. It avoids the trail of error. By that test, its truth may be known.

By this restoration the Lord is keeping His promise that the "gates of hell" shall not prevail against His Church. Truth can never be destroyed, though organizations may perish. And He has added that He has now established His Church on earth for the last time. [^17]

When the Church clings to truth, it is safe; for neither hell nor the devil can vanquish truth. So declares a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "And if you do these last commandments of mine, which I have given you, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you." [^18] That is understandable.

The trail of man's error throughout the years is not a pleasant one to follow, but it carries eternal lessons, and makes clear why it became necessary to restore the Church of Christ.

If you will examine, in the light of truth, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, you will find that through it the gospel has been restored in its simplicity and fullness.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Moses 1:39)
[^2] (Matt. 7:29)
[^3] (Matt. 21:23)
[^4] (Mark 13:34)
[^5] (See Acts 6:6; 13:3; 19:6)
[^6] (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 167)
[^7] (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 129)
[^8] (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 139, 140)
[^9] (Abraham 1:4)
[^10] (D. & C. 84:24, 26)
[^11] (D. & C. 84:27)
[^12] (Journal of Discourses, 21:190)
[^13] (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 169)
[^14] (Exodus 19:6)
[^15] (D. & C. 121:41, 42)
[^16] (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith, 2:I9)
[^17] 17. (D. & C. II2:30)
[^18] 18. (D. & C. I7:8)
