John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

AUTHORITY IN RELIGION

The plan of salvation, often called the gospel, is of God's making. He is in charge of its consummation. This He expressed clearly to Moses: "Behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^1]

However, the plan provides that man, by the exercise of his free agency, shall carve out his own destiny. God, therefore, leaves the operation of the plan to man on earth. He accomplishes His purposes through His children on earth. This divine trust lifts man to the position of a collaborator with God. Any other method would relieve us of personal responsibility. We would remain as children, led by others, with never the right of free action.

In conformity with this procedure God, Himself, seldom appears on earth, except to initiate His purposes, and to authorize His children to carry the plan forward. Thereafter, He supervises their efforts, and gives help when needed.

God visited the first man, Adam, and instructed him in the plan of salvation, and conferred upon him the necessary authority to bring the plan into operation. At diverse other times, when it has become necessary, because of apostasy, He or His messengers have come on earth to re-establish the plan. When the plan of salvation was restored in this day, it began with a visitation from the Father and the Son to the boy Joseph Smith.

Whenever the Lord thus places the promotion of the plan of salvation in human hands, the recipient becomes a representative of God. Therefore, he, as his Master, may speak "as one having authority." [^2] To do the required work he needs divine power and authority. These have always been conferred upon those who have become connected with the plan. Thereby, men have been able to act officially in the accomplishment of the plan of salvation.

Such power and authority are needed. Every plan has metes and bounds. A foreigner may believe in the Constitution of the United States, but cannot make himself a citizen of the country, with all attendant privileges. Someone with authority is required to confer that gift upon him. It is just so in a true religion. The plan of salvation places definite requirements upon those who accept it. It is beyond the caprice of man. Authority is needed to perform gospel ordinances. Though the operation of the plan of salvation is placed in human hands, it remains under God's supervision and authority. If the plan were man-made, clearly it would need only human authority; but since it is God-made, it demands divine authority.

All careful students, at all times, have recognized the need of authority in religion. People in all ages have required authoritative officers and acts for religious performances. The medicine men of untutored races act in response to this demand, as do the priests or other leaders of the multitude of religious organizations, among more civilized peoples. In the days of the Savior this was the very question asked by "the chief priests and elders of the people." "By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?" [^3]

A religion formulated by God must, and does, possess direct authority from God to perform its several, necessary acts. Any other derivation of authority is valueless.

"For the Son of Man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work." [^4] Such authority does not come from an inward call. It must be bestowed by direct communication, by the laying on of hands. That is the divinely ordained method of transmittal by which authority may descend from God to man, and from man to man. [^5] By this method also, a man's authority may be traced back to the ultimate source of authority—God. This divine procedure has its human equivalent in the signing of the commission, say, of an officer in the army.

In the absence of legal authority, as during the dark ages of apostasy, many good men have done what they thought was the next best thing to do. They have assumed authority, performed ordinances, and set up churches, in the trust that the Lord, knowing their dilemma, would respect their acts. While undoubtedly the Lord will bless such sincere men, and those, equally earnest in their desires, who follow them, yet there can be no deviation from the law.

However good the motive, no other plan, save that set up by the Lord, carries with it His authority. Any and every ordinance, intended to comply with the plan of salvation, though performed in God's name, but without God's authority, is invalid, and inefficacious in achieving the purpose of the divine plan.

This power, with its accompanying authority, is called Priesthood. Joseph Smith says, "It is the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing His glory at the beginning of the creation of this earth, and through which He has continued to reveal Himself to the children of men to the present time, and through which He will make known His purposes to the end of time." [^6]

"It is the government of God," says John Taylor, third President of the Church, "whether on earth or in the heavens, for it is by that power, agency, or principle that . . . all things are upheld and sustained. . . . It is the power of God delegated to intelligences in the heavens and to men on the earth." [^7]

And Joseph F. Smith, sixth President of the Church, defines Priesthood very clearly, "It is nothing more nor less than the power of God delegated to man by which man can act in the earth for the salvation of the human family, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and act legitimately." [^8]

In its larger sense, then, Priesthood means the power of God, the power by which He performs His mighty works. A portion of that power, enough for his needs, and for the realization of the divine plan for human salvation, has been given to man on earth. By that power, every man who has received the Priesthood may shape his life and every act thereof for his present and future welfare, and for the benefit of all men.

It is often asked why the Priesthood is conferred on men only. The answer is that the essential organization of the Church is by families. The man, by divine teaching, is the president of the family, the spokesman for it. Therefore, the men who now, or who may in the future, stand as heads of families, are ordained to the Priesthood. But the blessings that flow from such bestowal of the Priesthood are shared by husband and wife and by all members of the family. All are under the privileges and responsibilities of the Priesthood, the man in the field assigned to him, and women as wives and mothers in the equally important fields assigned to them. Every man and woman is expected to help work out the eternal plan and purpose of the Lord. As they do this, all have an equal claim upon the blessings that flow from the possession and use of the Priesthood.

Priesthood on earth began with Adam. Modern revelation gives an account of the descent of the Priesthood in patriarchal days. Undoubtedly many men besides the patriarchs themselves received the Priesthood, the divine gift, great above others.

From Noah, who possessed the keys of the Priesthood, it descended through Melchizedek to Abraham. In the days between Noah and Abraham, a period little known, it would seem that many righteous men held the Priesthood. It was the earnest desire of Abraham to receive the Priesthood, and to practice without molestation the gospel of Jesus Christ, which led him to leave Ur for the country which later became the promised land. In his own words, "I sought for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God unto the fathers concerning the seed." [^9]

The Priesthood may likewise be traced from Abraham to Moses, who received it from Jethro, during his sojourn of forty years in the wilderness.

During the days of Moses, the children of Israel sinned to such a degree that the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood was taken away, and only the Lesser or Aaronic Priesthood remained among Israel. [^10] John the Baptist was the last who held the keys of this Priesthood. [^11]

Nevertheless, though the Higher Priesthood had been taken away from Israel as a body, it was not permanently taken from the earth. Between the time of Moses and the coming of Jesus Christ, there were, at various times, and perhaps at all times, holy men, prophets of the Lord, such as Ezekiel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and others, who received the Higher Priesthood as part of their special commissions in the service of the Lord.

When the Savior came on earth to re-establish the gospel in its completeness, He brought with Him the full authority of the Priesthood. He ordained Apostles and Seventies, and left with His followers the authority of the Holy Priesthood, under which the Church could be fully organized for the purposes of the plan of salvation.

The descent of the Priesthood was made possible, because those who held the Priesthood, conferred the authority upon others who were worthy. Thus the chain of authority was lengthened and kept unbroken. Every Priesthood holder must be able to trace his authority back to God; otherwise the claimed authority is invalid, spurious, and without divine power. This is paralleled in everyday life. Every officer in the army must be able to trace the authority of his commission back to the Commander in Chief. Should the chain of authority be broken by sin or ignorance, it must be forged anew, from the beginning, for it stems from God.

This raises a much-debated question: Can a man lose the divine authority once bestowed upon him?

The answer is an unqualified, Yes. Authority is given for a specific purpose: the advancement of the divine plan of salvation, through conformity with its requirements. Authority cannot be separated from the plan of salvation. They live and move and have their being together. Ignore the plan, and authority disappears.

Therefore, when divine law or duty is disobeyed; when man-made forms are substituted for divine ordinances; when false doctrine replaces doctrinal truth; when personal unrighteousness is practiced, or when power is misused, authority slips away and is lost. Such departures are like a poison which kills, gradually perhaps, but surely. It would be folly to believe that in religion, a man who dishonors his commission retains his authority, when in any man-made organization he would lose his authority and membership. Any other view renders God impotent in dealing with His own concerns. That is nonsense. [^12]

The Prophet Joseph Smith states the case in no uncertain words: "The power, glory and blessings of the Priesthood could not continue with those who received ordination only as their righteousness continued; for Cain also being authorized to offer sacrifice, but not offering it in righteousness, was cursed. It signifies, then, that the ordinances must be kept in the very way God has appointed; otherwise their Priesthood will prove a cursing instead of a blessing." [^13]

It was apostasy, with the resulting loss of authority that made the restoration of the gospel necessary. In early Christian days the doctrine and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ were sadly corrupted; dark apostasy followed; the chain of authority was broken; and unauthorized men took it upon themselves to ordain men to the Priesthood. Kings and other temporal leaders undertook, upon their own authority, to commission spiritual leaders. The Church of Christ became disorganized; man-made churches came into being; spiritual darkness and confusion reigned throughout long centuries; reformation followed reformation, but without the restoration of the Priesthood.

At length, more than a thousand years after the loss of the Priesthood, the Lord began the work of restoration. The Church of Christ was then organized in completeness, and with a fulness of divine power, and for the last time.

On May 15, 1829, John the Baptist, holding the keys of the Lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, conferred that Priesthood, by the laying on of hands, on the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. In the next month, Peter, James, and John, the ancient apostles, appeared and conferred the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood upon the same young men.

There is but one Priesthood, the Priesthood of God; but in the operation of the Church, there are two divisions, corresponding to offices with certain duties within the Church. This is well understood by all students of the scriptures.

Thus, the Priesthood, the foundation of the Church, was restored, never again to be taken from the earth. And the chain was unbroken, as it was bestowed by those who held it authoritatively in ancient days. Upon this platform the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints brings the message of salvation to all the world.

Whenever the community of believers known as the Church exists on the earth, the Holy Priesthood is given to, transmitted by, and used under the authority of the Church, and in that way only. Priesthood cannot be obtained elsewhere. That has always been so from the days of Adam when the Church was first organized. The Church is the depository of the doctrine and authority belonging to the plan of salvation. Were it not so, confusion would prevail.

Ordination to the Priesthood may be received by every male member of the Church above twelve years of age. Thus, the Church becomes a "kingdom of priests," as in the days of Moses. [^14] That means that every member of the Church, man, woman, and child, may share in the blessings, joys, and powers flowing from the Priesthood. There is no special Priesthood class in the Church. The younger men are ordained to the offices of deacons, teachers and priests in succession, if their lives are worthy. The older men are ordained elders, standing ministers to the Church, or seventies, traveling ministers to the Church, or high priests, from among whom presiding officers are chosen. Members of these groups are organized into quorums, for study, activity, and brotherly fellowship. All these quorums have officers, and from them also are drawn thousands to become patriarchs and to fill the administrative positions of the Church, bishoprics, high councils, and stake presidencies. It is an organization duplicated nowhere else. The Priesthood of the Church of Jesus Christ form an army for righteousness unexampled anywhere else on earth. It is a heart-thrilling sight to look upon the thousands of men filling the great tabernacle, unpaid workers for Christ and His kingdom, who at conferences, represent only a part of the officers of the Priesthood and the kingdom of God.

It is in the possession of the authoritative Priesthood, the Priesthood of God, that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints differs from all other churches. By that power it moves steadily onward to bless mankind, to banish error, establish truth, and to bring all men to a knowledge of the true gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Without the Priesthood, a church would be like Samson of old, shorn of its power. A Priesthood of authority, received directly from God, is the distinctive mark of "Mormonism."

In examining a religion, first consideration should be given to the authority that it possesses. Claims to authority should be scrutinized with greatest care. And it should always be kept in mind that divine authority is possessed by only one organization. There cannot be several ways of compliance with the requirements of the plan of salvation. There may be several erroneous bypaths, but only one certain road.

Though Priesthood is invested with great power, its use is ever in harmony with the spirit of Jesus Christ. It must be used with love and in wisdom.

Priesthood is never harsh or dictatorial. If magnified, it tends to make men Christ-like. In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the manner of its use is described, "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile." [^15]

That is the spirit of the Church and its authority.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Genesis 1:27-28)
[^2] (Gospel Doctrine, p. 272)
[^3] (Gospel Doctrine, p. 272)
[^4] (Genesis 2:24)
[^5] (Discourses, p. 196)
[^6] (Fairchild, Marriage and the Family, p. 548)
[^7] (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 282)
[^8] (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 139, 140)
[^9] (Abraham 1:4)
[^10] (D. & C. 84:24, 26)
[^11] (D. & C. 84:27)
[^12] (Journal of Discourses, 21:190)
[^13] (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 169)
[^14] (Exodus 19:6)
[^15] (D. & C. 121:41, 42)
