John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

RELIGION AND MARRIAGE

You know the power of the family group. You know that the sweetest memories and joys are those of home and family. You know that the ideals, principles, and doctrine sown in the intimacies of the family circle are harvested in individual and community action. If a family loves freedom, its members will go out to battle for it, and the state, in time, will be governed by principles of liberty. If there be faith in God, within the family, the Church and state will prosper, and blessings will be showered upon the people. In short, as the family units are, so very largely the world will be.

The beginning of the family is marriage. By marriage is meant the lawful association of sexes, and the having of children. Parents and children become the family. Such marriage is ordained and sanctioned by the Lord. "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." [^1] This command has been re-enforced by many later divine revelations. This makes marriage honorable, and a duty binding upon us. President Joseph F. Smith said, "No man who is of marriageable age is living his religion who remains single." [^2]

Marriage and the family, the home, are sacred institutions. They are not man-made, but of God.

Marriage carries with it great consequences. Pre-existent spirits are begotten into and obtain their being in the world; and are thus placed on the way to eternal joy. Moreover, marriage is the preserver of the race, without it, the purposes of God would be frustrated, the earth would be void and empty. [^3]

Marriage is also a protector of man. Without it, unlawful associations would be entered into, until as today, as stated by President Joseph F. Smith, "Unchastity is the dominant evil of the age." Fidelity between man and woman would disappear. Promiscuous sex relations lead to disease, which in time would ravage the race. The bodies and minds of humanity would be corrupted by such practices. All the prophylactics in the world will not erase the results of sexual sin from mind and body. This is evident wherever the sixth commandment has been broken. From that point of view alone, marriage should be upheld.

It is not good for man to be alone. By the loveinspired companionship of man and woman, the higher faculties and nobler traits of human nature are developed. And, only through marriage, lawfully lived, can this be attained. Those who deliberately refrain from marriage, usually become morose, self-centered, and selfish.

The institution of marriage is in every respect for the good of man. This inherent value of marriage to individuals, and therefore to the state, explains the explicit scriptural statements relative to marriage. For example, "A man shall leave his father and his mother and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh." [^4]

Considering its importance to the individual and to the world, marriage is, or should be, excepting acceptance of Gospel truth, the most important event between birth and death. When a young man asks a girl to marry him, he is really determining the happiness-course of his life. When a girl says, "Yes," she is making the most important decision of her life.

Marriage should be for life; and for the hereafter. To marry and then to divorce, to adopt and then to discard, violates the purpose of marriage. Trial marriages are an affront to decency. They who advocate them are moved upon by forces destructive of righteousness.

The choosing of a mate in marriage should, therefore, be done prayerfully, carefully, without haste, and with deliberation. When that is done, guidance from higher sources will be obtained.

Love for the companion-to-be comes first. Without love, marriage is a dangerous experiment. With love one may safely begin the journey with another. Love is of a permanent character. It does not flit about. It grows in the presence of the loved one. Infatuation is seldom love; for if tested, it burns down and out, like a consumed candle. Before marriage, both parties should be certain that the attraction between them is really love.

Marriage means mating. No person is happy unless he has found his mate. That is nature's law. A mate is one who is in harmony with the husband or wife, one who quiets and soothes, one who inspires and urges toward high goals, one who gives of herself or himself for the loved one. That may be the first test of love.

There may, of course, be differences of temperament between husband and wife. If these differences do not touch the vital issues of life, they may be desirable, to round out life. But, the intimacies of daily family association require a common understanding of, and a unanimity of opinion on, the deep-lying purposes of life. This too often is the rock upon which marriage founders.

In matters of religion, especially, the husband and wife must see alike, else, sooner or later, serious consequences may, and usually do, follow. Mixed marriages should be avoided. They are usually unhappy. This becomes more evident as children arrive, and need to be trained.

Profane and sacred history has shown the unwisdom, and real harm, of the marriage of two people who have different religious beliefs. Wars and national contentions have often followed such marriages. In religion, dealing with more profound matters, the response to such differences is more sensitive.

Brigham Young has stated the matter very clearly: "What was the cause of the first, or one of the first, curses that came upon Israel? I will tell you. One of the first transgressions of the family called Israel, was their going to other families or other nations to select partners. This was one of the great mistakes made by the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for they would go and marry with other families, although the Lord had forbidden them to do so, and had given them a very strict and stringent law on the subject. He commanded them not to marry among the Gentiles." [^5]

It is to avoid such mistakes, that a period of courtship is advocated. It is perhaps its main purpose. Courtship enables young people to become acquainted, to understand each other, and to discover whether their compatibility is sufficient to weather the strains and possible storms of life. Courtship should be extended long enough to give reasonable certainty respecting such matters. It removes doubts and restraints from the early period of marriage. Such a courtship, terminating in marriage, is always a happy memory.

Hasty, ill-considered marriages are unwise. Young people who marry in haste take tremendous chances upon their future happiness. Out of long human experience is drawn the adage, "Marry in haste and repent at leisure." The present epidemic of hasty marriages, often between people briefly acquainted, and with widely different backgrounds of living, will unfortunately, bear sad fruit. Wise young people will enter matrimony with intelligent, prayerful care.

Mistakes may, of course, be made, in selecting mates. Married life may reveal incompatibilities and conditions between husband and wife, which cannot be reconciled. Especially is this true in marriages entered into hastily. Such differences may lead to much unhappiness, frequently to divorce. True religion is firmly set against the present ease with which divorces may be obtained. In 1938, 250,000 divorces were granted in one year in the United States. In the Mountain States the rate rose to 70 divorces for every 10,000 married persons. [^6] Many divorces are based upon causes, often trivial, which the married parties themselves could correct. There must be a give and take between husband and wife. The trouble is, generally, that true love does not exist; otherwise many a marital rift would seem of little consequence. More care in courtship days might have avoided the marriage.

Many difficulties of married life would vanish if marriage were entered into in early life. The present tendency to delay marriage makes the necessary adjustments between husband and wife more difficult. When the mate is found, after a consistent courtship, and with reasonable caution as to the future, it would be well to consummate the marriage.

The postponement of marriage until money has been saved for home and equipment is dangerous. Real joy comes to the couple who, laboring together, build their home by small degrees. Many moral values are established thereby. It is a false ideal that the newly-married couple shall be provided with all the comforts that have been accumulated by the parents, after many years of industry and thrift. A girl who insists upon this, probably does not love her sweetheart truly. If she did, such difficulties would vanish. She would feel that when they are together, the world is at their feet.

Another cause of domestic unhappiness is that neither husband nor wife has been trained for life and its demands. Educational forces are almost criminally delinquent in this matter. Homemaking is possibly the most important applied science. Yet many a girl goes through the whole school, high school and college curriculum without touching the subject; yet we expect her to assume without further help the duties of wife, homemaker, and later of mother. There is grim danger in this procedure. The many "broken" homes point to insufficient training for married life. Our school men would do well to shed this burden.

Above all, to avoid domestic infelicity, and to secure a happy marriage, the spirit of the Lord must be maintained in the family. Family prayers, in which all members participate, should be held daily. A blessing should be asked upon every meal. There should be willing participation in the activities of the Church. If that be done, the home will have a better chance to be one of peace and joy. As children grow toward maturity, the effects of such home life will be seen in their every endeavor.

It need not be said, perhaps, that kindness should prevail between husband and wife, as among parents and children. Those whom we love in the family circle, should receive our greatest respect, our best behavior.

Husbands and wives must be loyal to each other. They must be true to each other. In the Church there is no double standard of morality. The man should go to his wife as clean as he expects her to be. After marriage, they too must keep themselves for each other. "Thou shalt not commit adultery." There is no surer way of failure in home and with family, and no surer condemnation of the Lord, than through moral impurity.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints deals with eternal realities. It would be surprising indeed, if the marriage sacrament were of a passing nature of the earth only. It must have eternal meaning beyond the things of this world.

So it is. The marriage and family relation, with its wealth of blessing, may continue into eternity. It depends upon our lives on earth. Power in the Priesthood has been given man, by which this may be accomplished. It is a gift which raises man to the sublimity of Godhood. It sets forth as nothing else can do, the full meaning of the home and its sanctity. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith came the glorious, heart-filling, soul-lifting, message of joy, that marriage may be made eternal.

This doctrine teaches that marriage and family relationships and associations may be continued after death. People who are worthy may be sealed to each other, by authority of the Priesthood, for time and eternity; which means that, forever and forever they shall be together, and rejoice in the possession of their family. The grave will separate them only for a brief time. They will be reunited. Together, as husband and wife, with their family, they will work toward their infinite destiny, the likeness of God. For those who really love each other, there will be no cessation, in the hereafter, of affections and associations which we found sweet on earth. The children born to us will be ours through the coming ages.

They who do not make themselves worthy of such eternal marriage and family possession, will continue to hear, on their wedding day, the chilling words of the frozen formula, "until death doth you part." They also will live on in the hereafter, but separated from each other and their children. They will travel alone, deprived, through endless ages, of family associations, unless, indeed, they later elect to obey the laws of God, and thereby claim the privilege of being sealed, either in life, or after, by proxy on earth, for everlasting time. They will have lost much by their delay, but much is nevertheless given them under God's provision for true repentance.

There is an unspeakable satisfaction in knowing that that sealing power has been exercised for us. John Taylor, third President of the Church, says: "Why is a woman sealed to a man for time and all eternity? Because there is a legitimate power on earth to do it. This power will bind on earth and in heaven. It can loose on earth, and it is loosed in heaven. It can seal on earth, and it is sealed in heaven. There is a legitimate, authorized agent of God upon earth. This sealing power is regulated by him. Hence what is done by that, is done right, and is recorded. When the books are opened, every one will find his proper mate, and have those that belong to him, and every one will be deprived of that which is surreptitiously obtained." [^7]

To win these blessings, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, should eagerly qualify themselves for the blessing of eternal marriage. At any cost of personal sacrifice should marriage be sought in the temples, in which alone such marriages may be solemnized. It is the best insurance for happiness in married life; and it is the way ordained by God for all who are faithful.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Fairchild, Marriage and the Family, p. 542)
[^2] (D.&C., 68:25, 26)
[^3] (Exodus 20:12)
[^4] (The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 283, 284)
[^5] (Discourses, p. 196)
[^6] (Fairchild, Marriage and the Family, p. 548)
[^7] (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 282)
