John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

RELIGION AND THE FAMILY

The purpose of marriage is two-fold.

First, it provides the joy that accompanies conjugal and family love. We are so endowed, and it has been so ordained, that full happiness can be won only through the associations made possible by family life.

A family consists of parents and children. There is no real family life without children. Mother-love, father-love, parental-love, must be satisfied to obtain full family joy. Marriage is incomplete unless children are begotten, reared, and trained.

The second purpose of marriage is to provide bodies for the pre-existent spirit children of God, who have earned the right to come on earth. These spirits have accepted the plan of salvation, and are anxiously waiting for the opportunity to take upon themselves temporal bodies, and to share in the experiences of life on earth. They accept gladly the call to come here, for they know that the experiences of earth are a preparation for the glorious, eternal activities in that other world which we enter after death.

In the light of this knowledge, the begetting and training of children acquire a high spiritual meaning. When a child is born, another pre-existent personage is given the privilege of preparation on earth for his divine destiny; another step is taken to complete the plan laid out in the Great Council of pre-existence.

Under these two purposes, marriage becomes a sacred privilege; really a partnership with the Lord in achieving the purpose of the plan of salvation.

Under this doctrine, children are joyously welcomed by Latter-day Saints. The responsibilities accompanying the having of children are not only willingly but gladly accepted.

Under this doctrine, also, Latter-day Saints are not parties to the agitation to limit the number of children in a family. This unwholesome practice is in defiance of the experience that, all in all, large families are the happiest. There is in large families a varied interplay of thought and behavior that maintains interest in life and living, and compels personal self-control. No member of a large family, properly conducted, has wished that it might have been smaller. As the years move on, there is increasing appreciation of the many contacts made possible by a large family.

Childless couples confess to their longing for children, to enlarge their happiness; and are often led to adopt children. Childless couples are most subject to marital differences. One student reports that about "70 per cent of all childless couples dissolve their marriages in divorce." [^1] For marital happiness, children are a good insurance. They are "the tie that binds husband and wife together."

They who airily say that they look for quality rather than quantity in children talk nonsense. The inborn quality of our children is beyond parental control. We cannot transmit to them more than we ourselves have or our ancestors had. If we are superior, or our progenitors were so, we may have superior children. The number of children bears no relationship to their quality. Very often the last child of a large family has been the most largely endowed by nature.

Likewise, in this country at least, large families do not need to suffer for economic support. Children really may be made an economic asset, to the benefit of the family and themselves. Read the lives of the men who have won most success. Usually, they have been obliged to yield some economic service from their childhoods.

Under normal conditions, the bearing of children brings health to the mother; and to support them, power to the father. It would be wisest and best in the matter of child-bearing to let nature take its course. Ill health or incurable disease should be the only cause for limiting the number of children in the family. The married couple should trust that, if one obeys law, the Lord will help win the battle. Fear always destroys joy.

Birth control is a tampering with nature. It is dangerous, no matter how well devised the contraceptives may be. It affects adversely those who practice it, physically, morally, spiritually, and especially emotionally. An uneasy conscience, clanging nerves, emotional instability, moral weakness, and a feeling of cowardice, are likely to follow those, who, to foster their own supposed comforts, selfishly run away from the duty of parenthood. We cannot deceive nature, or escape her punishments.

Not the least of the evils resulting from birth control is the failure to maintain the population of the land. The birthrate in the United States is on a steady decline. Per thousand of population it has fallen from 25 in 1915 to 17 in 1939, and appears to be still declining. In 1941 the reproduction rate in the United States was below the death rate. Such a condition weakens the race. The nations that will possess power in the future, will be those who maintain a normal birthrate.

The Latter-day Saints, true to their teachings, have maintained a high birthrate, at present nearly twice that of the United States. Children continue to be welcomed in Mormon households.

Parenthood carries with it peculiar responsibilities. Rearing children is as important as having them. The future of the world depends not only upon how many people we have, but also upon their ideals and character. The home can best instill the principles of righteousness, necessary to make and keep the world a desirable place in which to live. The home, more than the school or church, can effectively shape the character of our coming civilization. Parents must accept this responsibility without quibbling. We must not try to shift the task to someone else. The school and the church should at the best, in such matters, serve as collaborators with the home. The home should be pervaded with the spirit of law, order, and kindness, of self reliance, industry, and achievement, and of faith and religious devotion. Then, we may be assured, benefits will issue from the homes to the communities on earth, to build and maintain a worthy civilization.

The Lord has warned parents of their responsibilities: "And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized. [^2]

To train children properly requires sound knowledge and the wise application of that which we know. We are sadly conscious of the fact that the future of many of a child has been warped from its possibilities by the poor home training. Sensing this, many a mother, looking with the eyes of love upon her baby, feels herself inadequate for her job. That is not necessary, for parents may, in our day of adult education, receive training, and may train themselves, for competent parenthood. The experience of successful parents, good books on the subject, study courses in parent training associations and in college extension courses, are available for the instruction of parents. Parents, actual or prospective, should avail themselves of such opportunities, even at the sacrifice of some social activities.

The training of mothers and fathers for parenthood is an urgent need of the day. In this matter, our schools, elementary to university, are at fault. Boys and girls too frequently go through to college graduation, with little instruction in the problems of daily life and their solution. The most important business of life, centering in the family, is to them as a book that has never been opened.

Very often these young people have inadequate or no knowledge about their own bodies, though it is difficult to build a happy life without physical health. They may know much about abstruse matters in science, or in remote corners of literature, but stand wonderingly when asked about the function of the liver, and they confess that they have never heard of the pancreas. One may survive happily in ignorance of a dead civilization, but a mistreated liver or an overworked pancreas defeats the search for full happiness. The failure of many a marriage may be traced to liver complaint.

They are as often unacquainted with social, ethical, and spiritual issues as affecting family life. Yet, in these fields every child, a coming father or mother, needs instruction. Such knowledge does not come by itself. And, it is vastly more important to know that "thou shalt not steal" or that "thou shalt not commit adultery," and the reasons for the commands, than to know algebra or any other purely scholastic subject. Sectarian religion may not, under the law, be taught in public institutions of learning; but there is no law against teaching the necessity of obeying the principles embodied in the ten commandments and the beatitudes. They should be fearlessly and continuously impressed, by the schools, upon the minds of youth. The lamentable weakness of our schools in these fields, in our enlightened day, borders on disgrace.

All correct learning is good. But, "first things should come first." And, the conditions, aside from the making of a living, upon which personal welfare rests, are "first things." Otherwise, the coming generations will be poorly prepared for life. Therefore, education for fatherhood and motherhood, the preservation of the house and family, should form a part of every school curriculum.

Of course, it is not enough to know what to do. Knowledge must be used to be of value. As sound or unsound principles are practiced in the house, so the home will be: a place of restful good, or restless evil. Make the home beautiful, however simple the materials, and the coming homes will be filled with beauty; make them clean and virtuous, and a moral generation will arise. The power of example must never be forgotten.

Many of the evils of the day may be laid at the doors of careless homes. A father who defrauds others is likely to raise thieving children; or one who blasphemes, teaches his son to swear. A cocktail-sipping father cannot well complain if his son becomes a drunkard. Parents can say little when the daughter, to whom they have not, by word or example, taught cleanness in life, falls into immoral ways. Wayward children are a double sorrow if we have not done our duty by them.

As for our day, young people are born as good as ever. They still dream of happy lives. They hope for success. They would rather be good than bad. But, times have changed. There are gilded temptations today that were unknown yesterday. There are enticing opportunities, bearing the stolen badge of freedom, which were not permissible in earlier days. Youth, themselves, in our dangerous age, need to seek protection against temptation. If trained right, they should more than ever cooperate with parents in establishing worthy homes. The commandment to "Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land . . ." [^3] remains in full force. They should abide, gladly, by the law of God and man, which leaves children subject to their parents until maturity arrives. Above all, they should make conformity with God's law their chief desire. Youth should keep in mind that the path to success is paved with self-control.

The chief tool used by the evil one to win converts to his foul philosophy, to wither life's joy for young and old, to open doors to the destruction of homes and nation, is immorality. In the words of President Joseph F. Smith, it is "the dominant evil of the age." Young and old should remember that whoever surrenders his virtue, surrenders to the devil, and to anguish of soul. To misuse the fountains of life is to cast away God's greatest gift, unsullied, pure love. Knowing this, the forces of evil seek above all to tempt people to prostitute their sexual powers.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches and stands for the same standard of morality for men and women. Both must be virtuous. There must be absolute moral, physical cleanness in all its members.

Alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine drinks, destructive deceivers of the nerves, all used in profusion throughout the land, are used by the evil one to soften and weaken the will against sin. They make it easier to break God's law. They should be avoided by all, young and old.

The need to do vigorous battle against present-day evil is plainly evident. The Federal Bureau of Investigation reports that in 1943, the number of under-21-year-old girls who were arrested leaped nearly one-third above that of 1942, an already high year. If parents were the masters of their homes; if the homes were attractive, as they should be; and if the daughters had been kept at home by night and their whereabouts known by day, this record of shame would not have been made. Undoubtedly, other causes than lack of parental vigilance are involved in present-day looseness among many young people, but parents should see to it that their own skirts are clean. In so important a matter, we must not be "asleep at the switch."

The moral looseness of the day pervades every corner of society. Contraceptives are publicly offered for sale; prophylactics to cure foul diseases from sexual sin are provided, as a matter of course, to the men in our armed forces, and to all. Among fifty-two frequent questions by the British armed forces, one asks bluntly, "What is wrong with fornication (if both the man and woman want it)?" and, so on, through a list of horrors of impurity. In such attitudes are an inversion of truth and moral righteousness, which inevitably lead to destruction and death. There is no permanent power in an immoral person or nation. Not only each individual, but our whole nation, stands on trial in this matter. It may be that the solution of the problem of chastity among us will in the end decide our national outcome, whether we shall survive or disappear from the current of history. That decision is in the hands of the homes of the land.

To Latter-day Saints, the subject of the family does not end on earth. It continues into the eternities. The Church teaches that family relationships on earth continue in the hereafter. By the power of the Priesthood a man and a woman may be sealed to each other for time and eternity, and their children may be sealed to their parents for endless time. Or, if children are born of parents already sealed to each other, the parents have eternal claim upon them.

In the great coming day, in the eternal heavens, families will be together. The government will there be of the patriarchal form, as it was at the beginning of earth time. The father and mother will stand at the head of their family. Each child in turn will preside over his children. There will be an endless chain of families. It is a vision of family love and association that fills the heart with warm gratitude.

But, only those who so live as to merit a place in the celestial kingdom of God, who accept the law, and are true to their covenants, can enjoy these privileges. They who defile themselves, who disobey and who defy God's law, will find themselves excluded from participation in these eternal, enduring blessings.

It is well, in all that we do, to view the whole picture of our past, present, and future. When we do so, we may be given added strength amidst the temptations of life; we may be less willing to forfeit eternal joy for transient satisfaction of appetites.

In conclusion, these plain words from John Taylor, third President of the Church, may summarize the essence of this talk and the one just preceding:

"Husbands, do you love your wives and treat them right, or do you think that you yourselves are some great moguls who have a right to crowd upon them? They are given you as a part of yourself, and you ought to treat them with all kindness, with mercy and longsuffering, and not be harsh or bitter, or in any way desirous to display your authority. Then, you wives, treat your husbands right, and try to make them happy and comfortable. Endeavor to make your homes a little heaven, and try to cherish the good spirit of God. Then let us as parents train up our children in the fear of God and teach them the laws of life. If we do, we will have peace in our bosoms, peace in our families, and peace in our surroundings." [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Matt. 22:39; Mark 12:31; Luke 10:27)
[^2] (Matt. 7:12)
[^3] (Acts 17:24, 6)
[^4] (L'Envoy)
