John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

OUR FATHER'S CHILDREN

What did the Savior mean when he said, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself"? [^1] Did he mean that all people of every race are our brethren? Did he mean that white, yellow, red, and black; learned and unlearned; my next door neighbor and the stranger ten thousand miles away, are entitled to my love, as if they were my brothers?

Clearly, the Savior's commandment means exactly that. Followers of Christ must do unto others as they would have others do unto them. [^2] We must attempt to bring happiness to all. The gospel must be taught to all the world. Life's necessities and comforts must be made available to all.

There are those who say that the doctrine of human brotherhood is theoretical and impractical. Well, then, Jesus the Christ is the theorist. His doctrine of peace has always seemed impractical to self-centered selfishness. Difficult as it may seem in this day of upheaval, among nations and races, to reconcile this commandment with practical good sense, the Church of Christ must practice it to the utmost. That is the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Men who reject this doctrine are not Christians.

In reality, the peoples of earth, all of them, are brothers and sisters. The races of men have a common origin. All were begotten by God in the pre-existent state. That makes mankind in very deed one great family. Paul the apostle says, and correctly, "God . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on the face of the earth." [^3]

The purpose of the plan of salvation is the same for all men. It is for the benefit of the whole human family. We were all in the great pre-existent council. All who come on earth were prepared for the earth adventure, and accepted the conditions of the plan of salvation. Therefore, under God's plan, all may claim equal rights, if equally good works are performed. Every human being has an untrammeled claim on joy; on freedom to live as he chooses; for help as may be needed.

The divine enterprise, known as the plan of salvation, is a co-operative venture between God and His spirit children. As God agreed to help us, so we agreed to help all our brothers and sisters, to work out the plan. To the degree that all members of the human family live up to the conditions of the plan, the sacred project is successfully consummated. That places upon every one of us, to the limits of his influence, the responsibility of providing the blessings of salvation for every other person. Man is responsible for man.

If we are to accomplish Christ's command, every one of us must consider two equally important things in our every righteous act: First, is it for our own good? and, second, is it for the good of our neighbor? That test should be the determining guide to human action. As we apply it to our acts, we approach the power to love our neighbor as ourselves.

The acceptance of man's responsibility for man has wide effects. It means that all shall be actively concerned with the common good. There will be no hindrance offered to another's righteous attempts. Domination of man over man will disappear. Coercion of the free will, will not then be attempted. Beyond the forbidding of evil there will be no restraints. The world at last will be free to all.

When that happy day arrives, all humanity, of every creed and color, of every land and clime, will stand together in the performance of righteous works. No one will work for his own advantage only. It was of that day Kipling wrote:

"And only the Master shall praise us, and only the Master shall blame; And no one shall work for money, and no one shall work for fame; But each for the joy of working, and each in his separate star, Shall draw the thing as he sees it, for the God of things as they are." [^4]

The person who seeks to help another, imitates Christ, who gave his life for us. Thus the greater blessing is received. Power over oneself is the first reward. Unselfishness follows. A person who is able to think of another's advantage in every transaction, receives an inner satisfaction therefrom which cannot be measured by material conquests. Let everyone who has done a good deed bear witness! Nevertheless, by the operation of eternal law, he usually prospers more in a material way.

The United States of America is an example. In its formation, it hoisted the standard of liberty to the view of the whole world. Then it threw open its doors to the oppressed of all nations. To these immigrants it gave employment, lands, happy futures, and above all things, freedom. To their children it opened careers undreamed of in the "old countries." It gave much, such as the world has not received before. But it received more in return. It has become powerful, prosperous, the envy of the nations of earth. The blessings of heaven have followed its service to humanity. It is ever so.

On the other hand, our failure to remember that every man is our brother, every woman our sister, has led to sorrow and suffering in the world. The failure to recognize the equal rights of man has blackened the pages of history, with unspeakable evil acts.

Slavery, better named tyranny, in its many forms, always in opposition to the divine will, has been the favorite means of gain at the expense of others. Negroes have been moved from their native haunts, as if they were animals, in stinking ships, often to come under the whip and lash of inhuman owners. Under the guise of business, but with the sole aim of personal gain, men and women have been kept, much as slaves, at life-destroying treadmill work, over unseemly hours, in unwholesome mills and mines, and at starvation wages. Children have been caged, in body and soul-killing labor, through long days, in noisome factories. Personal wealth, fame, and power have been placed ahead of men, women, and children. In national affairs, the world over, diplomacy has been an effort to gain advantage over others, and to secure a material profit from them. Wars have been fought for the possession of territory rightfully belonging to others.

Such tyranny has entered intellectual and spiritual fields. Men have been held in ignorance, and have been forced to accept religious dogma.

The whole story of man's unfairness and cruelty to his brother is too sordid for repetition. It is well known. God knows, there is need of the Golden Rule among men!

Well could Hood sing of the seamstress earning a crust through unseemly hours of toil for the factory owner.

"Work! Work! Work! While the cock is crowing aloft; And work—work—work Till the stars shine through the roof! It's O! to be a slave Along with the barbarous Turk Where woman has never a soul to save, If this is Christian work." [^5]

The harvest of this disobedience to the command that we love our brothers as ourselves, has been hunger, rebellion, running streams of blood, and the stark horror of the prostitution of intelligence, by using it to devise more cruel and effective means of slaughtering human beings. Those who have thus tried to gather wealth and power, by forgetting the rights of others have themselves faced life and death with a gnawing fear in their hearts. That has been their pay for inhumanity. The curse of Cain has been, to some degree, upon all who have refused to be his brother's keeper. Dire consequences always follow disrespect of our neighbor, whether by man or nations.

The devil has invented many excuses for tyranny among men. The most common excuse is that existing conditions, beyond control, compel and therefore justify such evil practices. That is no excuse at all. In a righteous society, unrighteous conditions would be corrected. Failure to do so is deliberate disobedience to divine law. Were there more brotherly love among men, ways to obliterate tyrannical conditions would soon be found.

A more evil excuse, born out of personal ambition and love of darkness, blood brothers, is that the majority of men are worthless, that there are a few supermen who alone should receive consideration. So speaks Nietzsche, the philosopher of innate evil: "Lo, I teach you the superman! The superman is the meaning of the earth. . . . The superman, I have at heart, that is the first and only thing to me—and not man: not the neighbor, not the poorest, not the best." [^6] That doctrine is in the heart of every dictator, and directs him. That doctrine, drawn from the caldrons of hell, in clear opposition to the teachings of Christ, has thrust the present world war upon us.

In all fairness it must be said that, among nations of moral enlightenment, particularly among democratic peoples, human tyranny has greatly decreased. Men of vision have battled for human freedom. The people themselves, in whom is the ultimate power of decision, have demanded liberty. Wherever government has been by the people, laws for the liberation of men from unwholesome restraints have been enacted. The principle of the brotherhood of man has not yet been fully realized, but, among decent nations, is making steady progress. Really, for that we are battling today, for that we are giving the lives of fathers, brothers, husbands, and sweethearts.

In equal fairness it must be said that in securing reforms to establish the brotherhood of man, there must be no unatural haste.

Many changes have occurred on earth since man was first placed here. Different habits and customs, physical and mental, have arisen in different lands and at various times. Races of men, and groups within a race, which have developed, seem as entirely different peoples. Through generations of service some people have become so accustomed to depending upon others, that they fail, when placed upon their own responsibility, to provide a living for themselves. Others, of limited natural capacities, are capable only of assuming small responsibilities. Yet others, suffering from long continued physical or mental weakness, can do but a portion of the work assigned to normal people. And, some are so indifferent to their lot in life, that they will make no effort to secure changes.

These and other conditions must be kept in mind by reformers in behalf of human brotherhood. The natural law of change is growth. No sudden changes must be attempted. The best that can be done is to help men to rise, little by little, into the condition desired. That requires help from the strong, for the weak. Unless the strong give such help, the brotherhood of man cannot be established. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, a divine message comes to all who are strong: "Succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees." [^7] The present, famed welfare program of the Church is but an expression of this principle.

To bring about the brotherhood of man, every person, strong and weak, must learn to "esteem his brother as himself." [^8] When all men become as one in mutual respect, in faith, purpose, and action, they can go forward to conquer the world. [^9] They become irresistible.

The primary, practical means of securing human brotherhood is cooperation. All other methods are secondary. Cooperation means that many men, interested in the same activity, unite for the common good of the group. It enters every field of human activity—economic, intellectual, spiritual. Cooperation is a principle of tremendous power. One man may be weak; but a thousand, standing together, are strong. One man may stand helpless before the fallen tree; but the many will carry it away easily. One man may shout a truth with little avail; but a thousand voices will be heard by the multitude.

Public education is a good example. When men united to lift ignorance from the people, by united effort, intelligence and intellectual efforts made advances never before known.

To be acceptable, cooperation must, however, look beyond its own circle. It must be unselfish. It must seek to benefit all men. It must look towards ultimate universal, human brotherhood. When the power of cooperation is misused, when it considers only its own needs and desires, it defies God's law and becomes evil. Cooperative selfishness, a present day evil, is a stench in the nostrils of decent people.

By cooperation, in the spirit of the gospel, and in harmony with its laws, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been able to perform its history-making work, and to bring its members into happy lives. By cooperation its has brought about much economic welfare; by cooperation the far flung conquests of the western deserts were made possible; by cooperation it has given its members richer social enjoyment, and has lifted them to higher levels of intelligent living. By that means the Church is instilling the saving ideals of life into the minds and hearts of its members. By cooperative efforts the gospel is being taught to the world, and the doors of salvation opened for the dead through sacred temple ordinances. Carefully examined, the whole system of "Mormon" activity is held together, under spiritual law, by cooperation.

There is yet a more perfect institution for bringing about human good will and love, human brotherhood. It is sometimes called the United Order. It is a system of higher cooperation, under Priesthood direction and supervision, by which the products of each man's labor, beyond his needs and those of his family, are placed in a common treasury to help the weak and needy, to meet the needs of the community, and to support properly authorized enterprises. It is as far from the commonly defined socialism and communism of the day, as west is from east, as right is from wrong. It rests upon spiritual agreement and obedience. It is a product of Priesthood power. It is God's method of establishing brotherly love among men.

The so-called United Order has been tried out by the Latter-day Saints. It works; it is successful. Some day, when we are more fully fitted for the plan, when cooperative enterprises have been cleansed from selfishness, the Lord will authorize its establishment, through the Church, for the benefit of the Church and the whole world. Then, brotherhood will indeed rule the world.

The principles of the brotherhood of man represents, more fully than any other commandment, the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Without it, our religion would rest on an insecure, impermanent foundation. A religion which does not accept this doctrine is corrupt at the core. The man who seeks to love his neighbor as himself is the only true Christian. Others carry the badge unworthily. The deep significance of this principle cannot be safely set aside.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is committed to the full acceptance of the command of Jesus, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." It knows that only in the imitation of the sacrifice of Christ, can weak man attain the ideal of the gospel. The full recognition of the need of sincere love among men will form the basis of the hoped-for new world of universal peace and prosperity. The end of contention on earth will come when man to man, and nation to nation, reach out helping hands to one another; and peace will come upon no other terms. And it can be done, if men set their hearts to it.

The Church realizes, soberly, that this great change can come over the earth only as each individual learns to love his fellow man. You and I must begin with our next-door neighbor. The words of Jesus should be written upon every heart: "Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them. But so shall it not be among you; but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister: and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all. For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." [^10]

That this ideal may soon be realized is the fervent, earnest hope of the Latter-day Saints. For that we pray and strive.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Exodus 20:15)
[^2] (I Sam. 8:7)
[^3] (Matt. 6:10)
[^4] (Matt. 6:33)
[^5] (Mark 1:15)
[^6] (Mark 9:1)
[^7] (The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 205, 206)
[^8] (Luke 2:13, 14)
[^9] (The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 206, 207)
[^10] (Discourses, Ed. 1941, p. 24)
