John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER NINETEEN

THE KINGDOM OF GOD

The government under which we live, wherever we are, is our important concern. It determines to a large degree the happiness that we win from life.

Religion deals, or should deal, with all matters affecting our welfare. Naturally, therefore, it has a deep interest in human government. The Church, as the community of believers in the gospel of Jesus Christ, does not hesitate to declare its opinion concerning governmental principles and acts. Did it fail to do so, it would be untrue to its sacred objective. The Church refuses to be muzzled in its teaching of righteousness, whatever the field may be.

The Church, therefore, declares fearlessly that a government, to be of benefit to the people, must comply, in its operations, with the principles imbedded in religion, that is, in the gospel of Jesus Christ. The more nearly a government does this, the more serviceable it is to the people. Whenever a man-made law violates God's law, the people suffer.

Such conformity must go beyond mere ethical teachings; it must be of a religious character. For example, laws, requiring honesty among men, must be enacted, not merely to avoid the social confusion that would follow general dishonesty, but to obey the flaming, divine command from Sinai, "Thou shalt not steal." [^1] God must be in any truly satisfactory government of men.

The gospel, then, becomes a standard by which the value of a government, and all its acts, may be measured and judged. Every law, regulation, and practice, may be laid, for comparison, by the side of corresponding principles of religion. Then, their true value will soon be discovered. When this is done by every voter, he will know, without further need of counsel, how he should use his franchise as a citizen.

Every legislator and administrator should test proposed policies for governing men in institutions, by the principles of religion, by the requirements of the gospel. Many present propositions and practices would then drop as putrid flesh from the body politic. Were that done in legislative halls, or managerial offices, the old sores of misunderstanding and political contention would soon heal, never again to open. Were that done, a new world of peace would arise from our blood-sodden, hate-riven world. If legislators would read the Bible publicly in their sessions, new light would guide them to wise decisions.

It follows, that a perfect government would be one that employs only gospel principles. Such a government would be the kingdom of God. But, such a government will not be achieved until Christ himself comes to "rule and reign." However, all governments, to benefit their citizens, should move towards the gospel ideal. Until that time comes, if human welfare is to be preserved and increased, governments must seek to emulate in their enactments, and by the administration of their laws, the doctrine, principles, and practices of religion. The body of law must be pruned of everything in opposition to that ideal. That brings religion and human governments in close conjunction.

This view is recognized in many lands. The king is crowned amidst religious ceremonies. By priestly attendants, he is washed, anointed, blessed, and dressed in ceremonial robes. At times, as recently in England, he is virtually proclaimed the head of the church. The close connection between divine and human governments is thus recognized. The careers of the nations show, however, that such crowning ceremonials are largely empty forms, having no substantial results.

The original government of men on earth, in the days of Adam, was one embodying the principles and authority of the plan of salvation. Later governments, at diverse periods, under patriarchs and prophets, were the same. Governments departed from divine rule, but copied divine forms, as the people forsook the doctrines of the gospel, and broke the commandments of the Lord. The people always retain their free agencies, as when Israel desired a king: "Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should reign over them." [^2] So long as the truth of the gospel was held inviolate in the beliefs and acts of the people, there were no departures from the government of God on earth.

Jesus often spoke of the kingdom of God, as a coming government on earth. He taught his disciples to pray, "Thy kingdom come." [^3] He urged his followers to seek first "the kingdom of God"; [^4] and declared that "the kingdom of God is at hand." [^5]

The plain meaning of this teaching is that while Jesus often referred to a spiritual kingdom, He also taught there should be a kingdom of God on earth, patterned after the one in heaven, and possessing divine authority. Else, why ask that the "kingdom come," or say it was "at hand," or that it would "come with power?" [^6]

The kingdom of God has been defined by John Taylor, third President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He says:

"What is the meaning of 'thy kingdom come?' It means the rule of God. It means the law of God. It means the government of God. It means the people who have listened to and who are willing to learn and to observe the commandments of Jehovah . . . Thy kingdom come, that the confusion, the evil, and wickedness, the murder and bloodshed that now exist among mankind may be done away, and the principles of truth and right, the principles of kindness, charity, and love as they dwell in the bosom of the Gods, may dwell with us." [^7]

This identifies the kingdom of God with the Church of Christ on earth, with Christ at the head. They who have accepted the gospel, the plan of salvation, with its attendant ordinances, are the citizens of the kingdom. The Church is the incipient kingdom of God.

The objectives and marks of the kingdom of God are those of the Church of Christ: peace and good will among men—the message of the angelic hosts heard by the shepherds, watching their flocks, at the birth of Christ. [^8]

The power of the kingdom of God, as of the Church, is a priesthood that can speak and act for God with authority. No other officers will be needed by the kingdom, when fully established, for the consummation of the purposes of God. This also has been stated clearly by President John Taylor:

"When the will of God is done on earth as it is in heaven, that priesthood will be the only legitimate ruling power under the whole heavens; for every other power and influence will be subject to it. When the millennium . . . is introduced, all potentates, powers, and authorities—every man, woman, and child will be in subjection to the kingdom of God; they will be under the power and dominion of the priesthood of God: then the will of God will be done on the earth as it is done in heaven." [^9]

In the Church, as established, with its laws, ordinances, and authority, lie the seeds of the coming kingdom of God. Out of it will grow the promised kingdom with Christ as its head. It will not come in any other manner. Clearly, it becomes then the duty of the Church to spread the gospel message over the earth. Thereby the Church and its activities will serve as a leaven by which the whole world may be leavened. By the voice and labors of the Church, the faces of all people may be turned towards the light of eternal truth. Little by little, through the power of the priesthood, adequate preparation may be made for the full establishment of the kingdom at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. In all this the Lord gives His help. In the words of Brigham Young: "The Kingdom of God on earth is a living, moving, effective institution, and is governed, controlled, dictated and led by the invisible God whom we serve." [^10]

To the coming of this kingdom, the Latter-day Saints look forward with confidence. They accept gladly the responsibility of helping to prepare for that coming. They pray that the coming may not be long delayed.

Let us not be misunderstood. In this conception of the kingdom of God, the Latter-day Saints have no revolutionary designs on the existing governments of earth. On the contrary, the Lord, speaking to the Prophet Joseph Smith, said, "Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land. Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign." [^11] The Latter-day Saints are taught to be a strictly lawabiding people; and their history has shown that they do observe the laws of the land.

However there are many kinds of governments. All governments, in the last analysis, derive or should derive their power and maintenance from the people. Governments, to have a claim upon popular respect, must, therefore, be set up for the benefit of the people. Individual liberty must not be curtailed, but rigidly and fully preserved. That means a constitutional government. Any government which violates these eternal, righteous principles will not yield human good. People have the right to secure the overthrow of governments that deprive their citizens of freedom. On this subject, the Lord instructed the Prophet Joseph, as follows:

"And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me. Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land; and as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this cometh of evil." [^12]

But a constitutional government does not of itself profit a nation. It must be administered properly, else its inherent freedom may be a name only. "When the wicked rule, the people mourn." [^13] Upon the people rests the responsibility of selecting officers or administrators of the law. This is really the foremost privilege of free men; and should be exercised with the utmost care. The Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, concerning this matter: "Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil." The martyred patriarch, Hyrum Smith, elaborated upon this theme in powerful words:

"You are to vote for good men, (and if you do not this, it is a sin: to vote for wicked men, it would be sin) . . . who will maintain every man on his right." [^14]

In our own land, as in others, too much attention is given, in selecting men, to political party allegiance, and too little to the character of the men who are candidates for office. Consequently the people suffer.

The Constitution of the United States of America provides the best existing human approach to the government characterizing the kingdom of God. It maintains the freedom of men, and seeks to set up safeguards against any form of tyranny or dictatorship. It was inspired by God, as stated in latter-day revelation: "For the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles; that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment. Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another. And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." [^15]

The Church gives full allegiance to the principles embodied in this divinely-inspired document. It rises in defense of it, and resists any proposed changes therein. With Joseph Smith we pray, "May those principles, which were so honorably and nobly defended, namely, the Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be established forever." [^16]

The principles of the gospel may be used successfully in human government. That is demonstrated by the fact that the more the principles of righteousness have been used in governmental affairs, the greater has been the prosperity of the people.

An unwritten chapter of American history is an example from our own day. When in 1847 the "Mormon" pioneers entered the Salt Lake Valley, then an uninhabited desert, far from the outposts of civilization, they set up rules and regulations drawn from the principles of religion. They were obliged to do so, for no other government was available. Men were chosen for office, of every kind, under the laws of the gospel and the priesthood. As a result, during the following few years, a peace and progress resulted, which has not been equalled since, and which is unique in the history of the world.

It must be admitted, with sorrow, that few of today's governments approach, in spirit or in deed, that of the kingdom of God. Few place gospel truth above all things. Few are willing to comply with gospel requirements, ever so lightly. After nearly two thousand years we are far from the realization of a kingdom of God, on earth, operating in the spirit of Christ, with peace and good will as gifts to humanity. Christian nations are now engaged in the largest, fiercest, and bloodiest war of history. The spirit of Christ is not recognizable in this gigantic, Satanic struggle. The spirit of evil leads the procession.

Nevertheless, the Church knows that the kingdom of God will be established. Its coming is certain. God is never defeated. He is always the victor. The establishment of the kingdom must be our constant objective. There will come a time when God will say to the nations, "Enough!" Then He will assume command on earth, as in heaven; and the kingdom will be fully established. Then warfare will cease; though the inviolability of free agency may yet leave some hearts filled with rancor and hate. Nevertheless, "every knee shall then bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ." [^17] Peace and good will will prevail among the people.

May the nations obtain the view of the coming kingdom, and shape their actions accordingly. When this great world war ends, the following peace will depend on how closely the articles of peace will accord with the principles of the Lord's plan of salvation. Were our statesmen wise, they would prepare for their coming responsibilities as peacemakers, by daily, diligent study of the principles and practices of the Lord's gospel of peace. It would give them better preparation than any man-made course of study. Then, in all their negotiation they would seek to build towards the kingdom of God.

May everyone of us engage, proudly and valiantly, in the building of the kingdom of God on earth, and above all, may the day of the coming of that kingdom be hastened.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Gal. 6:7)
[^2] (I Sam. 8:7)
[^3] (Matt. 6:10)
[^4] (Matt. 6:33)
[^5] (Mark 1:15)
[^6] (Mark 9:1)
[^7] (The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 205, 206)
[^8] (Luke 2:13, 14)
[^9] (The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 206, 207)
[^10] (Discourses, Ed. 1941, p. 24)
[^11] (D. & C. 58:21, 22)
[^12] (D. & C. 98:5-7)
[^13] (D. & C. 98:9)
[^14] (History of Church, 6:323)
[^15] (D. & C. 101:77-80)
[^16] (D & C. 109:54)
[^17] (Phil. 2:10, 11)
