John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER TWENTY

LEAVENING DOCTRINES OF JOSEPH SMITH

Nearly one hundred years have passed since the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, the Prophet. Through the perspective of that century, his prophetic power is clearly seen.

Joseph Smith's mission was to restore the ancient gospel of Jesus Christ in its purity and with its authority. In so doing, he brought into open light doctrines of the gospel which had been forgotten, ignored, or corrupted by a wayward generation.

Since the time of Joseph Smith, religious views have changed greatly. Some churches have frankly abandoned many of their older beliefs; others look with new eyes upon their inherited body of doctrine; and new churches have arisen in response to the cry for new light and more truth.

The general trend of this changing religious opinion is towards the system of faith set forth by Joseph Smith, the Prophet. The fulness of the gospel, restored and revealed a century ago, has leavened the religious thinking of the whole world. That is a powerful evidence of the essential truth of "Mormonism." This may not be admitted by all, but one needs only compare the world's religious doctrines of a hundred years ago, with those of today, to become convinced of the correctness of this contention.

Let us review briefly ten of these leavening doctrine, each one of which really merits hours of discussion.

First. God is a personal Being who may and does speak to man.

One hundred years ago it was almost invaribly taught that the Lord would not again reveal Himself to man; that the canon of scripture was completely full; and that there was nothing more to tell mankind. In the face of this belief, Joseph Smith declared that he had seen God and His Son—personal glorious Beings—and had heard their voices; that continuous divine revelation is a part of true religion; and that the prevalent conception of God, a meaningless essence, one in three and three in one, everywhere present, yet completely filling every human heart, was wrong. This was a shock to the people of that day, but thinking men have been driven to a choice between two conceptions of God: either a personal Being, of warm, loving kinship with man, or an apparently impersonal, force of forces. Today there is pretty general agreement that God must speak to or guide man in this eternally changing and developing world; and as certainly, that He is able to do so.

Second. Man is a pre-existent being.

The doctrine that man lived with the Lord, as His child, in the spirit world, before coming on earth was another shock to people. Yet, pre-existence seemed a happy doctrine, for it implied that man is a spiritual child of God, whose glorious days in the first, or spiritual estate, were as a preparation for the earth career. It established a real relationship between man and his Maker, that of literal Father and child. It gave to fatherhood and motherhood, in heaven or on earth, a new dignity. Today, when the permanence of essence of the universe is the safe basis of thinking, it seems rational, necessary, that man, the crowning and dominating figure of creation, is eternal also, everlasting from the beginning as into the endless future. Men are looking with longing eyes upon the doctrine of pre-existence.

Third. Existence is purposeful.

Joseph Smith's teaching that earth life was definitely planned by the Lord for a host of waiting spirits, as a school of experience, at first met opposition. It seems impossible, because it implied that our first parents came on earth by deliberate appointment, and that the Fall, a favorite subject for sin-baiting preachers, was a necessary prelude to the consummation of the Lord's eternal plan for His spirit children. To say that "Adam fell that man might be," was indeed a new and strange doctrine one hundred years ago. Even stranger was the doctrine that the purpose of existence is that man might be made joyous. "Men are, that they might have joy," said the "Mormon" prophet. Sin and evil and misery had so long been pulpit clubs that the fresh light of happiness on earth and in heaven seemed an impossible goal. Today the world has largely turned its back on the old views, and declares that man must be made happy—from an ample supply of bread and butter, to a fearless outlook upon eternity.

Fourth. Every man is a free agent.

A hundred years ago mankind was thought to be held, helplessly, in a destiny imposed by the powers of heaven. It was a cheerless, empty prospect, leaving no place for noble self-effort. In answer to this benumbing untruth came the glorious doctrine of man's free agency. In the life before this, the earth plan was presented to the waiting spirits. Some accepted and some rejected the plan. None was forced to come on earth. Once upon earth, the right of free agency continues. Man may receive or reject truth; may be virtuous or immoral; may progress or retrograde. The Lord will guide and whisper, urge and lead, but the right of the free agent remains inviolate. Therefore, man is not predestined to any fate, but by a succession of acts of will, builds his own fate. In the light of such knowledge the confused picture of human history becomes clearer. The Lord's purpose with respect to the earth and His children, one of goodness and joy, is changeless, and will not fail, but this purpose is worked out through human agents, who may at will advance or retard the plan. All of human history is but the resultant of God's plan and man's use or misuse of it. The divine purpose goes on rapidly when we cooperate; slowly when we oppose. In the end, the purposes of the Almighty will be fulfilled, for He has eternity in His keeping, and can wait, with loving assistance, while man works out his own destiny by the exercise of his free agency. Thus man gains in strength, and moves upward. Such thoughts, new and novel a century ago, are among the commonplaces of this day.

Fifth. Salvation is graded.

All will be saved, said Joseph Smith, except the mysterious few who are known as the sons of perdition. The meanest sinner will receive a greater gift in the Kingdom of Heaven than is within his mortal conception. But, some will receive a higher place than others in the eternal mansions, for their works have been better. Hell consists of sorrow for past errors which have placed us lower than we might have been. Faith and works must go together. This doctrine was a blow to sulphur-spitting evangelists of a past day, who tried to scare men into righteousness with threats of eternal fire, and in the same breath promised full salvation, with the virtuous and the pure, to the vilest sinner, without required restitution, if he but declare faith and promise repentance—even upon his death-bed. The decades have moved men's thoughts away from so illogical a doctrine. The law of cause and effect, dominant in the physical world, must have its counterpart in the spiritual domain. "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." [^1] Faith without works is insufficient to the mind enlightened by the vast progress of recent days. Salvation by God's grace, alone, seems a poor kind of justice. Salvation built upon works, magnified by God's love, can be understood.

Sixth. There may be unending progression.

Progression is the end of existence. There is no joy without it. But, the power to progress does not end with death. Life hereafter is not static. Playing harps forever near the throne of God is a poor prospect for an active intelligence. There is progression in the world to come, eternal progression. The innate powers of man are carried into eternity. "On the other side" man may learn, believe, and act; may repent, reach out, and advance. Throughout endless time the eternal spirit of man may, by the use of its free agency, rise to higher levels. The infinite height which man may attain is beyond mortal comprehension. Bold was such a doctrine a hundred years ago. Today it seems almost a necessity. On every hand, nature moves onward, to some higher, finer place. Can it be otherwise in the spiritual world?

Seventh. The unbaptized dead may be saved.

What of the dead, who died without knowledge of the gospel, if all are to be saved? Will the eternal law of baptism, for example, be suspended in their case? No. For them vicarious service may be rendered. The living may perform the necessary ordinances, belonging to earth, for the dead; and the departed spirits, possessing free agency, the power of repentance and doing good works, may accept or reject that which has been done for them. There, with those who accepted the gospel on earth, they will engage in labors of eternity. In that great world, spirits mingle, their labors are various, each follows his own desires as here, family relationships are maintained; there may be progression even as here; the eternal law of cause and effect, the indestructible privilege of repentance, exist there as here. In this day of clear thinking about the future state of man, the doctrine of Joseph Smith, concerning the spirit world, is the only one that gives a fulness of comprehension. It was a marvelous vision, a century ago, to which the world has been turning more and more throughout the decades.

Eight. The human body is sacred.

The prevision of Joseph Smith was not confined to somewhat remote things. Everyday life with its needs was given full consideration. One hundred years ago the body of man had no religious value. It seemed to exist to give man pain and suffering. The new revelation taught otherwise. The body is the tabernacle of an immortal spirit. One major purpose of the earth experience is to secure the body to be ours eternally. The body must be kept holy. Therefore, it has been taught for a century, that no unclean thing should enter it—alcohol, tobacco, coffee, tea, and other injurious substances must not be used—little meat, but chiefly fruits, vegetables, and grains should form the basis of man's dietary. Men and women must keep themselves equally, fully, morally pure. Throughout the last century, the world has come to look upon the human body in a new light. Millions are expended to protect it. The future of the race is tied up with a healthy body. The teachings of "Mormonism" for a century are those which, under other names, with scientific teaching, the world is adopting for the preservation of physical health. The Word of Wisdom is another witness of the truth of the restored gospel.

Ninth. All men are brethren.

Christian brotherhood has been a church slogan these hundreds of years, spoken easily with silken voices—but it has been carried into practice with poor success. It could not well be otherwise when men were thought to be only the creations of God, not really God's children. The teachings of Joseph Smith set forth the true relationship of mankind, and defined man's service to his brothers to be a holy obligation. Men differ in powers and accomplishments, but, nevertheless, all must enjoy measurably the comforts of life. Therefore, men must work together. Therefore, the strong must help the weak. Thus the principle of cooperation comes into view, the determining economic, social, and spiritual principle of the world. Throughout a hundred years, this doctrine has enabled the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to do mighty works. More and more the world is realizing that its wars and miseries can be overcome only as all men are viewed as brethren, and mutually assisted as there may be need.

Tenth. Man lives under law.

Running through the dark ages of apostasy was the wicked thought that, in spiritual matters, men might be above the law—a spirtual grace might relieve them from obedience. Now has come the stern, but safe, foundation of life, that the relation of cause and effect is invariable and must be subscribed to by every living soul. This is the cornerstone of our recent vast progress in the physical world. Man is compelled to believe that it holds with equal force in the spiritual world. Every act has its effect. Thoughts, as well as acts, write their records on eternal pages. There are great laws of the universe—physical and spiritual. Intelligence operates under a reign of law. The first law of life is the recognition of law, and the obedient use of it. The gifts of life are the results of obedience. All this, taught in majestic language by Joseph Smith, is now axiomatic among intelligent, modern men. To win the blessings of salvation, the prerequisites must be accepted: Faith in the Lord and in His gospel; repentance of former mistakes and a turning away from future follies, and the sign of acceptance of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and of future obedience to its laws by baptism—these laws, complied with, bring the blessings desired by every human heart. That law permeates religion, has given new dignity to spiritual concerns.

These are but a few of the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ restored through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, one hundred years ago. They run through the gospel structure as the great riveted and bolted steel beams make the framework of the modern skyscraper. There are many more of like illuminating power.

It cannot be said that these and other doctrines of the Latter-day Saints have been accepted generally by the Christian or the Pagan world. But, it may be said, with historical accuracy, that the trend of religious belief everywhere is towards conformity with the teachings of the Latter-day Saints throughout the last century.

That is, the truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ have been as a leaven to the world's thought and belief. The whole lump of religious conceptions is slowly acquiring new life. Such is the way of truth. Let it loose in the world, though unnamed and unclaimed, and it will in time transform thought and advance mankind.

Every person who obtains a vision of these and other doctrines of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and becomes acquainted with the events of the Church, feels within his soul the vivifying influence of truth. No longer does error seem sweet to him. Thenceforth, his Spirit ranges freely in the pleasant sunlight of a fuller understanding of life.

It is a marvel that the youthful prophet of the latter days should have taught these principles as certain truth, a century in advance of the world's new learning and thinking, which tend to confirm them. It was beyond the unaided power of man. Honest, unprejudiced study of the life and labors of Joseph Smith as a teacher of truth and as a predicter of coming events, leads to the conviction that he was, indeed, inspired of God, a prophet of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Strauss, Leben Jesu; Renan, Vie de Jesus; Brandes, Sagnet om Jesus)
