John A. Widtsoe, Understandable Religion ( 1944)

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

THE CHALLENGE OF MORMONISM

"Mormonism," so-called, offers a three-fold challenge to all the world: First, to love truth above all else; second, to seek it with one's might; and third, to obey it at any cost. It asks no more of any man.

The church knows and teaches that every enterprise, to be reliable, and of benefit to man, must be founded in truth. Whether it be the building of a bridge, or the formulation of a religion, there can be no certainty of outcome, no safety of use, unless tried and tested knowledge is employed. A true religion must be built upon truth. That is the basic, doctrinal thesis of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We rest our faith on truth. In the words of Brigham Young: "Our religion is simply the truth. Is it all said in this one expression—it embraces all truth, wherever found in all the works of God and man that are visible or invisible to mortal eye." [^1]

It was in simple search for truth, that Joseph Smith, of Palmyra, New York, in 1820, then a fourteen-year-old lad, went into the woods to pray. He had no quarrel with sects or churches. He only wanted to be assured of their correctness. In the midst of religious confusion, he sought order, which is an eternal mark of truth. Out of this pursuit came the power and authority that led to the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The Church continues to live and move and have its being in truth, ancient, present, and to come, under whatever name, for it knows that thus light comes; and that light drives dreaded darkness away. With the poet Dawson we say:

"I have no fear Of what truth may disclose to me. . . . false gods go When the true gods their faces show."

Though truth is so important to humankind, and involved in everyday life, it has been made, by philosophical abstraction, to seem nebulous, far away, difficult to understand.

When Jesus stood before the Procurator, in defense of His own career, He declared simply: "To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth." [^2] Pilate seemed mystified by this statement. He asked, "What is truth?" not so much for information, it would seem, as to express a doubt: "No one knows what truth is." That has been the attitude of multitudes, much to the world's sorrow.

The Prophet Joseph Smith gave a luminously clear definition of truth. "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." [^3]

Under this definition, all verified knowledge, the sum of correct, substantiated knowledge, is truth. This definition can be comprehended by the human mind. It places truth, so far as obtainable with human powers, within the reach of all who will seek it, and removes it from the field of speculation. It avoids the quagmires of argumentation. The search for knowledge becomes a search for truth.

The power of knowledge cannot be questioned. All about us is the evidence that the accumulation of knowledge, if accepted and properly used, leads to man's well-being. It gives power over opposing forces. It makes progress possible. It lifts us nearer to the realization of our desire for enduring happiness. Moreover, since the constant companion of knowledge is light, the brood of false knowledge—witchcraft, the evil eye, astrology, palmistry, and other similar absurdities—have been compelled to retire into the foul darkness whence they came. In a world possessed of knowledge, there is no place for sooth-sayers, unsupported traditions, unfounded opinions, or self-appointed prophets. They who in this day engage in such practices are traveling in the domain of superstition.

Ignorance, the lack of knowledge, has always been a barrier to human happiness. Ignorance walks in darkness; it keeps men in fear and uncertainty; it leaves them helpless in their earnest toil for the joy to which they are entitled. No adage is more unsound than: "If ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise;" for, at its best, ignorance gives only transient, incomplete, often dangerous satisfactions. The children of ignorance are chance and confusion; both pitiless destroyers.

In every concern of life nothing is more important than this doctrine. The world's history, its wars and periods of peace, may be read as the fruits of man's possession and use of knowledge. In the age-old quest for happiness, man has won or lost, as he has gained dependable knowledge, and has used it properly or improperly.

It has been an error of the ages that men, too often, in their eager quest for welfare and well-being, have not built upon established, sound knowledge, have not respected it, have not sought it. Disaster has always followed. When knowledge is refused, when ignorance is deliberate, the beginnings of sin and evil are laid.

Has man the power to discover truth? Upon the foregoing definition, the answer is, yes. Man has been endowed with faculties, by the use of which he may gather knowledge from far and wide, and by which he may distinguish between that which is dependable and that which is not rooted in certainty. He can see, hear, smell, taste, and feel. He has emotional and spiritual powers that are as real as those of the eye or ear, and more comprehensive than the physical senses. When these powers are insufficient, he may devise aids to his senses. Coupled with these senses is the power of thought or reason, by which the facts of observation, the experiences of life, may be brought together, and their meaning discovered and explained.

Man is fully equipped, by his senses, small and great, and by his mental and spiritual powers, to seek out and to find truth, to explore the universe and these powers are yet to be fully plumbed. Perhaps they are illimitable, endless. Weak and frail man has only begun his universe-wide assembling of knowledge, and his invasion of truth's hiding place. Forever he may push into the region of inexhaustible knowledge.

The search for truth as a basis for religion, carries with it solemn responsibilities.

First of all, the truth of religion must be found by oneself. It cannot be accepted second-hand. In a sugar factory an untrained worker may be employed to read the light rotation in a polarizer, which then is calculated by one trained in the science into percentages of sugar. The first worker, who must depend upon the superior knowledge of another, is little more than an automaton. A registering photoelectric eye might be devised to make and record the observation.

Such a procedure does not suffice in religion. Each person must secure personal intimacy with the principles of religion, which determine his conduct, aspirations, and hopes. Every one of us must search out truth for himself. Substitutes cannot act for us. Neither priest nor layman can do the work for us. We cannot place religion, the most important concern in life, in the lap of another. Such a doctrine is not always acceptable, for it removes the scaffolding from the many who seek to "cut across" to the benefits of religion.

Instead, the supreme importance of truth in life requires that every man become a searcher for it. He must become so well acquainted with the sound principles of religion, as to be able to defend every one. In minor matters of business, he may be content to buy a cash register, without understanding its principles of operation. But in matters of religion, upon which his happiness, here and hereafter, depends, he must know and understand the truth which he brings into action in his life. Salvation is individual; hence each individual must know and do for himself. Every person must stand upon his own feet in this discovery. When that is done, many a doctrine now held in regard throughout the world will be found to be false, and the churches will totter upon their man-made foundations.

One cannot deal lightly, or toy, with truth. When found, it must be accepted and respected, else it turns upon its possessor to his destruction. To ignore the known current in the high tension wire is to invite disaster. There must be complete surrender to the new-found knowledge.

That may require that a person give up many a false tradition; some perhaps gained at mother's knee. It may mean the conquest of appetites. It may lead to separation from old companions. It may leave one in a minority group. It may demand a complete new order of life. There can be no compromise in this field.

Upon this reef many a truth-bound voyager has foundered. To sever ties of habit, friends, or family, seems too high a price to pay, even for truth. To be subjected to the facetious comments of the unbeliever seems beyond endurance. But, truth is the pearl of great price—and whatever the price may be, it is worth it. It will require courage, yes, but in the simple words of Lowell:

"They are slaves who dare not be In the right with two or three."

Jesus of Nazareth, the bearer of truth, declared that "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." [^4]

The progress of the world has been accomplished by those who loved truth enough to pay any price for it. The history of inventions, or organizations for human good, illustrate this principle. Men have suffered and gone to the death for their certain, well-founded knowledge. Praise be to their memory!

The persecuted people, who under Brigham Young's leadership entered the barrenness of the Salt Lake and surrounding valleys, did so because of love of the Gospel they had found. They honored truth in their courageous toil against the hardships and privations of pioneer life. They knew that if the plan of salvation is worth anything, it is worth all.

Sadly, we must confess that truth is too often honored in the breach. The evil effects of alcohol, tobacco, caffeine drinks, and the variety of habit-begetting, nerve-deceiving drugs, have been fully demonstrated, yet the consumption of these enemies of man is increasing with an unheard-of rapidity. Uncleanness destroys life, yet looseness in morality is spreading over the earth. Repeated experience through human history shows that riots, bloodshed, wars, and the accompanying famine and pestilence will continue, unless men foster the welfare of their brethren as they seek their own well-being. Yet, cocky selfishness stalks fearlessly in the market place. The word of God—though He be known, and receive scanty Sunday worship—is forgotten or flaunted in the so-called practical affairs of men. So, throughout the whole range of human affairs, truth is held in indifferent respect. Therefore, darkness prevails. And the earth moans in grief.

In the dark category of sins none is greater than to know truth, and then to ignore or disobey it. That is true in the physical as the spiritual field. The serious consequences of disobeying truth are clearly stated in a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "There are many who have been ordained among you, whom I have called, but few of them are chosen. They who are not chosen have sinned a very grievous sin, in that they are walking in darkness at noon-day." [^5] That is the sin of sins: To walk with closed eyes in the midst of light; to know truth, yet not to yield to it. That sin threw the Son of the Morning from his high pedestal in the divine council into the depth of evil, and made him Satan, the teacher and defender of untruth.

Herein lies the key to the world's relief from its pains and sorrows. The happiness of nations will be proportioned to their honest love and earnest searching for truth, and their courageous acceptance of it. There will be concord in legislative halls when honoring truth shall be the first order of the day. Then, treaties among people will no longer be "scraps of paper." Then we can build safely for the future.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is a gospel of truth—all truth. Truth is its foundation. Every condition, thing, or being, if only true, may find its place in the system and organization known as the gospel and Church of Jesus Christ. Therefore, the acceptance of, and rigid adherence to, all truth, form the foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Upon that foundation the Church is building a structure that shall "never be destroyed or left to another people." [^6]

That makes love of truth the greatest thing among men. It becomes the core of life, the essence of all that comes within man's purview. It becomes the directing force, and the test of quality, of every human action. The search for it becomes the highway to human happiness. It becomes a sacred word. Could that be comprehended by us all, this would be a sweeter world in which to dwell.

Our individual lives, our inmost joy, our true contentment, our power to draw sweetness from the brief journey called life, may best be measured by our active, obedient, love of truth. We must feel as President Joseph F. Smith, when he said, "We will give a thousand errors, if we can find them or if they exist in us, any moment, for one truth; and we will swap off a thousand mistakes, if they can be found, for one accurate, consistent, and proper action." [^7]

The first concern of every Latter-day Saint, as of every other person, young and old, must be to possess and care for truth. When that is accomplished, the whole world will be as Eden of old. But, until that happy day comes, each one of us may, through obedience to what we know to be true make an Eden of our own individual lives.

The future is in the hands of those who really love truth, seek it, and accept it at any cost. There can be neither peace nor progress upon any other terms. The world is crying for people, who, confident in truth, courageously defy error, and go out to battle fearlessly for the happiness of humankind.

Shall we be of that redeeming army?

That is the challenge of Mormonism! . . .

I bear to you all my humble but certain testimony that the truths we have discussed together are of God, and must be accepted if happiness is to be won by us on earth, and salvation in the hereafter.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Discourses, p. 2)
[^2] (John 18:37)
[^3] (D. & C. 93:24)
[^4] (Matt. 10:37)
[^5] (D. & C. 95:5, 6)
[^6] (Daniel 2:44)
[^7] (General Conference Report April, 1908, p. 8)
