Ezra Taft Benson, This Nation Shall Endure ( 1977)

XV

The Mormons and Our Message

"Our message to the world is that the kingdom of which Daniel prophesied is now on the earth. . . . As Jesus said to men of His day, so we say to men of today: 'The kingdom of God is in the midst of you.'"

In the Old Testament it is written that in the last days "the God of heaven [shall] set up a kingdom." (Daniel 2:44.) Daniel likened the early beginnings of this kingdom to "a stone . . . cut out without hands," which would become "a great mountain" to fill the whole earth. (See Daniel 2:34-35.)

Our message to the world is that the kingdom of which Daniel prophesied is now on the earth. Its early beginnings were as inconspicuous as a small stone rolling down a mountain. Today, partly because of its accelerated growth, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is no longer ignored. Prejudice has largely subsided as people have come in contact with Mormons and their message.

We realize that our message is impressive as well as startling to some. It provokes the sincere inquiry. "Did not Jesus establish the kingdom of God, His church, in His own time? Why do you claim that the kingdom of God is only a latter-day event?" This sincere inquiry is deserving of an answer.

Jesus did establish His church on this earth in His time, which He declared was "the kingdom of God has already come unto you." (Luke 17:21, Inspired Version.) His church had an authorized ministry personally ordained by the Savior Himself. To a selected number, whom He designated as apostles, He bestowed the "keys of the kingdom." These keys, or rights, authorized the apostles to be legal administrators of the gospel of our Lord and the ordinances that pertained thereto. These keys further enabled the apostles to bind ordinances for time as well as eternity. Referring to this power, Jesus said to His apostles, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 18:18.)

After our Lord's literal physical resurrection, but before His ascension into heaven, He commanded the apostles to "teach all nations" His gospel. (See Matthew 28:19.) He further exhorted them to be "witnesses . . . in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1:8.) Obedient to that command, the apostles took the gospel throughout the world. The gospel message, once confined to Palestine, became a worldwide message. From its centers in Jerusalem, and later Antioch of Syria, Christianity spread to foreign frontiers with a harvest of converts. As expressed by Jesus in the parable, the mustard seed became as a tree with its branches extending into various parts of the earth. Because of its rapid growth, the church became noticeable. Persecutions followed, first by the Jews and then by the Roman government. Some of the leaders of the church were martyred, including James, Peter, and Paul. Disaffection spread among the members in the infant church. Since valiance to the cause meant certain death, some chose apostasy. Eventually, the apostles were killed, leaving no legal administrators on the earth to regulate the affairs of the kingdom, to settle doctrinal disputes, or to pass on the authority they held.

With the passing of the apostles and the loss of the priesthood keys, corrupt doctrines were introduced into the church. In the words of one eminent historian, "Christianity did not destroy paganism; it adopted it. The Greek mind, dying, came to a transmigrated [new] life in the theology and liturgy of the Church." (Will Durant, The Story of Civilization, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1944, 3:595.)

By the second and third centuries, widespread changes had been made in the pure doctrines and ordinances given by the Savior. The church that Jesus had established and sanctioned was no longer on this earth.

But had this general apostasy not been foreseen? Speaking of His kingdom, Jesus said on two occasions, ". . . the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force" (Matthew 11:12), and "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you [the Jews], and given to a nation [the Gentiles] bringing forth the fruits thereof" (Matthew 21:43).

This was not the same kingdom about which Daniel prophesied, for he said that the kingdom of the last days would never be destroyed or "be left to other people." (Daniel 2:44.) Jesus said that the kingdom established in His time would be "given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof." In other words, Jesus knew, as did the apostles, that an apostasy would take place before His kingdom would be finally established as a prelude to and preparation for His second coming.

The apostle Paul wrote to members of the church at Thessalonica that the second coming of Jesus Christ "shall not come, except there come a falling away first." (2 Thessalonians 2:3.) And Peter likewise wrote: "There shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies . . . and many shall follow their pernicious ways." (2 Peter 2:1-2.)

So the world entered that long night of apostasy, the Dark Ages. The church, no longer sanctioned by God, exercised an oppressive tyranny on the minds of men and shackled them with chains of false traditions. Truth was turned to superstition, joy to despair, and worship to ritual. Before the gospel could again shine forth its resplendent light, religious and political freedom first had to be restored. God determined that it take place in America.

This land had been preserved as a continent apart from the religious oppression, tyranny, and intolerance of Europe. In time, emigrants came to the new land and established colonies. By and large, they were a God- fearing people. A war was fought for their independence, and by God's intervention, victory was achieved. By that same omnipotent power the Constitution was born, which guaranteed religious and political liberty. Only then was the time propitious for the kingdom of God—that "stone . . . cut out without hands"—to be restored.

A prophet of God was sent to this new nation. This occurred in the year 1805, only sixteen years after the ratification of the Constitution. The prophet's name was Joseph Smith.

In his fifteenth year, while troubled because of the "tumult of opinions" about which church was right, this young man sought an answer in prayer. Secluding himself in a grove of trees near his father's farm in Palmyra, New York, he asked of God. His prayer was answered with a glorious manifestation in which he saw God the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ. These are his words:

"I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun. . . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, . . . This is my Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith 2:17.)

He was commanded to join none of the churches of his day. In time, other heavenly messengers came to this earth and conferred on him those keys or rights to administer the affairs of the kingdom of God. With the restoration of the keys, the gospel of Jesus Christ and ordinances of salvation became available to mankind.

This is the glorious message we desire to share with the world, that through God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, the kingdom of God has been restored. It is the greatest message since the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Like the stone that Daniel saw, the kingdom is now rolling forward in the earth to fulfill its destiny to fill the whole earth.

We are under divine commandment to see that this is done. In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in October 1831, the Lord proclaimed: "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth.

"Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth." (D&C 65:2, 5.)

"Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come. . . ." (D&C 65:6.) As Jesus said to men of His day, so we say to men of today: "The kingdom of God is in the midst of you."
