Ezra Taft Benson, This Nation Shall Endure ( 1977)

XVI

A Message to the Lamanites

The three prominent precepts in the Book of Mormon are: (1) that Jesus is the promised Messiah, our Lord and Redeemer; (2) that this land is a land choice above all other lands; and (3) that God has preserved a promised people because of special covenants they or their progenitors willfully made with God.

Mormons have an Article of Faith that reads: "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God."

Briefly, here is an account of the origin of this book.

On a spring day in the year 1820 in the state of New York, a young boy named Joseph Smith went into a grove of trees on his father's farm to pray. He sought guidance. He wanted to join a church, but he was confused as to which one. While seeking an answer, he read one day these words from the Bible: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) This Joseph did. In response to his prayer, our Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, appeared to him. Joseph was told to join none of the churches.

Joseph was to learn that Christ established His church in former days when He was here on earth. Being the Church of Jesus Christ, it was vitalized by revelation from heaven. Doctrinal disputes were settled on the basis of revelation. But persecution against the church and disaffection from within caused the apostles and prophets to be taken from the earth. This removed the appointed servants who were to receive revelation for the church at large, to keep its membership in a unity of doctrine and faith. So revelation ceased and scripture ended. New doctrines and creeds of uninspired men were introduced into the church. As predicted in the scriptures, there was an apostasy.

But it was also predicted in the scripture that the Lord would restore His church in these latter days prior to His second coming. Like the former-day church, His restored church was to have apostles, prophets, and current revelation, which added new scripture. We declare that this prophecy has come to pass. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord has established His church again on earth. Within it are found apostles and prophets, revelation, and new scripture. One portion of the new scripture coming forth in our modern day is the Book of Mormon.

On the evening of September 21, 1823, an angel named Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Moroni was the last of a long line of ancient prophets from a mighty civilization that once inhabited the American continent centuries ago. The angel told Joseph Smith that the history of these early inhabitants of America was written on metallic plates that lay buried in a nearby hill.

These records covered a period of American history from the time of the Tower of Babel until about 421 A.D. The engraved records were handed down from generation to generation and were abridged by a prophet named Mormon. Mormon's son Moroni added some additional writings and then laid the records in the earth, where they remained until he delivered them to Joseph Smith. By the inspiration of God, Joseph Smith translated these records and titled the record after its author. That is why this record is called the Book of Mormon.

There were other witnesses besides Joseph Smith who saw the angel and the plates. Their written testimony is found printed in the front of each copy of the Book of Mormon.

The Bible is a scriptural account of God's dealings with His children in the Old World. The Book of Mormon is a scriptural account of God's dealings with His children in the Americas.

Of this sacred volume of scripture, the Prophet Joseph Smith said, ". . . the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 194.)

I emphasize three of the prominent precepts in this book: a promised Lord, a promised land, and a promised people.

The first and most central theme of the Book of Mormon is that Jesus is the promised Messiah, our Lord and Redeemer. He came to redeem mankind from a lost and fallen condition brought about by Adam's transgression. Nearly all Christian churches accepted this truth as fundamental to their faith when the Book of Mormon was published to the world in 1830. The fact that another book had come forth as a second witness to Christ's divinity was regarded by many churches as being both superfluous and spurious. They said, "We already have a Bible. Why do we need another?"

But the nineteenth century was not the twentieth. Who but God and inspired prophets could have foreseen the need for an additional witness for the divinity of His Son? Who but God and inspired prophets could have foreseen the time when self-evident truths in the Bible were made obscure by virtue of modern translations—translations made by scholars who seriously challenged the divinity of Jesus Christ as the Son of God? Who but God and inspired prophets could have foreseen the day when ministers of prominent denominations would openly challenge the divinity of Jesus Christ? One doctor of divinity, in lecturing to a large group of students in the last decade, said: "Who knows but what in the year 2004 or some other year, there will live a man who will live more perfectly than did Jesus. Then we will worship him as the Son of God, rather than Jesus. The reason we worship Jesus as the Son of God is because he lived the most perfect life of any man of whom we have knowledge."

Others of the clergy have challenged the virgin birth account in the New Testament as a myth. The literal resurrection of the Master is regarded by some as a hoax perpetrated upon a gullible community by Jesus' apostles.

I received some time ago a letter from a long-time friend, a lay worker in his own church. He closed his letter with the words, "God bless you and your wonderful work. I pray that Satan be kept out of your church—since we have failed to keep him out of ours!"

Concluding a three-day convention, attended by 3500 people from forty states and five foreign countries, this occurred. An informal, unprogrammed banquet was held. After the dinner, the chairman announced he would call on four or five men from the audience to come to the podium and speak from their hearts about anything they would like to say. The first called was from the South—a publisher of farm magazines. This is the substance of his remarks: "Ladies and gentlemen, I've been accused of leaving my church, but I say to you, I didn't leave my church—my church left me. My church no longer teaches that God lives, that He is a personal God who hears and answers prayers as I was taught as a child in my Sunday School classes and at my mother's knee. My church no longer teaches the basic concepts of Christianity—the reality of the holy atonement, the resurrection, the final judgment. My church no longer teaches these basic truths. I say to you, I still believe them. The pulpit of my church has become a pipeline to collectivism—teaching the social gospel, but denying the basic concepts of Christianity. I didn't leave my church, my church left me."

Yes, only an omniscient God and prophets whom He inspired could have foreseen this age of unbelief and the need for an additional witness of Christ for our modern age.

How does the Book of Mormon provide a second witness of the mission of Jesus Christ to the Bible? Book of Mormon prophets testified hundreds of years before the birth of Jesus that He would be born of a virgin named Mary and that His name would be Jesus Christ. Long before Jesus was born these prophets outlined His public ministry and declared that He would work mighty miracles, such as "healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases." (Mosiah 3:5.)

Though He was God, and that by virtue of the fact that God our Heavenly Father was His literal Father, the Book of Mormon testifies that He was susceptible to mortal infirmities: temptation, pain, hunger, thirst, and fatigue.

The Book of Mormon tells of the Messiah's great atoning sacrifice. It describes how Jesus willingly suffered the pains of all men and specifies the conditions by which His atonement may bring us to a remission of our sins, a peace of conscience, and great joy.

Many years before His first coming, Book of Mormon prophets foretold that He would be rejected by His nation, the Jews; that He would be scourged, crucified, and buried. But these same prophets also foretold that He would arise again from the dead, and because of His resurrection, all mankind will be resurrected—every mortal creature. These prophets testified that eventually Jesus will come again to judge the world.

The Book of Mormon is a second witness of Jesus Christ because it tells the account of His ministry to the people on this continent following His ascension in Jerusalem. Permit me to share with you the beautiful account of His glorious appearance to these people:

[The people of Nephi] cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they thought it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people saying:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world.

And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come. (3 Nephi 11:8-15.)

The Book of Mormon is a second witness of Jesus Christ because it contains the plain and precious truths of His gospel. Within this sacred record is the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ; in other words, the Lord's requirements for salvation. Here are the Savior's words: "And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God. And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned. . . . Ye must repent, and be baptized in my name, and become as a little child, or ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. . . . verily, I say unto you, . . . this is my doctrine." (3 Nephi 11:33-34, 38-39.)

Perhaps you have questions such as these: What is the purpose of baptism? What is the correct mode of baptism? Who has the authority to baptize? How does one become a member of the Church of Jesus Christ? By what name is the Church of Jesus Christ to be called? How does one obtain a forgiveness of his sins? What is the state of the soul between death and the resurrection? Will I live again? What is the state of a resurrected being? How can I receive a fullness of joy?

Within the pages of the Book of Mormon are answers to these questions. It is for this reason that an angel of God told Joseph Smith that "the fulness of the everlasting gospel was contained in it." (Joseph Smith—History 1:34.) Now perhaps you can understand why Joseph Smith said that "a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book."

The question is sometimes asked, Are Mormons Christians? We declare the divinity of Jesus Christ. We look to Him as the only source of our salvation. We strive to live His teachings, and we look forward to the time when He shall come again on this earth to rule and reign as King of kings and Lord of lords. In the words of a Book of Mormon prophet, we say to men today, "There shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." (Mosiah 3:17.)

A second theme emphasized in the Book of Mormon is that the land we live upon, this land of North and South America, is a land choice above all other lands.

One thing becomes apparent as we study the scriptures. That is, God has had a hand in the history of mankind. His purpose is to bring to pass the immortality of all of His children and the eternal life of those of His children who willingly comply with His commandments. You will notice that I have made a distinction between the terms immortality and eternal life. Immortality is a free gift to all men because of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Eternal life is the quality of life enjoyed by our Heavenly Father. Those who fully comply with His commandments receive the promise that they will have this quality of life. "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting [eternal] life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life." (John 3:36.) The great purpose of God throughout the history of mankind has been to bring His children to eternal life. It is a purpose motivated out of the infinite love that He has for all of us, His children.

Because of His infinite love, God has seen fit from the very beginning of this earth to give men commandments. These commandments were designed to exalt man from His fallen state to a state of righteousness and joy. They were also designed to bring about domestic accord in homes, communities, and nations. History has shown that when individuals and nations have kept the commandments of God they have been happy, prosperous, and most blessed; when they have departed from those commandments, pride, strife, contention, and warfare have resulted. There have been times in the history of mankind when nations have brought down upon themselves the judgments of God, and this because they deliberately chose a course contrary to God's purposes and their own happiness. Famine, disease, and war—that terrifying triad of human tragedy—have led many great civilizations to ruin and oblivion. The history of mankind is a testament of this fact.

Every American citizen should understand God's purpose for this great nation in which we live, and how we may avert the decadence and destruction suffered by other mighty empires. Here is what the Book of Mormon says about the founding of this nation and how we may survive as a free country.

The national celebration of our country's two-hundredth birthday has afforded The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints a wonderful opportunity to reaffirm to the people of this nation the origin, purpose, and destiny of the United States of America. You may be interested in some of our efforts to instill this message among our own as well as others not of our faith.

As a part of our nation's Bicentennial celebration, the Tabernacle Choir toured the east coast, performing in Philadelphia, Boston, New York, and Washington, D.C. On July 3, 1976, the choir performed at the Kennedy Center to an overflow audience, with the president of the United States in attendance. Never have I felt so proud of this beloved country—and stirred with emotion—as when the choir performed those songs eulogizing our heritage and freedom.

For members of our church, an attractive publication was prepared for all Latter-day Saint families in the United States. This manual contained four lessons, designed especially for parents to teach their children in family home evenings the purpose and destiny of this land. In a recent report given to the Church by its Bicentennial chairman, it was reported that "the demand for this manual far exceeded our supply. In homes across America beautiful lessons have been taught on the purpose and destiny of this land." (L. Tom Perry, Ensign, November 1976, p. 39.)

For persons not of our church we have published a handsome booklet entitled God's Hand in the Founding of America. Three messages were emphasized within the pages of this attractive brochure: (1) that America's earliest history began more than 2,000 years ago and is contained in an ancient and sacred book called the Book of Mormon; (2) that the discovery of America and the establishment of the United States were part of God's plan and were brought about by men who were inspired and guided by God; and (3) that America's future destiny is dependent on the righteousness and morality of her families.

As a church, we are earnest about this message. We are most concerned about trends within this nation which, if unchecked and continued in their course, will lead us to the oblivion of former great civilizations. I speak of the trend of modern idolatry in our midst where men seem to venerate their possessions more than they do their God, who made this abundance possible. I speak of the trend of insatiable coveting where each person and group—business, labor, minority groups, and individuals—wants more and more but gives less and less. I speak of the desecration of the Sabbath day, which has degenerated into a national holiday for recreation. I speak of the break-up of families, where divorce has become an acceptable pattern in our society. As a church, we are appalled at the number of children who are left to grow up without both mother and father.

Yes, I speak of the moral permissiveness that has taken root in our midst. Today sex is all but deified, and yet is promenaded before our youth in its most explicit, coarsest, and debasing forms. Truly, in the words of Isaiah, we live in a time when men "call evil good, and good evil." (Isaiah 5:20.)

Yes, the Book of Mormon declares America to be "a land choice above all other lands," but we must remember the contingency of our freedom and prosperity. It is that we worship the God of this land—even Jesus Christ—and keep His commandments, or we shall meet the same fate of civilizations that have gone before us!

This nation is God-ordained for a glorious purpose. It is ordained as an ensign of liberty to all other nations. That liberty will be maintained as we keep the commandments of God. Righteousness, as the Book of Mormon states, is the indispensable ingredient to liberty.

A third theme evident in the Book of Mormon is that God has preserved throughout history a promised people, children of promise, because of special covenants that they or their progenitors have willfully made with God.

The history of a covenant people is recorded in the Bible and begins with Abraham. Therein we are told of special promises that God made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. These promises subsequently were given to Jacob's twelve sons. Most are well-acquainted with the promise made to one of those sons, Judah, that the Messiah should come through his lineage. We are less familiar with the promise given to another of Jacob's sons, Joseph. If you will carefully read chapter 49 of Genesis, you will find these great promises given to Joseph and his posterity:

The Book of Mormon tells the account of a colony of Israelites descended from Joseph, who left Jerusalem before its great destruction during the Babylonian siege under King Nebuchadnezzar. It tells how these descendants of Joseph "came over a wall," a metaphoric expression denoting a barrier to them. That barrier was the great ocean between the continents of Asia and America. The Book of Mormon tells how they were guided by the hand of the Lord to the land of America and how Joseph's posterity became very numerous on the land until they filled it with a mighty nation.

The patriarch to this family of Joseph in America was named Lehi, who said of himself, "I am a descendant of Joseph who was carried captive into Egypt. . . . great were the covenants of the Lord which he made unto Joseph." (2 Nephi 3:4.) He attempted to instruct all his posterity in these covenants. His eldest sons rebelled, but his younger sons kept the covenants. The division that occurred in Lehi's own family was in miniature what happened to Lehi's descendants who became a nation. Those who followed the dissident faction of Lehi's family called themselves Lamanites after the eldest son, Laman. Those who followed the more righteous branch of his family were called Nephites after the younger son, Nephi. The Book of Mormon chronicles many of the fratricidal wars that took place between these two groups and that eventually led to the destruction of their civilization when both factions grew in wickedness.

The American Indians are descendants, a remnant, from this once advanced civilization. Theirs is a noble and exalted heritage, a heritage that goes back over 2500 years on this promised land. Through the Book of Mormon their great heritage comes to light. Scholars have even come to recognize that the pre-Columbian Indian culture was far more advanced than historians had previously acknowledged. An example of this recognition is the work of the late Felix S. Cohen, prominent lawyer, philosopher, and recognized expert on Indian culture. In his essay "Americanizing the White Man," published in the American Scholar (Spring 1952, pp. 177-91), Mr. Cohen summarizes the contributions of the Indian to our modern society.

In the field of agriculture, Mr. Cohen states that "four-sevenths of our national farm produce is of plants domesticated or created by Indian botanists of pre-Columbian times." Their gifts to us in agriculture are corn, tobacco, white and sweet potatoes, beans, peanuts, tomatoes, pumpkins, chocolate, American cotton, and rubber.

In the field of medicine, the Indians' gift constituted, until a few years ago, "most of America's contributions to medical science." These are quinine, cocaine, witch hazel, oil of wintergreen, petroleum jelly, arnica, and others. Physicians and botanists "have not yet discovered a medicinal herb not known to the Indians."

But it is in the area of political science that the Indian may have made his greatest contribution. Thomas Jefferson freely acknowledged his debt to his Indian mentors. The fear in Jefferson's day was the aggrandizement of government power. Which is more preferable, the freedom of the Indian society or the oppression of European governments? Jefferson preferred the freedom of the Indian society. Then the question, Which submits man to the greatest evil? And Jefferson answered: "One who has seen both conditions of existence" would say the European form has the greatest evil. "The sheep are happier of themselves, than under the care of the wolves. It will be said that great societies cannot exist without government. The savages, therefore, break them into small ones."

And so the pattern of states within a nation that we call a federation of states, "the habit of treating chiefs as servants of the people instead of as masters, the insistence that the community must respect the diversity of their dreams—all these," according to Mr. Cohen, "were part of the American way of life before Columbus landed."

Before the destruction of the civilization from which the American Indian descended, Jesus Christ came to them. He said to these Israelites, "Ye are they of whom I said: other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice. . . ." (3 Nephi 15:21.) These other sheep did hear His voice. He taught them His gospel. He foretold the fate that would befall their descendants, the Indians, many, many generations later.

"I have caused my people who are of the house of Israel to be smitten, and to be afflicted, and to be slain, and to be cast out from among [the Gentiles], and to become hated by them, and to be a hiss and a byword among them." (3 Nephi 16:9.)

In this remarkable prophecy, Jesus foretold not only what would happen to the Indian, but the sequence in which it would take place, namely, they would be afflicted, they would be slain, and they would be cast out. Modern history today verifies the accuracy of this prophecy.

This prophecy states that the Indian would first be afflicted. What was the nature of that affliction? Before the white man came to this continent, North America was almost totally free from infectious disease. There was no smallpox, no measles, no mumps, no cholera, no diphtheria or tuberculosis. It was only after the white man came that the Indian contracted these diseases. Smallpox was the most deadly of these afflictions. More Indians succumbed to smallpox than fell casualty in all their wars with the United States. The Cheyennes lost half their tribe from smallpox. The Mandans were almost exterminated. The Crees, it is said, lost seven thousand. A quarter of the Pawnees were killed by the epidemic, and estimates of deaths among the Blackfoot run as high as eight thousand.

Later, thousands of Indians died of respiratory diseases brought by low resistance to white man's diseases. This was the period when pneumonia and tuberculosis took such a toll that the Indians were called the "vanishing Americans."

The prophecy by the Savior further states that the Indian would be slain. Between 1800 and 1860, it is estimated the Indian population decreased from one million to 44,000. The figures are rough estimates, but they do gauge the great losses sustained by the Indian nations owing to disease, wars, and government policies. Yes, thousands of Indians were slain, chiefly through massacres and the Indian wars. Remember some of these wars and famous Indian Chiefs: Black Hawk's War; the Little Crow uprising; the Apache and Navajo wars; Chief Crazy Horse and the Sioux battles; Sitting Bull and the Battle of Little Big Horn; Chief Joseph and the Nez Perce; the Wounded Knee massacres.

Last, the prophecy by Jesus declared that the Indian would be cast out from among the Gentiles. From 1778 to 1871 it is said that the United States government signed and ratified 371 treaties with the Indian nations, and each was broken or rescinded. The most infamous of these laws was the Indian Removal Act of 1830. American society swept to the Mississippi River and completely surrounded the five civilized tribes, who were allowed to live in peace for a time; but then agitation against them increased, and finally by the Act of 1830, these people were removed from their homes to the land west of the Mississippi. As the Indians were evicted from their homes—"cast out," to use the phrase of the Lord's prophecy—thousands of the old, the weak, and the young perished. The five "civilized" tribes that made this death march, called the "Trail of Tears," were the Cherokees, Choctaws, Creeks, Chickasaws, and Seminoles. It is said that one quarter of the tribe of Cherokees, 4,000 in number, died in the march.

These "civilized tribes," so-called because they lived in houses and built farms, were settled in Oklahoma, with the exception of the Seminoles. This was to be their territory, never to be preempted by the whites. Despite this promise, however, Oklahoma became the forty-sixth state of the Union, and the Indians were pushed out or placed on reservations. When oil was discovered in that state, ironically the richest deposits were discovered in the territory that had been given to the Indians. Because their land had been usurped, it was necessary to take their claim into federal court. The attorney who represented the case for the Indians was Ernest L. Wilkinson, a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and past president of Brigham Young University. The settlement was one of the largest in legal history and made some of the Indian people in Oklahoma among the richest in the nation.

In spite of afflictions, deaths, and inequities done to the Indian people over the years, yet they remain children of promise. Listen to their promise contained in the Book of Mormon: ". . . it shall come to pass that they [the Indians] shall be driven and scattered by the Gentiles; and after they have been driven and scattered by the Gentiles, behold, then will the Lord remember the covenant which he made unto Abraham and unto all the house of Israel." (Mormon 5:20.) ". . . then shall the remnant [among whom are the American Indians] . . . know concerning us [the Book of Mormon civilization], how that we came out from Jerusalem. . . . the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be declared among them; wherefore, they shall be restored unto the knowledge of their fathers, and also to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which was had among their fathers. And then shall they rejoice; for they shall know that it is a blessing unto them from the hand of God. (2 Nephi 30:4-6.)

"Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed [meaning the modern remnant of Israel] . . . forever, for the lands of their inheritance; for it is a choice land, . . . above all other lands. . . ." (2 Nephi 10:19.)

Such is the promise made by God to this favored remnant of Joseph today.

But what of the Gentiles, descendants of the European colonists who migrated to this land? What is their promise? Of these favored people, those who populate our great land today, the Savior prophesied: ". . . if they will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance. . . ." (3 Nephi 21:22.)

I humbly testify that God has mercifully fulfilled this promise to the Gentiles. His church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has been established among them. Thankfully, thousands have come into the Church where they, too, will receive the blessings promised by God to Abraham's posterity.

Humbly I witness that I know the certainty of the truth of this message. I testify to the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon as being the word of God. Jesus Christ does live, and He will return again to this earth. A special destiny awaits those who are righteous and will abide by His covenants.
