Ezra Taft Benson, This Nation Shall Endure ( 1977)

XVIII

This Nation Shall Endure

"Let us rededicate ourselves to the lofty principles and practices of those wise men whom God raised up to give us our priceless freedom. Our liberties, our salvation, our well-being as a church and as a nation depend upon it."

I love this great nation of which we are a part. To me it is not just another nation, not just a member of the family of nations. It is a great and glorious nation with a divine mission, brought into being under the inspiration of heaven. It is truly a land choice above all others. I thank God for the knowledge we have regarding the prophetic history and the spiritual foundation of this great land of America.

When I contemplate the great events that have transpired here, going way back to the days when our first parents were placed in the Garden of Eden, and recall that this garden was here in America;

When I contemplate that it was here also that Adam met with a body of great high priests at Adamondi-Ahman shortly before his death and gave them his final blessing, and that to that same spot he is to return again to meet with the leaders of his people, his children;

When I contemplate that here in this land will be established the New Jerusalem, that here in this land Zion will be built;

When I contemplate that prophets of God anciently served here in this land, and that the resurrected Christ appeared to them;

When I contemplate that the greatest of all visions, the coming of God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, to the boy prophet, took place in this land;

When I contemplate all these marvelous things, my heart fills with gratitude that I am privileged to live here, and that I have the honor and pleasure not only of serving in the Church, but also of having served in the government of this great land. I consider it an honor and a privilege.

I am grateful for the Founding Fathers of this land and for the freedom they have vouchsafed to us. I am grateful that they recognized, as great leaders of this nation have always recognized, that the freedom we enjoy did not originate with the Founding Fathers; that these glorious principles, this great boon of freedom and respect for the dignity of man, came as a gift from the Creator. The Founding Fathers, it is true, welded together with superb genius the safeguards of these freedoms. It was necessary, however, for them to turn to the scriptures, to religion, in order to have their great experiment make sense to them. And so our freedom is God-given. It antedates the Founding Fathers. It is an eternal principle. It was a principle at issue in the spirit world.

I am grateful that the God of heaven saw fit to put His stamp of approval upon the Constitution and to indicate that it had come into being through wise men whom He raised up unto this very purpose. He asked the Saints, even in the dark days of their persecution and hardship, to continue to seek for redress from their enemies, "according," He said, "to the laws and constitution, . . . which I have suffered [or caused] to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh. . . ." (D&C 101:77.) And then He made this most impressive declaration: "And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 101:80.)

It is gratifying that the constitutions in many of the other lands of our neighbors in the Americas are patterned very much after this divinely appointed constitution, which the God of heaven directed in the founding of this great nation. It is not any wonder, therefore, that Joseph Smith the Prophet, a truly great American patriot, said, referring to the Constitution, "[It] is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner. . . ." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 147.)

President Brigham Young declared prophetically, "When the day comes in which the Kingdom of God will bear rule, the flag of the United States will proudly flutter unsullied on the flagstaff of liberty and equal rights, without a spot to sully its fair surface; the glorious flag our fathers have bequeathed to us will then be unfurled to the breeze by those who have power to hoist it aloft and defend its sanctity." (Journal of Discourses 2:317.) But, President Young asks, "How long will it be before the words of the Prophet Joseph will be fulfilled? He said if the Constitution of the United States were saved at all it must be done by these people. It will not be many years before these words come to pass." (JD 12:204.) These words were spoken April 8, 1868, over one hundred years ago.

Yes, we have a rich heritage, but may I remind you that nations ofttimes sow the seeds of their own destruction even while enjoying unprecedented prosperity, even before reaching the zenith or the peak of their power. I think history clearly indicates that this is often the case. When it appears that all is well, ofttimes the very seeds of destruction are sown, sometimes unwittingly. Most of the great civilizations of the world have not been conquered from without until they have destroyed themselves from within by sowing these seeds.

It is my conviction that God does now look with favor, and has looked with favor, upon this government, which He established by wise men. It is also my firm conviction that His protective hand is still over the United States of America. I know, too, that if we will keep the commandments of God—live as He has directed and does now direct, through His prophets—we will continue to have His protecting hand over us. But we must be true to eternal verities, the great Christian virtues that God has revealed. Then, and only then, will we be safe as a nation and as individuals. God grant that the faithfulness of the Latter-day Saints will provide the balance of power to save this nation in time of crisis.

In 1973 the First Presidency said: "We urge members of the Church and all Americans to begin now to reflect more intently on the meaning and importance of the Constitution, and of adherence to its principles. . . . In these challenging days, when there are so many influences which would divert us, there is a need to rededicate ourselves to the lofty principles and practices of our founding fathers. . . ." (Church News, September 22, 1973, p. 3.)

Let us not permit these admonitions of our living prophets to fall on deaf ears. Let us, as they direct, learn the meaning and importance of our God-ordained Constitution. Let us rededicate ourselves to the lofty principles and practices of those wise men whom God raised up to give us our priceless freedom. Our liberties, our salvation, our well-being as a church and as a nation depend on it.

This nation does have a spiritual foundation—a prophetic history. Every true Latter-day Saint should love the United States of America, the most generous nation under heaven, the Lord's base of operations in these last days.

May we do all in our power to strengthen and safeguard this base and increase our freedom. This nation will endure. It may cost blood, but it is God-ordained for a glorious purpose. We must never forget that the gospel message we bear to the world is to go forth to the world from this nation, and that gospel message can prosper only in an atmosphere of freedom. We must maintain and strengthen our freedom in this blessed land.

May God bless America and preserve our divine Constitution and the Republic that He established thereunder.
