No specific author, Hope ( 1994)

SEEK HIGHER FLIGHT LEVELS

ELDER ROBERT E. WELLS

There are laws irrevocably decreed in the heavens before the foundation of the earth upon which all blessings are predicated. When we receive a blessing, it is because we are obeying those laws. (See D&C 130:20.) There are some laws which are apparently higher in a certain sense than others.

Let me start with a physical law—the law of gravity. If I drop something heavier than air, it falls to the earth. I have been flying small aircraft for some forty years. Aircraft are heavier than air. Some are heavier than cars, some heavier than locomotives. They fly because of a higher law—the law of aerodynamics, the law involving a certain amount of speed coupled with the shape of the lifting surface to overcome gravity. In a sense, it is a higher law.

I fly two kinds of airplanes: those that can cruise anyplace between sea level and about the height of the Rocky Mountains, and those with more powerful engines that can fly above the weather. It is not a pleasant experience to struggle along in bad weather in the kind of aircraft that does not have the power to go up on top. You are there in the dark clouds, the turbulence, the lightning, the thunder, the rain, the hail. It is a beautiful experience, however, to fly a powerful aircraft that will climb quickly through the weather and clouds. As you break through on top, there is glorious, beautiful sunshine and blue sky. And looking down, that which just moments before was dark and threatening is now just lovely and delightful white cloud tops.

SEEK HIGHER LEVELS OF LIFE

Let's apply the concept of climbing above the turbulence to life: Seek the higher flight levels of life. There are many circumstances in our lives. Some of you may think you are as high as you need to go. I am aware of a returned missionary who thinks he has already achieved a superbly high spiritual level. He probably thinks the rest of his life will be anticlimactic. Not so! We should all strive continually for a higher flight level.

There are those recently married who are enjoying the beautiful new love of their lives. Yet they can look forward to even higher levels of loving and living. There are those who are successful in any field—the businessman, the graduate. And there are those who are not enjoying so much success. There is the scholar who didn't get the scholarship. There is the beauty pageant contestant who didn't make it to the finals. There are those who feel they are too tall or too short, too thin or too fat. There are those who are not quite satisfied with all of these circumstances in their lives. There are the lonely, the lost, the disappointed, the hurt, the wounded. All may find a way to the higher levels of life so they can be above the storms of discouragement and dismay. All can climb to higher levels.

GOD GAVE US HIGHER COMMANDMENTS

Let me illustrate some of the higher commandments of life as I feel they were explained by the Savior. The Savior, in the Sermon on the Mount, used the illustration of higher flight levels, or principles. Allow me to make some liberal translations of the scriptures.

In the Sermon on the Mount the Savior might have said, "Thou hast heard from the prophets of old, thou shalt not kill. But allow me to give unto thee a higher law—the law of fellowship, the law of brotherhood. Be not even angry with thy brother." (Cf. Matt. 5:21-22.) This is a higher concept that has the power to lift us above the storms, the turbulences, the trials, and the tribulations of life.

We all know of the additional interpretations of anger—that of being offended, that of criticizing others, that of being bitter. Any of these feelings are like poison to our spirit. The classic illustration is the case of a rattlesnake. If a rattlesnake comes and bites us, what should we do? Should we look for a stick to punish the rattlesnake, or should we try to get the poison out?

Any negative feelings tend to keep us in lower levels of life. We must lift and free ourselves from those things and truly live the spirit of brotherhood and love. Perhaps you have been a roommate or a missionary companion and have experienced the silent treatment or have given the silent treatment. Lift yourself to a higher level of relationship with others.

The Savior might have said, "Thou hast heard from the prophets of old, thou shalt not commit adultery. Allow me to give you a higher law. Thou shalt not even look at a person of the opposite sex to lust after them lest thou hast committed adultery in thy heart." (Cf. Matt. 5:27-28.) He was looking ahead perhaps to this day and age where there is lustful looking, where there are improper magazines and inappropriate movies. Lift yourself to a higher level. It is possible to become addicted. Learn to control thoughts. Learn also that virtue and chastity can be lost piecemeal, a little bit at a time, by lack of thought control, by lack of proper understanding of this higher law of the Savior.

The Savior said, "Thou hast heard from the prophets of old, thou shalt not forswear thyself. But I say unto you, swear not at all. Let your language be, 'Yea, yea' and 'Nay, nay.'" (Cf. Matt. 5:33-37.)

President Heber J. Grant was told by his doctor that he needed to take up a sport which would put him out of doors and give him fresh air and exercise. The doctor even suggested the game of golf. President Grant took some lessons, felt he was in condition to play a round of golf, and invited some friends to be with him.

On the first tee his friends insisted that he go first. He put the little white ball up on the little wooden tee and practiced a couple of swings. He was really going to show them what he could do. With a mighty swing he missed the ball. He stepped back again and took a couple more practice swings. This time he was really going to hit it.

For the second time the club head missed the ball. This time President Grant was embarrassed and turned a little red. He stepped back for more practice swings. This time he was going to knock it a country mile, but the wind from the club head caused the ball to roll off the tee. He was frustrated. He turned to his friends and said, "I never swear, but there are moments, and where I spit the grass will never grow again." All of us can find an appropriate response to moments of frustration and live that higher kind of law.

The Savior said, "Thou hast heard, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth"—the law of retribution. He gave them the higher law of turning the other cheek. "If they ask for your coat, give them your cloak also. If they ask you to go one mile, go the second mile." (Cf. Matt. 5:38-41.) This is a beautiful indication of how we should react to any situation in which we are asked to do something.

And the Lord said, "Thou hast heard, love thy friend but hate thine enemy. I say unto you, love thine enemy, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you." (Cf. Matt. 5:43-44.)

In almost any of the commandments we can find a higher interpretation. For example, consider the last of the Ten Commandments—thou shalt not covet. I can imagine the Savior saying, "I'll give you, in this, the last dispensation, a higher law, so that you won't even think of coveting: the welfare plan. Be self-sufficient, live within your means, have a year's supply of food on hand." The welfare plan is a higher law than the tenth commandment.

A higher interpretation of "love thy father and thy mother" might be, "Also love thy forefathers and do thy genealogy work." Another interpretation might be, "Form an eternal family of thine own—eternal marriage in the temple." For almost any of the commandments, we can find a higher interpretation.

GO BEYOND OBEDIENCE

Let's examine the principle of obedience. We've all heard the parable of the father with the two sons. He said to the first, "Go to the vineyard and work." The first son said, "No," but then repented and went. The father said the same thing to the second son, who replied, "Yes," but then forgot or chose not to go. (Cf. Matt. 21:28-30.)

Now let's use the parable of the father with the five sons. All of the sons were asked to go to the vineyard to work. The first son said, "No." Rebellious, ornery, he didn't go. The second son said, "No," but then afterwards repented and went. The third son said, "Yes, I'll go," but then became distracted and didn't go. The fourth son said, "Yes," and he went. A great son, a wonderful son. He did a good job. The fifth son, however, sought a higher interpretation of the law of obedience. Before the father got to him, he went to his father and said, "Dad, I've gone to the vineyard. I've pruned, weeded, fertilized, watered, fixed the fence and gate. I brought the tractor back and put in the garage. Dad, what else can I do?" The fifth son understood the higher interpretation of the law of obedience—of not needing to be commanded in all things. He had initiative and resourcefulness.

I had an instructor in the navy, a fine man who had been a test pilot. One of his responsibilities was to test a fighter plane that was important to the factory. If they didn't sell it, they would go bankrupt. It was also important to the navy, which needed a quality aircraft to operate on aircraft carriers. In those days there were no electronic instruments aboard. He had to fly the aircraft, the prototype, and then tell the owners of the factory and the admirals whether it passed the test. They watched him take off and climb. After a long period of time he returned, landed, and climbed out of the aircraft.

All of the engineers, designers, owners, and admirals were there to hear him say, "As you saw, the aircraft jumped off the ground in less than the required distance." They all nodded. "Time to thirty thousand feet was so many minutes and so many seconds." Everybody ooed and ahhed. "It climbs like a homesick angel." Tremendous! "Speed at full throttle, straight and level, exceeded the calculations of the engineers by 14 percent." Everyone was impressed and the engineers were calculating how much that must have been. "On a power dive the wings didn't come off, nothing bent." But then he said, "It didn't pass the test. When I put it through the maneuvers which a fighter plane must be able to perform—when I tried to do the snap rolls, the loops, the evasive maneuvers—this aircraft would not respond to the controls. It was like a mule that gets the bit in its mouth and wants to go straight. Nothing I could do would make it turn fast enough. You'll have to make larger, more sensitive control surfaces so that the aircraft will be obedient to the pilot."

I've seen missionaries in the mission field who are very intelligent and have great talent and tremendous ability but fail because they aren't responsive to the controls. They aren't quite obedient. They don't understand that the rules are, first, to protect them from Satan and, second, to bless them with success. There are many interpretations, higher interpretations, of the law of obedience.

BECOME TRULY UNSELFISH

Consider the law of unselfishness. Let me use an interpretation of the parable of the prodigal son. You all know the story of the errant son who wasted away the inheritance he asked of his father. He came back tragically humbled. The father saw him from far off and loved him, hugged him, and sent the servants off to dress him with rings, robes, and shoes. He even declared a festival in his honor and killed the fatted calf. The older brother saw the party and asked what had happened. When he heard, he was upset and went to his father and said, "Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandments: and yet thou never gavest me a [party] that I might make merry with my friends." (Luke 15:29.)

The father's explanation was not a rebuke, just a simple explanation. "Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. . . . [But] this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found." (Luke 15:31-32.)

Imagine with me a higher interpretation of the story. I can now see the older son saying, "Father, forgive me. Wouldn't it be a good idea to divide my inheritance with my brother who has returned?" Can't you see the increased joy of that father, who responds, "This, my other son that was lost in selfishness, is found again." I can see him calling the servants and saying, "Get my finest clothes, and my finest rings, and my finest shoes, and put them on this my elder son. Kill another fatted calf and call all of his friends, let us have a great party together. We who were lost to each other are found again."

SEEK TRUE PEACE

There is a higher interpretation of the principle of peace. The Savior is the Prince of Peace. Great interpretations have been given to that title. One of the finest I have ever heard was by President Harold B. Lee. President Joseph Fielding Smith had just died. President Lee was now the prophet. His first major meeting as the prophet was in Mexico at an area conference. In his first press conference as prophet, held there, he was asked a trap question.

"What is your position with regard to the Vietnam involvement—the Vietnam War?" It was a hot political issue at the time. If President Lee said, "I'm in favor of being there," the reporters would headline it, "How strange, a religious leader in favor of war." If President Lee said, "I'm against it," they would say, "How strange, a religious leader who pretends to support his government is against his own government."

It was a difficult question. President Lee's answer was inspired. It relied on a higher interpretation of the law. He said, "We, together with the entire Christian world, abhor war." Then he said, "The Savior, however, said that in the world there would be tribulations. He said, 'In me ye might have peace.'" (John 16:33.) President Lee went on to say, "The Savior said, 'Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you.' (John 14:27.) The Savior was not talking about the kind of peace that you can win with armies and bombs and rockets. He was talking about the kind of peace a person can have in his own heart, no matter what kind of tribulations there may be in the world." President Lee so won the understanding and sympathy of those worldly reporters that they gave good coverage to the conference and excellent coverage to him as a religious leader. From him they learned the higher interpretation.

THE WAY UP CAN BE THE WAY DOWN

There is another aspect of the higher law: The Lord's way is not always our way. The parable of the Pharisee and the publican illustrates this. The Savior observed two men who entered the temple to pray. The Pharisee said, "Thank God I'm not as other men are. I fast twice a week, and I tithe all I possess." Today he would have added, "I observe the Word of Wisdom, and I do my home teaching. Look what a great man I am. I'm thankful I'm not as other men are." The publican, the tax collector—very much looked down upon in those days—prayed, "God, be merciful to me a sinner." The Savior went on to say, "The publican, the second, is justified, rather than the Pharisee. For every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." (Cf. Luke 18:10-14.)

Allow me a personal interpretation. I fear there are too many self-righteous, holier-than-thou, better-than-thou in our ranks. I see too many who tend to look down upon other religions and other religious leaders. Some feel we have a particular corner on spirituality. We need to give more Christian love to those of other religions—more respect, more attention.

Although born and raised in the Church, I went to a Catholic university at the age of seventeen—straight from BYU to Gonzaga University in Spokane, Washington. Every professor of mine was a Jesuit priest who wore the black full-length cassock. Every one held a Ph.D. And every one was a great Christian gentleman. I went there scared to death, the only Latter-day Saint boy on the entire campus. But they didn't ridicule my church, or me. I came to see them as spiritual leaders who were making tremendous sacrifices in their own lives.

In South America I saw many Protestant missionaries living in the jungles, doing a magnificent work, sacrificing themselves and their families—their entire lives. They don't have eighteen-month or even three-year missions—they are out there for a lifetime in the jungles. They are to be honored and respected for the work they do.

I had many Jewish clients in the years I was in international banking, and I never lost money on a loan to anyone of the Jewish faith. Every one of them paid.

In 1943, during World War II, the SS Dorchester, a troop ship, was torpedoed with nine hundred souls aboard in the north Atlantic in wintertime. It went down so fast that only two hundred and fifty or so survived. It was evident that not everyone was going to be able to get into the lifeboats. There were four chaplains on board: a Jewish rabbi, a Catholic priest, and two Protestant ministers. The survivors said the chaplains were seen helping others into the lifeboats. Then they were seen linking their arms together, the four of them bowing their heads in prayer, as the ship went under. There's a chapel in Philadelphia built in honor of those four chaplains. The motto of the chapel is "Unity without uniformity." That's a lofty spiritual goal for all of us.

The way up is down. King Benjamin said it beautifully. "If ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants." (Mosiah 2:21.) Have a lively sense of your own guilt, Mosiah said. (See Mosiah 2:38.) Now, we don't need to have a lively guilt complex. If it's doing that to you, it's wrong. He goes on to say that a saint is meek and humble. Be aware of your own nothingness. "Remember . . . the greatness of God, and your own nothingness." (Mosiah 4:11.)

GET RID OF NEGATIVE FEELINGS

In order to climb up through the storms and the turbulence of life, it is necessary to lighten the load. Many of us have excess baggage consisting of guilt. In the process of repentance, confession is necessary. Get rid of jealousy. It is a poison to the spirit. Get rid of contention of any kind, usually caused by selfish pride—"I want it done my way." There is even a song about doing it my way. That doesn't get rid of contention. Get rid of rivalries, get rid of criticizing each other, get rid of negative thoughts, get rid of petty arguments.

Whenever we speak of rising above ourselves, rising to higher spiritual levels, there is a usual list of things to do. The scriptures certainly lift us to higher levels. Prayer is definitely a necessity for rising appropriately—not only traditional prayer, but frequent, heartfelt prayer with your eyes open while you are driving, or while you are walking and enjoying beautiful things. Talk to the Lord. Learn to pray with your eyes open. Learn also to serve others. Attend church, be worthy of a temple recommend, listen to beautiful spiritual music. Establish proper priorities. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness." (Matt. 6:33.)

Try also to have the proper motivation. I see all too often out in the mission field an element of ambition. "I want to be the assistant to the president." I see it sometimes in those who say, "Gee, I'd like to be the first bishop in my family or the first stake president in my family." Misplaced ambition will never lift you to spiritual heights. The only ambition in the kingdom that does lift one up is to have "an eye single to the glory of God." (D&C 4:5.) In other words, if you're looking for the glory of the Lord, and you are working hard, then all things will be in place in appropriate ways.

UNDERSTAND THE COVENANTS

Also necessary for rising to a higher spiritual level are covenants—the covenants and the ordinances in which we enter into a contract with our Heavenly Father. There is a series of contracts that we don't speak very much about. I refer to temple covenants.

In D&C 52 we find instruction that I believe makes a beautiful statement about the temple. "I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be deceived; for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the nations." We are then told how to avoid Satan's deceptions. "He that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me [and, I say, protected by the Lord against Satan] if he obey mine ordinances. He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God [and, I'm adding, protected by God against the maneuvers of Satan] if he obey mine ordinances." The temple covenants are the highest ordinances of this dispensation. (D&C 52:14-16.)

I learned celestial navigation when I was in the navy, but true navigation, to me, is Hugh Nibley's kind of navigation. He says, "When I go to the temple, I can take my bearings on the universe." Understand the temple and what those ordinances can do to lift you above the trials and tribulations and the storms of life.

SEEK SUPERIOR FRIENDSHIPS

Let's look at the higher law of self-control. We're here in this life to learn self-control—control of our appetites and passions. To move higher, we need to associate with higher-minded friends. All of us enjoy friends who put up with us regardless of our weaknesses. On the other hand, do you have friends who are keeping you from achieving your goals? We must ask ourselves the question and then do what is necessary to seek loftier levels. What do our friends do with their spare time? What is their language level? What kind of movies do they attend? How do they spend their money? Ask yourself these questions about your friends. President Kimball says, "Seek superior friendships."

LOOK AHEAD

What about coping with tragedy? All of us will face difficult circumstances in life—the death of a loved one, illness, the loss of jobs, failure in ambitions and aspirations. Each of us should look ahead and prepare for tragedy or unexpected reverses by helping others who suffer. Learn from observing the strengths and weaknesses of others. Involvement in Christlike service to others builds a reserve—a sort of investment—so that we can face tragedy when we are called on to do so. Accept normal grief. All of us are going to lose some of those who are near and dear to us. Consolation comes through the Holy Ghost. Anytime we fight against what the Lord has seen fit to bring about, anytime we struggle against it, we will not be able to receive the blessings of the Holy Ghost—the consolation, the comfort, the understanding. We need that understanding of drawing nearer to our Savior and to our Heavenly Father.

The habit of happiness leads one to a higher spiritual level. Make a habit of happiness. Rise above an inferiority complex, learn to cope with failure. We're living in a society that praises winning so much that sometimes we haven't prepared those who aren't going to be the gold-, silver-, and bronze-medal winners. It was interesting to watch the Olympics on one occasion. The gold-medal winner in one event was, of course, enthusiastic. The silver-medal winner, second in the entire world, was in tears. The bronze-medal winner was ecstatic. She hadn't expected to be there. Our reactions are all relative to our expectations, so learn the habit of coping with temporary failure. Ralph Waldo Emerson said, "A man's success is made up of progressive failures which he rises above, because he experiments and ventures every day. And the more falls he gets, the faster he moves on." In Argentina the gauchos say, "You're never a good rider until you've been thrown a few times."

Consider this statement: "Wisdom comes from good judgment, good judgment comes from experience, experience comes from poor judgment." Think about that.

CHANGE TO A HIGHER LEVEL

There are higher laws of love. The telestial level is: "I have to do it," and you do it out of fear. The terrestrial level is: "I ought to do it," and you do it out of a sense of duty. The celestial level is: "I want to do it," and you do it because of love. President McKay said, "Man is a spiritual being, a soul. There is something within man which urges him to rise above himself, to control his environment, to master the body and all things physical, to live in a higher and a more beautiful world."

Wherever we are, we can find the way to live at a higher level. This will take us above the storms and the turbulence and the problems of life. We can soar with the eagles. We are of divine origin. We are children of our Heavenly Father. Our Heavenly Father lives and He loves us and He hears our prayers and He answers them. Jesus the Christ lives, and He loves us.
