No specific author, Hope ( 1994)

TRUST IN THE LORD

ELDER GENE R. COOK

Some years ago a young man I'll call Raymond was in the seventh grade. He was a little taller than the other boys and did quite well in basketball and track. But as the year progressed, the basketball coach began saying to him, "Raymond, stay seated. You're no ball player. You're too clumsy." The next game, "No, we don't need you. You stay right there. You can't run. You can't shoot the ball. You're not fast enough." This process continued for a number of months.

The inevitable happened. Because of that continual negative conditioning, Raymond finally believed what he was being told about himself. He bought it hook, line, and sinker. He believed it so much that in coming years he did his best to avoid the gym altogether. He did not play basketball with the young men at Church or at school. He stopped running. He avoided sports and went through high school minimizing interaction of any kind in sports. The negative conditioning even followed him into his first year of college. Again he minimized his involvement to the smallest degree possible.

A year later he found himself on a mission in a distant land. In this particular country the buses did not stop to let people on or off. Passengers had to learn to do that on the run.

One afternoon Raymond and his companion were a block from the bus stop when they saw the bus coming. One of them said, "Run, Elder, run, or we'll miss our next appointment." To Raymond's great surprise, he beat his companion to the bus stop. That afternoon Raymond purposely arranged more runs for the bus. Each time he beat his companion.

He was shocked and amazed. He knew his companion had received a number of awards for being the fastest runner in all of northern Arizona.

It was then that Raymond suddenly realized that he'd wasted all those years. He could have excelled in athletics, but he had believed what someone else had sown in his mind.

Have you ever done that? Has someone convinced you that you are not good at music or mathematics or that you'll always be overweight? Each of us definitely received different gifts. But I am convinced that many of us are severely limited by the beliefs we have about ourselves.

Solomon said, "For as [a man] thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) And the Lord said, "And then, behold, according to your desires, yea, even according to your faith shall it be done unto you." (D&C 11:17.) You cannot rise higher than your own beliefs and thoughts about yourself. Jesus said, "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth." (Mark 9:23; emphasis added.)

One of the great processes you go through in life is to discover yourself, to find those gifts and capacities God has given you. He has given you great talents, the smallest part of which you have just begun to utilize. Trust the Lord to assist you in unlocking the door to those gifts. Some of us have created imaginary limits in our minds. There is literally a genius locked up inside each of us. Don't ever let anyone convince you otherwise.

May I tell you about an experience another young man faced? He was eighteen years of age, and I'll call him Raymond also. This young man found himself in a speech class at a university. He had received a scholarship and was anxious to maintain a good grade point average. For that reason his heart sank when, one day, the instructor announced, "Students, you will be pleased to know that in the last twenty-five years of teaching I've only given five A's."

Raymond tried to transfer from the class but was unable to do so. Through the months he received B's, B-'s, and once in a while, a B+, but never an A. He was disheartened. Thirty days from the conclusion of the term the teacher stood up and said to the class, "You each have one last talk to give. It will determine half of your grade. You must select an extremely controversial subject, talk for twenty-five minutes, make an actual defense of the subject the best you can, be prepared to receive a purposeful attack upon you and your subject after you have finished, and receive a written critique afterwards from each student in the class."

A great hush came over the class, mostly prompted by self-doubt and fear. Some thought of talking on communism versus democracy, racial issues, birth control—anything that would be controversial.

Numbers were drawn to determine who would speak first. Raymond drew number nine. As the days went by and he saw the grueling experience each speaker went through, fear mounted in his heart about what he should do.

He prayed about a topic, but he could not seem to settle on anything. It was now just two days until he was to give his speech, and he had nothing in writing. Yet one impression seemed to recur to him: "If you're looking for a controversial subject, choose the Book of Mormon. That's controversial enough."

Raymond was fearful, however, because he knew he was the only member of the Church in the class. He also knew that the teacher was an active member of a Protestant church. Throughout the entire semester as she taught passages from the Bible, she had made it clear that she regarded the Bible as the only revelation from God to man.

Raymond struggled with himself. He feared the whole idea might backfire. But he finally decided to do it. He had served a stake mission the previous summer and knew the missionary lesson depicting the Bible and Book of Mormon as scripture to the old and new worlds.

The day of his presentation he announced his subject as the Book of Mormon. A hush fell over the class. He began teaching with an academic approach, hoping to not offend. But about halfway through, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him and he thought to himself, "I can't just tell them historically about this book. I don't care what they think of me, or what happens to my grade. These folks are going to get it. The Book of Mormon is true. They ought to all know it."

From that point on he taught the lesson much as it was written to be given to investigators, bearing his testimony frequently. He even concluded in the name of Jesus Christ and said amen.

He then waited for the attack. To his astonishment, not a word was spoken by the students. The teacher tried to prompt them to attack. They would not. Not one word was spoken. Finally, in frustration, the teacher said, "Be seated, Raymond."

The written student reviews were all positive. Four or five wrote, "You have almost convinced me of the truth of what you have spoken." One individual who was particularly critical of the other students' presentations wrote, "I really would like to know more about your church."

What great faith it took for this young man to proceed and to teach what he knew was right in the face of almost sure ridicule. To his delight, Raymond received an A in that class. The Lord truly blesses any one of us that keeps the commandments and is not afraid to bear witness of Him as He has commanded all of us "to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in." (Mosiah 18:9.)

Didn't Paul speak with the Spirit, saying, "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth." (Rom. 1:16.)

"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Prov. 3:5-6.)

Remember, "To be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God." (2 Ne. 2:29.)

You may have faced, or you will face, the world just as this young man did. How much faith will you have? Never be embarrassed of the gospel, but go forward and testify of that which you believe.

Don't act as a novice pretending to know it all. One novice, a tourist from the East camping in the mountains of the West, humorously said to a seasoned guide, "Is it true that a grizzly bear won't attack you if you're carrying a lantern?" The man thought a moment and said, "Well, Sonny, it depends on how fast you're carrying it!"

Some of us, in making decisions, lay out plans like the tourist in the forest, or like another tourist who followed the counsel for a surefire way to catch a porcupine: Get up in a tree with a large steel tub. When the porcupine comes by, drop the tub over the porcupine. This provides something to sit on while planning the next move.

We can surely do better than that in doing our planning of life's critical decisions.

Let me tell about another young man whom I'll also call Raymond.

When he was eleven, Raymond obtained a paper route and began to prosper. At age sixteen he was still delivering papers. One day the manager of the newspaper came in and said, "Raymond, you have been so loyal and done so well in selling subscriptions that I'm going to appoint you assistant manager of circulation of this newspaper. In your duties you'll supervise the other paper boys and teach them how to sell subscriptions. After school, after finishing your route, you'll be able to the office to work two or three hours. You'll be able to do some homework while you're waiting to answer complaints on the phone. All in all, it will be a great job for you. And by the way, your pay will be tripled."

Raymond was delighted. He wanted to go on a mission and was saving money for that day. This job would simply accelerate the process. He counted his blessings. This seemed to be the ideal job, and at a time when many teenagers had no work.

Repeatedly he said to himself, "My, the Lord blesses one who keeps the commandments." He had always paid his tithing, kept the Sabbath day holy, and honored his priesthood. He also felt he was being blessed for resisting the pressure to study on Sunday.

A year and a half went by. One Saturday, George, the newspaper manager, came to him and said, "One week from now we're going to begin delivering the Sunday paper. You will not only have your Sunday route to deliver early in the morning, but you'll have to stay in the office from about 7:00 A.M. to 2:00 P.M. You'll also receive a 30 percent increase in pay."

The manager quickly added, "I know you're a Mormon, and you may be thinking of not taking this extra job beyond your route. If you don't take the job, you'll not only lose the opportunity to earn more money on Sunday, but you'll also lose your paper route and be fired from your weekday job as well. There are many of my other paper boys who would give their right arm to have your job."

Raymond was despondent. He prayed over and over, "How could this be, Heavenly Father? I have kept the commandments. I've tried to do what is right. I'm trying to go on a mission. Now I may lose my job. Shall I work this added job on Sunday, or not?"

He emotionally explained the problem to his father, who replied, "I don't know the answer, but I know someone who does," meaning the Lord.

Raymond struggled with the problem. He talked to his bishop. He learned that, if he decided to work, there were sacrament meetings being held in other wards in the afternoon that he could attend. He prayed and struggled with the problem two full days.

Tuesday, when George asked for his decision, Raymond said with great emotion, "I love my job and my route, but I cannot work on Sunday."

George responded emphatically, "You're fired! Come in Saturday to pick up your last check. There are many young men who would be glad to have a job like this. You're an ungrateful young man!" Then he stomped out of the office.

The next three or four days were hard for Raymond. The manager scarcely spoke to him. He wondered if he had made the right decision. He thought to himself, "There are many who have to work on Sunday because of their employment. Shouldn't I?" But the answer seemed to be the same: "There may be some who have to work on Sunday, but you don't have to and should not."

Saturday morning finally arrived, and Raymond went in to pick up his last check. As he walked into the office, George grabbed him by the arm and took him to a nearby room. "Raymond, please forgive me. I was wrong. I ought not to have tried to make you break the commandments. I have found another young man who is willing to do the extra work on Sunday. You can keep your job. Will you?"

When Raymond agreed, the manager added, "You'll find the extra 30 percent I was going to pay you for the extra work on Sunday included in your paycheck this week, and also in your future paychecks, as long as you continue working for me."

What great joy Raymond felt as he went home that afternoon! Again and again he said to himself, "It is worth it to keep the commandments of the Lord. The Lord will always provide for his own." What joy Raymond felt a year later to see his manager in the congregation when he spoke preparatory to leaving for his mission.

What greater joy, twenty-six years later, for Raymond to find that George was active, faithful, and strong in the Church.

The Lord commanded us to "seek ye a living like unto men." (D&C 54:9.) But we are also commanded to be in the world but not be of it. Be careful that you never compromise the principles you believe in. Always trust in the Lord.

Let me tell you about another young man. We'll also call him Raymond.

Raymond became very ill while serving a mission in a distant land. Because of these health problems, the mission president considered sending him home. To compound Raymond's problems, one day he began having a severe pain in his left foot. He couldn't even walk to the discussion he and his companion had scheduled. They went instead to the doctor, who said, "It's just arthritis caused by the damp weather. If you'll stay off your foot for two or three days, the pain will pass."

Raymond did so. He also received a priesthood blessing. But nothing happened. He was a district leader at the time, and his district had just begun to baptize in a city where there had not been baptisms for some time. He could not understand how the Lord could allow him to remain down when his district was just beginning to have success.

A week went by, then two weeks, then a month. There was no change in the pain in his foot. Finally, he was taken to the mission home in the capital city where more suitable medical facilities were available.

There he learned that one of the bones in his foot had been fractured and had then grown back together incorrectly. The doctors talked of either breaking the bone again or giving him electrical treatments to fuse the bone correctly, but it would take another month. He was down again, going for treatments twice a day. The treatments didn't make any difference. This problem, on top of his other medical problems, had him discouraged, and again the consideration came to send him home.

One morning, after nearly three months, Raymond stepped out of bed to find absolutely no pain in his foot. He stepped on the foot gently, then stamped on it, then ran a mile with his companion that morning. He was totally healed and he returned immediately to work.

Two weeks later a letter arrived from home. It began, "Dear son," and then a paragraph of chastisement followed for not having told his family about his ailments in the mission field. They had learned of his problems from another missionary, a friend of his, who had written home. "As a family we have begun a fast and constant prayer for you. We also have placed your name on the temple prayer list and hope that it might be of help to you."

As Raymond read the letter and referred to his journal, he found that the day he had risen from his bed was the day the letter had been written, the day his family had begun praying and exercising faith for him.

The reality of the power of faith cannot be denied. Remember the counsel—trust in the Lord.

Life is challenging. Major decisions face us all. But if we rely on the Lord, we will handle them successfully.

We see in all of these examples individuals who have acted in faith and have trusted in the Lord. The Lord really is the answer to our challenges, our problems, our future.

The following are a few suggestions that may help you stay close to and trust in the Lord:

The Lord prospers those who keep His commandments. He said: "And if it so be that the children of men keep the commandments of God he doth nourish them, and strengthen them, and provide means whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has commanded them." (1 Ne. 17:3.)

If you will keep the commandments, He will nourish you, strengthen you, and provide the means for accomplishing all things necessary to faithfully finish your divine mission here on earth.

The four stories related in this chapter were actual occurrences in the life of Gene Raymond Cook.
