No specific author, Hope ( 1994)

THE ROYAL ROAD TO HAPPINESS

ELDER J. RICHARD CLARKE

I recall a story about Chief Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes. He was riding a train. When the conductor came by to pick up his ticket, he could not find it. Recognizing the Chief Justice, the conductor said, "I'm sure, Mr. Holmes, that you'll be able to find your ticket when you return home. I'm certain that the Pennsylvania Railroad can get by without that ticket until you find it. Why don't you just mail it to us?"

"Young man, you don't understand at all," he said. "The problem is not where is my ticket; it's where am I going?"

Each of us has a challenge to identify where we are going. In the Book of Abraham when the gods were preparing the plan for the spirit children to come forward and continue their education, they said: "We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; . . . and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abr. 3:25-26.)

We are here on earth because we were faithful in our first estate. We learned to keep the laws that magnified us for future opportunity. We were indeed added upon and have entered our second estate with a successful record of performance. Just like an advancement from high school to the university, the pace of the second estate is quicker than that of the first. We are learning to achieve the promised glories, and we must lengthen our strides. Now that we have the desires of the flesh to subdue, we must once again master the laws that bring us joy in this life and the glories of eternity. Once again, we must be proven in all things.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that "happiness is the object and design of our existence." (History of the Church, 5:134.) Much has been said about the pursuit of happiness, but not quite so much about the happiness of pursuit. We must vigorously pursue that which enlarges our vision. We must, in fact, get on the offensive. Phillips Brooks once wrote, "Bad will be the day for every man when he becomes absolutely contented with the life that he is living, with the thoughts that he is thinking, with the deeds that he is doing; when there is not forever beating at the door of his soul some great desire to do something larger." To the Philippians Paul said: "This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,

"I press toward the mark." (Philip. 3:13-14.)

If happiness is the object and design of our existence, it seems to me that we must set some criteria for achieving it. One of the great souls of this generation was a philosopher by the name of William George Jordan, whose son, David Starr Jordan, was at one time president of Stanford University. He wrote an impressive essay, titled "The Royal Road to Happiness," in which he said:

There is a royal road to happiness; it lies in Consecration, Concentration, Conscience, and Conquest. Consecration is dedicating the individual life to the service of others, to some noble mission, to realize some unselfish ideal. Concentration makes the individual life simpler and deeper. It cuts away the shams and the pretenses of modern living and limits life to its truest essentials. Worry, fear, useless regret—all the great wastes that sap mental, moral or physical energy—must be sacrificed, or the individual needlessly destroys half the possibilities of living. Conscience, as the mentor, the guide and compass of every act, leads ever to Happiness. When the individual can stay alone with his conscience and get its approval, without using force or specious logic, then he begins to know what real Happiness is. Conquest is the overcoming of an evil habit, the rising superior to opposition and attack, the spiritual exaltation that comes from resisting the invasion of the grovelling material side of life. (William George Jordan, The Majesty of Calmness, Old Tappan, N.J.: F. H. Revell, n.d., pp. 51-53.)

I would like to touch briefly on each of these four points.

CONSECRATION

President Spencer W. Kimball indicated that perhaps the number-one problem we face is that of selfishness. The happiest people I know are those who have developed an acute sensitivity to the feelings and needs of other people. President Kimball was a personification of those great impulses.

Dr. Karl Menninger, the psychologist, was once asked by a lady, "If you knew for a certainty that you were going to have a nervous breakdown, what would you do?"

He said, "I would close my house; I would move over onto the other side of the tracks; I would knock on doors until I had an opportunity to meet somebody who had more problems than I did; and then I'd spend my time helping them solve those problems."

We read about bread being cast upon the water. There is a great multiplier effect in people's willingness to give of themselves that others might be blessed. Consider the situation of one mother in the nineteenth-century frontier of Kentucky. Life was rough for Sally Bush Johnston. She was left a widow with three children. She was getting older before she wanted to, and certainly hers was a much more difficult existence than she had ever imagined. Then she saw a chance for an easier life when an old friend of hers, a suitor she had known before she married and who was now a widower, came courting. He was dressed in a fine suit and a new pair of boots. He spoke of prosperity, of farming. He spoke of servants and of a way of life that seemed to be an improvement over that which she was experiencing. So she went with him.

When she got there, she found the "prosperous" farm to be a ramshackle, run-down farm covered with wild blackberry bushes and sumac. The house was a floorless hut—a log cabin, in fact, without windows. The only evidence of servants was two small children, a boy and a girl.

Her first thought was an obvious one: "I can't stay. I've got to return." She knew she had been duped. But as she turned to leave, she looked at the children, especially the younger—a boy whose thin face and melancholy gaze made upon her soul an impression as deep as it was instantaneous. At that moment a great spirit subdued her disappointment. She slipped off her sweater and began to straighten and clean the house. In determined words that she felt deeply within her, she said quietly, "I'll stay for the sake of this boy."

A neighbor was to write sometime later, "Oh, Sally Bush, what a treasure trembled in the balance that day." But Sally Bush could not have known that her stepson, this young boy whose melancholy eyes had penetrated her heart, was to become the President of the United States, states remaining "united" through a tragic civil war that would claim his life among the numbered dead. Sally Bush Lincoln, discouraged and tired and disappointed, looked into the eyes of a ten-year-old boy and said, "I'll stay for the sake of this boy."

In another place and another time, a wealthy family in England was spending the weekend with another wealthy family. Their son fell into a swimming pool and was in the process of drowning when the screams of the children attracted the attention of a gardener who plunged into the pool and saved the boy.

The boy's name was Winston Churchill. His parents, deeply grateful, attempted to reward the gardener. At first the man hesitated, but as they insisted he said, "I have a son whose dream is to be a doctor, and I don't know how we can provide that opportunity for him."

Mr. Churchill replied, "We will see him through and pay for his education."

Later on, when Winston Churchill became prime minister of Great Britain, he contracted a severe case of pneumonia. Word was sent out that he needed the finest physician to attend him. Sir Alexander Fleming, the developer of penicillin, was called and selected to care for the prime minister. He was also the son of the gardener. Churchill was to later say: "Rarely has one man owed his life twice to the same person." (Bits and Pieces, August 1979.)

Many people, I suppose, fantasize that if they were blessed with great wealth they would generously share with those who are in need. But that is unlikely unless they already give of themselves to those with whom they serve while living from day to day.

CONCENTRATION

The ability to concentrate is a mark of genius. Certainly we ought to focus our lives on the essentials. We ought to set high goals and meet high standards of performance. We ought to live with anticipation.

One of the sweetest people I know is Margaret Wells, a widow for over forty-five years, the wife of John Wells who was formerly second counselor in the Presiding Bishopric. She once told me, "I never go to bed at night until I can think of at least one good reason for waking up in the morning, at least one important job that I have to do. Even if it's only one thing, I wake up with anticipation. I look forward to getting up. If I waited until morning to plan my work, I'm afraid I'd just lie there and not put forth much effort."

I would suggest that we learn to wait to worry. Just about every time you get bad news, chances are that it has either already happened and you cannot do anything about it, or it was not worth worrying about in the first place. Psychologists have estimated that just 14 percent of all the bad news we initially hear is even worth the worry at all. We would do well to wait to worry.

I am impressed with how important attitude is in our lives. No matter how old we are or how educated we are, we are still mightily affected, both positively and negatively, by our attitude. I remember the story of a man who worked with refrigerator cars. One day he got himself locked inside of a car. Understanding what usually happens in such circumstances, he began to prepare himself to freeze to death. As he felt his body becoming numb, he recorded the story of his approaching death on the walls of the refrigerator car. He scribbled: "I'm becoming colder. . . . Still colder now. . . . Nothing to do but wait. . . . I am slowly freezing to death. . . . Half asleep now, I can hardly write. . . . [And finally] These may be my last words."

And they were. He died. Yet those who opened the car found that at no time had it been colder than 56 degrees. The refrigeration apparatus had malfunctioned. This man was the victim of his own illusion. All his conclusions were wrong. He knew about refrigeration; he knew what happened. He just failed to understand that, in this particular case, the refrigeration apparatus was not working. The mind has great power over and produces magical effects on the body.

CONSCIENCE

Conscience is our contact with the Spirit. Spiritual power is the greatest form of energy that I know. Spiritual power alone can sustain us in a time of crisis. Ethics are not enough. Spiritual power comes from God and is administered and controlled upon principles of righteousness. Our goal, as Peter advises us, is to be "partakers of the divine nature of Christ." One way to do so is by "escaping the corruption that is in the world through lust." (2 Pet. 1:4.)

Jesus warned about those who might destroy our bodies but then explained that the real problem is he who can destroy both body and spirit. The adversary is ever with us. He tries to tempt us, to destroy our lives, to convince us of incorrect and unsound and untrue principles that so often take us off course.

Consider the encounter Moses had with the adversary. "Satan came tempting him, saying: Moses, son of man, worship me.

"And it came to pass that Moses looked upon Satan and said: Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten; and where is thy glory, that I should worship thee? . . .

"Get thee hence, Satan; deceive me not; for God said unto me: Thou art after the similitude of my Only Begotten." (Moses 1:12-13, 16.)

We would do well; when tempted, to simply run those words through our minds: "Satan, why should I worship you? Where is your glory? I am a son (or daughter) of God created in the image and likeness of Him who saved the world." I am impressed by D&C 20:22, which says of the Savior, "He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them."

President Heber J. Grant said: "We have no right to go near temptation, or in fact to do or say a thing that we cannot honestly ask the blessings of the Lord upon, neither to visit any place where we would be ashamed to take our sister or sweetheart. The good spirit will not go with us on the devil's ground, and if we are standing alone upon the ground belonging to the adversary of men's souls, he may have the power to trip us up and destroy us. . . . Virtue is more valuable than life. Never allow yourself to go out of curiosity to see any of the undercrust in this world. We can't handle dirty things and keep our hands clean." (Bruce B. Clark, Richard Evans' Quote Book, Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1971, p. 201.)

The mother of John and Charles Wesley counseled them by saying: "Would you judge the lawfulness or unlawfulness of pleasure? Take this rule: . . . Whatever weakens your reason, impairs the tenderness of your spirit, obscures your sense of God, takes off your relish for spiritual things, whatever increases the authority of the body over the mind, that thing is sin to you, however innocent it may seem in itself."

A number of years ago I attended a management training seminar in New York. During a coffee break everyone in the room left except the instructor and myself. I inquired, "Don't you drink coffee?"

"No," he said.

"Well, that's interesting," I said. "You'd better be careful, or they'll be accusing you of being a Mormon."

"No, I'm a Baptist. But years ago I made a decision about my life and it was that I would do nothing which would take away from me my freedom. As of that time, I quit smoking, drinking, and taking any kind of intoxicants or anything that's addictive."

What a marvelous reason to abstain from anything that might be of harm to us! It takes away our freedom.

Zig Ziglar wrote: "To build a healthy self-image, there are some things you must avoid. Pornography is the primary one. Literally everything that goes into your mind has an effect and is permanently recorded. It either builds and prepares you for the future or it tears down and reduces your accomplishment possibilities for the future. Psychologists say that three viewings of Deep Throat, The Last Tango in Paris, The Exorcist, or any of the 'X-rated' films or television programs have the same psychological, emotional, destructive impact on your minds as one physical experience. The people who have seen these 'shows' are in agreement; they were sexually stimulated and viewed themselves with less respect. The reason is simple. These films or programs present mankind at its worst and when you see your fellow man degraded, you, in effect, see yourself degraded. It is impossible to view mankind at its worst and not feel that your own value has diminished and you can neither be nor do any better than you think you can or are. Ironically most X-rated films are advertised as 'adult' entertainment for 'mature' audiences. Most psychologists agree that they are juvenile entertainment for immature and insecure audiences." (See You at the Top, Pelican, 1984.)

What is the harmful effect of sin upon the soul? Sin places the sinner in bondage. Sin enslaves the sinner by making him love sinful things.

Karl Menninger says: "The wrongness of the sinful act lies not merely in its nonconformity, its departure from the accepted, appropriate way of behavior, but in an implicitly aggressive quality—a ruthlessness, a hurting, a breaking away from God and from the rest of humanity, a partial alienation, or act of rebellion.

"Standing on one's head is nonconforming, and it is neither aesthetic nor congenial behavior nor expressive of a moral ideal, but it is not likely to be considered sinful. Sin has a willful, defiant, or disloyal quality; someone is defied or offended or hurt. The willful disregard or sacrifice of the welfare of others for the welfare or satisfaction of the self is an essential quality of the concept of sin. . . . And sin is thus, at heart, a refusal of the love of others." (Karl Menninger, Whatever Became of Sin? New York: Hawthorn Books, 1973, p. 19.)

CONQUEST

Habits are an enemy to progress. Confucius said that the nature of men is always the same; it is their habits that separate them. The power to change, the power to banish the desire for evil practice or the fierceness from our hearts, comes through the Lord Jesus Christ. We must experience a godly sorrow (as we are told in Alma 36) if we are to be forgiven of the sins we want blotted from our memory and from our heart. We must come to terms with the Lord's anointed, our bishops, and through proper confession obtain a full and lasting forgiveness.

I am interested in a psychologist's point of view of the need for confession. "Confession must include a recognition of the aggression of the sins committed. 'So long as a person lives under the shadow of real, unacknowledged, and unexpiated guilt, . . . he . . . will continue to hate himself and to suffer the inevitable consequences of self-hatred. But the moment he . . . begins to accept his guilt and his sinfulness, the possibility of radical reformation opens up; and . . . a new freedom of self-respect and peace.'" (O. Hobart Mowrer, quoted by Menninger, Whatever Became of Sin?, p. 195.)

So all habits, then, are a challenge. Elder Delbert L. Stapley once said that we are not born into this life with fixed habits any more than we are born with noble character, and that when anybody boasts about his bad habits one can be sure that they are the best he has. The only way we can pay the price is to be motivated to have the blessing that accompanies the change. Remember, if bulls had no horns, anybody could be a matador.

We are so fortunate as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to understand the great power of redemption. Through the Lord Jesus Christ we can be and are redeemed. We are able to enjoy peace of mind and the beauties of the hope and the fulfillment of lives in harmony with sound and basic principles and values. Is it worth it?

Recently I was reading in the third chapter of Malachi the scripture to which we often refer as an explanation of the Lord's law of tithing.

"Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?

"And now we call the proud happy: yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered. [In other words, "How come everybody else who doesn't keep these commandments gets along so well?"]

[And then the Lord says:] "Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.

"And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.

"Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not." (Mal. 3:14-18.)

If we would in fact be happy and enjoy the blessings of eternal life, we must remember these words: "And moreover, I would desire that ye should consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual; and if they hold out faithful to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness. O remember, remember that these things are true; for the Lord hath spoken it." (Mosiah 2:41.)
