1.  Prioritize. If you feel you are trying to do too much, examine what you are doing. Some activities are less important than others and require less time and attention. Decide what is best for you to do, then focus on those priorities. Separate the essential from the nonessential. Essentials include rest, nutritious food, prayer, exercise, Church callings and attendance, and scripture study. Other priorities depend on your own circumstances.

2.  Take a break. Another way to relieve stress is to take a break from your normal routine. Such a break could be a half-hour nap, a walk, or a family activity.

3.  Ask for help. If you need help from others, ask for it. One overburdened mother prayed for guidance, discussed her feelings with her husband, and then presented her concerns during a family council. The family decided to divide up many of the evening chores. As they worked together, the mother began to feel better and the family grew closer.

    In another family, the birth of a disabled baby quickly overwhelmed the parents’ resources. But with the daily help of Relief Society sisters, the parents were able to manage their responsibilities.

4.  Eliminate nonessentials. Another way to deal with stress is to eliminate some items from your to-do list. One year our local school could not find enough volunteers to hold an elaborate holiday carnival. When the event had to be canceled, parents planned small, manageable parties instead.

5.  Do it. There will be times when, through prayer, we realize the best option is just to do what needs to be done. At such times, we need to remember that those who “put their trust in God shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions” (Alma 36:3).

As we attempt to do what is best, always praying for confirmation, Heavenly Father will help us resolve our concerns. With His help, we can use our time and talents wisely, bring balance into our lives, and find joy in the many tasks before us.
