In a general conference address, President Spencer W. Kimball told of his visit to the big island of Hawaii in 1946, shortly after a huge tidal wave struck its coast. More than a hundred people had lost their lives, and thousands had been left homeless. He related how one family narrowly escaped death by running up a hill and watching as their home below disappeared under the pounding waves.

“We, too,” President Kimball said, “are faced with powerful destructive forces unleashed by the adversary. Waves of sin, wickedness, immorality, degradation, tyranny, deceitfulness, conspiracy, and dishonesty threaten all of us. They come with great power and speed and will destroy us if we are not watchful.

“But a warning is sounded for us. … We must flee to high ground or cling fast to that which can keep us from being swept away” (Ensign, November 1978, 6).

Our one sure foundation, against which no trial, no sorrow, no terror has final power, is our Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ. The prophet Helaman reminded his sons: “Remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds … [they] shall have no power over you … because of the rock upon which ye are built” (Hel. 5:12).

To lay a solid foundation in Christ, we need to employ the basic principles of his gospel. One Church member learned to better make the Savior the foundation of life by putting first what the Savior taught we should put first. This included paying tithes and offerings promptly, praying, studying the scriptures, and placing a high priority on Church callings.

“As I did these things,” this member wrote, “my life became happier. My actions became stepping-stones for spiritual progress toward the goal of knowing and being like our Savior” (Ensign, September 1995, 41).

As we build our faith in Jesus Christ, we are better able to cope with our mortal challenges. And because we enjoy greater stability in our lives, we have more strength to help others who struggle with their own challenges. As we do this, we find ourselves becoming more like the Christlike beings our Heavenly Father wants us to become.

The spring following his wife’s untimely death from cancer, Elder Richard G. Scott of the Quorum of the Twelve testified at general conference: “True enduring happiness with the accompanying strength, courage, and capacity to overcome the most challenging difficulties comes from a life centered in Jesus Christ. Obedience to his teachings provides a sure foundation upon which to build. That takes effort. There is no guarantee of overnight results, but there is absolute assurance that, in the Lord’s time, solutions will come, peace will prevail, and emptiness will be filled” (Ensign, November 1995, 17).

- What can we do to strengthen our spiritual foundations?

- How does our gospel foundation give us perspective in times of trial?
