Enough has been already written to satisfy all with whom facts have any weight that the Mormonism which claims in Europe to be “of Christ,” is in Utah a despotism of the harshest character, allied to falsehood, murder, and the worst of crimes that degrade human nature. And here would I rest my pen; but it seems that one other episode in Utah life should still be added, showing as it does the intolerance of the ruling Mormon Priesthood when their own sway is challenged.

Thirty-five miles north of Salt Lake City—a short distance from where the Union Pacific debouches from Weber Canyon—a Welchman named Joseph Morris had found eager listeners to new revelations. The Bishop of Kington Fort, Richard Cook, formerly a noted Missionary in Manchester, England, and a number of intelligent men and women, received gladly the new prophet who had been raised up by “the Lord” to “deliver Israel from bondage.” Numerous believers in a very short time gathered from various parts of the territory, and Kington fort, on the Weber, became an important place. Morris abounded with revelations. His “gifts” exceeded in profusion those of all who had ever gone before him. The founder of Mormonism was nothing in comparison with his disciple from Wales. The adherents of the new prophet were perfectly overjoyed at the abundance of light that now shone upon their path, and some very intelligent men gathered to the Weber. Three English and three Danish clerks were daily employed in writing the heavenly communications from the mouth of the new prophet. Brigham had been barren—Morris was overflowing. The new disciples “consecrated” all they possessed to a common fund. Christ was seen to descend among them, and their wants would only be of short duration. As “the Lord” tarried, the enthusiasm of some of the converts cooled, and here began the difficulty with the new prophet. It became a question how much of their property they could reclaim. It had all been “consecrated.” The leading men of the sect decided to let them peacefully retire; but it was expected that they would honestly meet their accrued share of the obligations of the little colony. Some of them proved dishonest, and attempted to take away better cattle than they had brought, and they refused to make allowance for the support they had derived from the property of others. A feud arose, the dissenters applied to the Mormon Courts, and the latter were pleased with the opportunity afforded. Writs were issued, served and repulsed. The dissenters waited for the chance of seizing the moveable property of the colony, and as wheat was sent to mill they pounced upon it, and took teams and waggons as well. On one occasion the Morrisites arose early in the morning, and spread themselves over the country, keeping within view of the advancing teams. As the dissenter and two others pounced upon the convoy the second time, up sprang the Morrisites from places of concealment, and took them prisoners. They were taken to Kington Fort and imprisoned. The friends of the captured men sought their release ineffectually, for the Sheriff in that country could do nothing. One or two of the wives of the prisoners went to Brigham, but he refused to interfere. He was too shrewd to meddle directly in the affair. Justice Kinney was next visited. As judge of that judicial district a petition was filed before him, setting forth that these men were kept in close confinement and heavily ironed by order of Joseph Morris, John Banks, and Richard Cook. On the 24th of May, 1862, a writ of habeas corpus was issued to the Territorial Marshal, and by his deputy served, but no attention was paid to it. On the 11th of June a second writ was issued and was also disregarded. Kinney was intensely indignant, and insisted upon the militia being called out as a posse comitatus to accompany the Territorial Marshal. Acting Governor Fuller issued the necessary order. The Morrisites had been warned by the “Lord” that the “Brighamites” were plotting their destruction, and accordingly purchased all the rifles and ammunition possible. Early on the morning of the 13th of June an armed posse were seen on South Mountain overlooking the Morrisite community, and the following proclamation was sent to the Morrisites by one of their herd-boys:

Head-quarters, Marshal’s Posse, Weber River, June 13, 1862.

To Joseph Morris, John Banks, Richard Cook, John Parsons, and Peter Klemgard:

Whereas you have heretofore disregarded and defied the judicial officers and laws of the Territory of Utah: and whereas certain writs have been issued for you from the Third Judicial District Court of said Territory, and a sufficient force furnished by the executive of the same to enforce the laws. This is therefore to notify you to peaceably and quietly surrender yourselves and the prisoners in your custody forthwith. An answer is required in thirty minutes after the receipt of this document; if not, forcible measures will be taken for your arrest. Should you disregard this proposition and place your lives in jeopardy, you are hereby required to remove your women and children: and all persons peaceably disposed are hereby notified to forthwith leave your encampment, and are informed that they can find protection with this posse.

H. W. Lawrence, Territorial Marshal.

Per R. T. Burton and Theodore McKean, deputies.

A gentleman who was then in the Morrisites camp has furnished the author with the following statement:—Morris, a firm believer in the revelations he received, remarked, in answer to the inquiry “What shall be done?” that he would “go and inquire of the Lord.” He was soon heard in solemn and earnest prayer. In the meantime word was sent round the camp for the people to at once assemble in meeting and consult on the question. Women and children came together hurriedly, yet there was no excitement, and soon the Bowery was well filled. Morris was seen to come out from his dwelling with a paper in his hand. This paper proved to be a written revelation. His council were awaiting him. The revelation was read to the council, and a peculiar document it was. It purported to be from God, who was represented as being pleased with his faithful people there, and as having brought the posse against them to show his own power in the complete destruction of their enemies. It also promised that now the triumph of his people should come. Their enemies should be smitten before them, but that not one of his faithful people should be destroyed—that “not a hair of their heads should be harmed.” The council at once stepped out into the Bowery, close to which lived all the leading men, and, to save time, singing was omitted, and the meeting was opened briefly by prayer. John Parsons (previously a noted Mormon preacher in London), in his clear sonorous voice, then read the revelation. R. Cook arose to consult with the people as to which should be obeyed—the proclamation demanding the surrender of the prisoners held in custody of Peter Klemgard, and four of the leading men of the Church, or the revelation forbidding the surrender of these men. Before the people had a chance to speak or vote, or do anything at all in the matter, the booming sound of a cannon was heard, and screams arose from the third seat from the stand in the Bowery, and instantly two women were seen dead in the congregation, and the lower jaw, hanging only by a small strip of skin, was shot off a young girl of from twelve to fifteen years of age. It was the fearful and heart-rending screams of this girl that stopped the meeting. The people arose in utter confusion. Cook, still on his feet, suggested to all to go at once to their homes, and that each man should take care of his own family as best he could. Never was a revelation more immediately falsified, for scarcely had the promise of absolute safety been made than sudden destruction came. Panic-stricken men and women rushed hither and thither, some seeking safety in cellars, some in potato-pits; in short, anywhere or in any place in which security could be either reasonably or unreasonably hoped for. The first shot was in a few minutes followed by another and still another, and the attack was continued. The posse drew nearer and nearer, and the firing was kept up incessantly both with cannon and musketry. Had Burton or McKean had the pluck of a common constable, they could have gone safely into the fort, served the summons, and saved all effusion of blood. There was not a Morrisite in the fort that was armed or thought of arming. They met to consider the question, and to pray over it. About an hour and a half after the firing commenced they got their arms and effected an organization, and a regular defence was made. After fighting three days they raised the white flag, and ceased firing. Cautiously Burton and his aids, with a number of men, entered into the camp, and then transpired a bloody scene, concerning which the following affidavit has been made:

United States of America, Territory of Utah, S.S.

Alexander Dow, of said territory, being duly sworn, says: “In the spring of 1861 I joined the Morrisites, and was present when Joseph Morris was killed. The Morrisites had surrendered, a white flag was flying, and the arms were all grounded and guarded by a large number of the posse. Robert T. Burton and Judson L. Stoddard rode in among the Morrisites. Burton was excited. He said, “Where is the man? I don’t know him.” Stoddard replied, “That’s him,” pointing to Morris. Barton rode his horse upon Morris, and commanded him to give himself up in the name of the Lord. Morris replied, “No, never, never!” Morris said he wanted to speak to the people. Burton said, “Be d—d quick about it.” Morris said, “Brethren, I’ve taught you true principles.” He had scarcely got the words out of his mouth before Burton fired his revolver. The ball passed in his neck or shoulder. Burton exclaimed, “There’s your prophet.” He fired again, saying, “What do you think of your prophet now?” He then turned suddenly and shot Banks, who was standing five or six paces distant. Banks fell. Mrs. Bowman, wife of James Bowman, came running up crying, “Oh, you bloodthirsty wretch!” Burton said, “No one shall tell me that and live,” and shot her dead. A Danish woman then came running up to Morris, crying, and Burton shot her dead also. Burton could easily have taken Morris and Banks prisoners, if he had tried. I was standing but a few feet from Burton all this time. And further saith not.

Alexander Dow.

Subscribed and sworn before me, this 18th day of April, A.D. 1863.

Charles B. Waite, Associate Justice, U.T.

In the fight two of the Marshal’s posse were killed, and six of the Morrisites, and three of the latter were wounded. Only one in the Morrisite camp was killed by rifle-ball. It was the cannon at long range that did the damage. The first shot killed two women as before stated, and wounded a girl; another cannon-ball killed a woman and her child in the “wickiup.” The mother-in-law of the new prophet was also killed in her “wickiup.” A little infant had two narrow escapes. The first shot killed its mother, Mrs. Marsh, while it was in her arms, and it was in the arms of Mrs. Bowman when she was shot down. After the surrender all the prisoners were marched to Salt Lake on the 17th, and on the 18th they were examined before Judge Kinney in chambers, and placed under bonds to appear at the next regular term of Court. In urging measures against the Morrisites, Kinney claimed to be satisfied that he did only do his duty. It is difficult to see how he could long be passive when the order of his Court was disregarded. Burton committed the atrocity of which he is accused most undoubtedly, and it was the work of a devoted fanatic, who, seeking to please the Prophet Brigham, did not hesitate to do so by ridding him of a troublesome rival. That John Banks was foully dealt with there seems little room to doubt. He was wounded at the time of Morris’s death, but not fatally. The manner of his “taking off” only is obscure. In the evening he was well enough to sit up and enjoy his pipe. Suddenly he died. Was he poisoned, shot, or “knifed?” is the only query. It is generally believed that Dr. Clinton “knifed him.” Banks was among the first to receive Mormonism in Preston, Lancashire, England. He was soon ordained a high-priest, and during many years of labour among the Saints he had presided over the largest conferences in Britain, and at one time was one of the Presidency over the whole Church there. He was the most eloquent preacher that was ever in the Mormon Church. As his faith waned in Mormonism he was painfully grieved, and at times became intemperate. Before he was a Mormon he had been a Chartist, and the “despotism” of the ruling Priesthood was irksome to him. Years before he left England for Zion he silently mourned over the one-man power. His best life had been spent for Mormonism, and he was then too far advanced in years to begin a new life, and he emigrated to Zion when ordered, hoping that his fears might be removed by better experience. Brigham Young was personally kind to him after he arrived at Salt Lake, and sought to help him over his material troubles; but there was in the heart of John Banks more than he could tell the Prophet. When he heard Morris, it was the opening of a fresh career to him, and he eagerly embraced the new faith.

Before the regular session of the Third Judicial District Court, at which the Morrisites were to be tried, an element was imported into Utah that was destined to trouble the happiness of the Prophet. A new Governor, in the person of Stephen S. Harding, of Indiana, was appointed to succeed Dawson; and Thomas J. Drake of Michigan and Charles B. Waite of Illinois, were appointed Associate Justices. At the same time a body of California volunteers, under command of Colonel Connor, were sent on the overland mail route to protect that and the telegraph line across the Plains, but the Commander had also instructions to establish posts near Salt Lake City. At the March session of the Third Judicial District Court the Morrisites were tried. Ten of them were indicted for killing two of the posse during the flight; seven of these were convicted, one was “nolled,” and two were acquitted. Sixty-six others were fined $100 each for resisting the posse. Of the seven convicted of “murder in the second degree,” one was sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment, one to twelve years, and five to ten years each. Governor Harding, regarding the prisoners as deserving of clemency, pardoned them all. Most of those who had professed the Morrisite faith, and who did not immediately leave the Territory, found employment and refuge at Camp Douglas.

A month later, Colonel Connor took 250 of them and a company of the California volunteers, to Soda Springs, where he established a post in Idaho, immediately beyond the northern Territorial limits of Utah, and the Morrisites have there lost their peculiarities among a more humane population. After the “Morrisite war” Burton enjoyed the respect of the community and the honours of the Church. Offices and appointments were showered upon him, and wives multiplied in his household. If Brigham was horrified at the murder of Morris, Banks, and the two women, he was unfelicitous in its expression. Burton was, through his influence, made United States Assessor of Internal Revenue, was made a Bishop of the Church, and grew from Colonel Burton to Brigadier and Major-General. He was made a member of the City Government and Sheriff of the county of Great Salt Lake. His wealth increased with his honours, and he was associated with Brigham in nearly all of his enterprises. About four years ago the first move was made against him by the grand jury for the murders on the Weber, and he managed to conceal himself for about a year, and was sent on a mission “to preach the gospel” in England, with the indictment for murder hanging over him. There he was further elevated, and when he returned to “Zion” he was again honoured by being appointed the second counsellor to the chief Bishop of the whole Mormon Church. For the last eighteen months he has enjoyed perfect freedom, and has attended to his numerous affairs with the utmost assurance that nothing could be done with him, and in that he is probably correct, for nothing has ever been done against a prominent Mormon like Burton when a jury had the disposal of the business.

On the 6th of March, 1879, with all this evidence, and the testimony of living eye-witnesses before them, Major-General Burton was acquitted, by a jury in Salt Lake City, of the murder of Mrs. Bowman!
