[1] I myself made a movement with my hand—for I believed that my life was at stake, and I dared not do otherwise. The words of the oath I did not utter. [See explanation at the end of the chapter.]

[2] Mormonism Exposed, p. 236.

[3] Besides poor Mary’s family, in every other instance [with the solitary exception of Sister Ann—my “talkative friend”—who is still living, and is so well known in Salt Lake City], I have been as scrupulous in giving real names as I have been in stating only facts which I had either witnessed or knew beyond question were true.

GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, ST. JOHN’S SQUARE, LONDON.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ENGLISHWOMAN IN UTAH: THE STORY OF A LIFE'S EXPERIENCE IN MORMONISM ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
