This issue contains articles and activities that could be used for family home evening. The following are a few examples.

“Blessed by My Calling,” p. 11: As you teach the lesson, consider discussing how the Lord eased the author’s burdens as she served with all her heart. Invite family members to share how they have been blessed as they have served the Lord.

“What Did the Pioneers Bring?” p. 16: Consider listing the four points of wisdom President Stephen L Richards presents in this article. Discuss how each of these can strengthen your family and bless the lives of those who follow in your footsteps.

“Sharing the Gospel with Confidence,” p. 30: Consider inviting your family to discuss how to apply the following statement from the article: “Please remember that you do not need to feel that you must justify your beliefs; you simply need to explain them in a spirit of love and kindness. The truth always prevails when true doctrine is taught.”

“He Told Me, ‘No Way,’” p. 58: After reading or summarizing the story, consider role-playing ways to respond when faced with temptation. Family members could practice saying aloud “No way,” just as Chase did.

“What about family home evening? Aren’t we going to have it tonight?” my six-year-old daughter, Leilani, asked. A feeling of guilt flooded over me. My husband and I had been trying to hold family home evening, but with many claims on our time, we had fallen out of the habit. Leilani’s reminder made us recommit to not neglect family home evening for any reason.

As Leilani and her sister, Nadia, have gotten older, they have wanted to teach during family home evening what they have learned in Primary. They even draw their own visual aids to illustrate the principles they want to teach. We rejoice as parents to see them talking about the gospel and often can expand on the subject they have chosen.

“What about family home evening? Aren’t we going to have it tonight?” are words I am trying hard not to hear repeated. I know that when children are young is the best time to teach them. The world may exercise its influence, but if we work and grow alongside our children, we can reach our goal of raising men and women of principle.

Patricia Cárdenas de Prado, Guatemala
