Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Every Stone a Sermon ( 1992)

Preface

Surrounded by a fifteen-foot wall, the Salt Lake Temple is located in downtown Salt Lake City, Utah, on a ten-acre parcel of land known as Temple Square, identified as the Temple Block or the Sacred Square during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The temple, with its six spires rising from the east-central part of Temple Square, was envisioned by Brigham Young even before the Latter-day Saints arrived in the Great Salt Lake Valley in 1847.

ixThe temple site was chosen only a few days following Brigham Young's arrival in the Great Basin on 24 July 1847. However, construction did not begin until the laying of the cornerstones on 6 April 1853. During the next four decades, work on the "Great Temple" was delayed many times, but beginning in the late 1880s, the Church's full resources were consecrated to the temple's completion-a temple that Church leaders consistently said fulfilled ancient prophecy: "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains .... And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob." (Isa. 2:2-3.)

ix"Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord" reflects the imagery of not only the Latter-day Saints coming to Salt Lake City but also the many nonmembers who visited the site during its forty years of construction. This book contains "eyewitness" accounts of these people: their feelings, reactions, and experiences as they attended the temple cornerstone laying, capstone service, and dedication ceremonies. It is a centennial reminder of the Latter-day Saints' rich heritage.

ixThis history is also a proper reminder of the devotion and sacrifice that went into the temple's erection, especially of those workers who were accidently killed during its construction-Archibald Bowman (1855); Sam Kaealoi (1878); William Pullen (1881); Samuel Ensign (1885); and Robert Ford (1890). [^1] The temple stands in part as a monument to these laborers and to all who gave of their talents and physical means to erect it.

ixBrigham Young himself wanted the temple "to stand as a proud monument of the faith, perseverance and industry of the Saints of God in the mountains, in the nineteenth century." [^2] The temple is a magnificent monument to their faith, but more important it remains as a sacred place of prayer, meditation, and worship.

ixWhile the year-by-year efforts to erect the Salt Lake Temple are outlined in this work, it is the sacrifices and the sense of holiness of these efforts which are highlighted. The cost to complete the Salt Lake Temple was estimated at just under three and a half million dollars when dedicated in 1893, but the cost in sacrifice on the part of the Saints, whether young or old, "will never be known until eternity shall reveal the secrets of this life." [^3]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 A list of workers accidently killed during the temple construction has previously been published (see W. A. Raynor, The Everlasting Spires: A Story of the Salt Lake Temple [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965], pp. 117-18). Upon further investigation, however, several death dates have been found to be incorrect, and one worker mentioned, William McCiban, was working on the New Tabernacle rather than the temple as indicated (see Deseret News, 28 May 1878). Sam Kaealoi and Samuel Ensign were not included on the list, but their obituaries indicate that they died while working on the temple (see Deseret News, 27 September 1878 and Deseet Evening News, 25 June 1885).
[^2] 2 Sermon of Brigham Young, delivered in the Bowery in Salt Lake City, Utah, 6 October 1863, JD 10:254.
[^3] 3 "A Great Temple," Juvenile Instructor 28 (15 April 1893): 241.
