Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf

President Dallin H. Oaks

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

Of the First Presidency

Giving to those in need — the poor and dis-

At the heart of God’s plan of happiness is the

tressed — is a principle in all Abrahamic religions,

power to choose. Amid the confusion in the world

and in others as well. Recently, the Church of Jesus Christ reported

about what is right and wrong, those who earnest-

ly seek truth — eternal, unchanging truth — can

for the fi rst time the extent of its humanitarian work

see much clearer. Truth is contained in the gospel

worldwide; 2021 expenditures for those in need in

of Jesus Christ and taught in His Church.

188 countries totaled $906 million, with members

“When you have important choices to make,

also volunteering over 6 million hours of labor. This

Jesus Christ and His restored gospel are the best

is beyond what Latter-day Saints do in callings, in

and His restored gospel are the best answer. When you feel weak,

ble organizations. member-to-member service and individually with innumerable charita- choice. When you have questions, Jesus Christ

“The Church of Jesus Christ is committed to serving those in need, Jesus Christ is your strength.”

and it is also committed to cooperating with others in that eff The Church has prepared a revised version of “For the Strength of relieving su With partners worldwide, the Church shares the common goal of ort.” Youth” to point young men and young women to Christ. This new guide ff ering. “All of this is part of God’s work for His children.” is subtitled “A Guide for Making Choices” and focuses on values,

Jesus Christ is “the true light that lighteth every man that cometh principles and doctrine rather than specifi c behavior. Through His

into the world” (John 1:9). “By this, all the children of God are enlight- prophets, the Lord has been guiding His people in that direction, to ability.” ened to serve Him and one another to the best of their knowledge and increase their spiritual capacity and follow Him in higher and holier

God inspires many organizations and individuals to do much good, ways. The Savior has “very high standards” for those who follow Him —

by His truths. Confi dence, peace, safety, happiness and belonging

done by others. and more Church members should recognize and support the good the highest of which is the invitation to earnestly seek His will and live

can be found in Jesus Christ, His gospel and His Church.

Sister Tracy Y. Browning

Elder Dale G. Renlund

Of the Primary general presidency

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

As she depends on glasses to see and

Airplane pilots operate within a framework to

understand the world around her, Sister Browning

safely unleash the potential of their aircraft. In a

said many divinely appointed tools help people

improve their spiritual vision. Scriptures, the

framework. similar way, personal revelation is received within a

words of the prophets, prayer, temple attendance

Like airplane pilots, people need to understand

and the sacrament can bring Christ’s light “in a

the framework within which the Holy Ghost func-

tions to provide personal revelation. Four elements

world that may be cloudy.”

The Savior can be a compass and pilot while

to this framework are: The scriptures; purview not

steering through life. “Jesus Christ is both the

and openness. prerogative; harmony with commandments; trust

purpose of our focus and the intent of our destination.”

The Old Testament teaches of God’s ancient people being invited First, feasting on the words of Christ in the scriptures stimulates

revelation. Second, “we receive personal revelation only within our

lives. to see their lives through Him in order to see more of Him in their personal revelation. The scriptures also teach how to receive personal

After she joined the Church, people were curious about why she purview, and not within the prerogative of others.”

did the things she did. These questions helped her “put on a pair of Third, personal revelation will be in harmony with the command-spiritual lenses” to clarify, focus and solidify her testimony. ments of God and covenants made with Him. “When we ask for

“Through rigorous eff ort to look to and for Jesus Christ in my every revelation about something God has already given clear direction, we

thought and deed, my eyes were enlightened, and my understanding open ourselves up to misinterpreting our feelings and hearing what we unto Him.’ ” quickened to recognize that Jesus Christ was calling for me to ‘come want to hear.” Fourth, recognize what God has already revealed personally, while

As people allow Him to direct them, they will see that “all things being open to receive further personal revelation “line upon line and

denote there is a God” and where they look for Him they will fi nd Him. precept upon precept.”

1

Elder Rafael E. Pino

Elder Hugo Montoya General Authority Seventy

General Authority Seventy

Although customs and traditions may vary

The eternal principle of love is demonstrated

from country to country, the “normal” things of

in living the two great commandments — loving

life should be those which keep Latter-day Saints

God and loving one’s neighbor.

moving forward on the covenant path.

As ministering brothers and sisters, Latter-day

“No country contains the totality of what is

Saints should willingly help one another because

good or admirable. … Take a moment to meditate

they love each other as children of Heavenly Fa-

our families.” on our customs and the way they are infl uencing

spoken. ther, regardless of needs, nationality or language

Four “marvelous habits” that should be normal

for Latter-day Saints include: Personal and family scripture study; “We love each other because we are brothers, personal and family prayer; weekly sacrament meeting attendance; children of the same father.”

We love God because of what He means to us — we depend on

frequent participation in family history and temple work. “provides a Savior so we can be redeemed and return to the presence “How do we feel when we hear these four things? Are they part of Him for our welfare and His protection, despite our mistakes. He

our normal lives? There are many other traditions that could be part of of God.” The adversity of life can cause doubt about the fulfi llment of the the normality we have adopted, thus letting God prevail in our lives.”

Followers of Christ should focus on Book of Mormon counsel to be Lord’s promises, but we can “trust in our Father. He always keeps his

“steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works” (Mosiah promises and we can learn what He wants to teach us.” 5:15). “I love these words because we know that the things that become It’s most important to be there for family members, under any normal in our lives are those that we repeat again and again. If we are condition or circumstance, just as Heavenly Father is for us. steadfast and immovable in doing good, our customs will be in accor- “Our Heavenly Father’s love for each of His children is real; He is covenant path.” dance with the principles of the gospel and they will help us stay on the there for each one. I don’t know how He does it, but He does.”

Elder Ronald A. Rasband

President Russell M. Nelson

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

President of the Church

In the Book of Mormon the phrase “this day”

Abuse constitutes the infl uence of the

adversary and is a grievous sin. “Let me be

teachings. is used to call attention to counsel, promises and

perfectly clear: Any kind of abuse of women,

“Pressing upon me ‘this day’ is the impor-

children or anyone is an abomination to the

Lord. … He mourns, and we all mourn, for each

Mormon.” tance of renewing our commitment to the Book of

person who has fallen victim to abuse of any

President Russell M. Nelson is doing his part

kind. Those who perpetrate these hideous acts

to fl ood the earth with the Book of Mormon. “But

are not only accountable to the laws of man,

but will also face the wrath of Almighty God.”

follow his lead.” he cannot open the fl oodgates alone. We must

Having personally presented the Book of Mormon to the king of For decades the Church has taken extensive measures to

Mozambique, the king and queen of Lesotho, India’s ambassador and protect children, in particular, from abuse. The Church website has ff ort to blur many others, “I have felt the Spirit of the Lord with us … and borne several aids. “I invite you to study them.” Another disturbing tactic of the adversary is his e

my witness of Jesus Christ, the cornerstone of our faith.” the line between what is true and what is not true. God is the

Individuals do not need to meet with kings and rulers to give source of all truth. “The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

someone this book. “I invite you ‘this day’ to give a Book of Mormon embraces all truth that God conveys to His children, whether the produce man.” to your friends and family, associates at work, your soccer coach or learned in a scientifi c laboratory or received by direct revelation

The book is easily shared on the Gospel Library App. “Think of all from Him. “From this pulpit today and tomorrow you will continue to hear

those who could be blessed by the gospel in their lives and then send truth. Please make notes of thoughts that catch your attention and to them a copy of the Book of Mormon from your phone. Remember those that come into your mind and stay in your heart. Prayerfully to include your testimony and how this book has blessed your life.” ask the Lord to confi rm that what you have heard is true.”

2

President M. Russell Ballard

Sister Kristin M. Yee

Acting President, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

Of the Relief Society general presidency

The Prophet Joseph Smith, missionaries of

The story of David, Nabal and Abigail in the book

the Church, President Russell M. Nelson and the

of Samuel — and personal moments from Sister

Yee’s past — illustrate the principles of forgiveness

another. Savior Jesus Christ are all pioneers in one way or

and reconciliation. Forgiving “can be one of the most diffi cult things

A pioneer is someone who helps discover

something new or as the act of preparing or

we ever do and one of the most divine things we ever

leading others on a new path. Joseph Smith was

experience. On the path of forgiveness, Jesus Christ’s

a pioneer as he helped in the Restoration of the

atoning power can fl ow into our lives and begin to

Lord’s Church. Missionaries are pioneers because

they help others fi nd the covenant path. President Nelson is a pioneer heal the deep crevasses of the heart and soul.” by opening many lands for the preaching of the gospel. And the Savior The Savior took upon Him “our sins and the sins of those who have “is the ultimate pioneer in preparing the way.”

“Indeed, He is ‘the way’ (John 14:6) for the plan of salvation to be hurt or off ended us.” Those who are still in situations where abuse is ongoing need not stay

accomplished so that we can repent, and through faith in Him, return in that circumstance. “Please know that forgiving someone does not mean that you put to our Heavenly Father.”

He closed with an invitation to be faithful when confronting life’s yourself in a position where you will continue to be hurt.”

challenges and to stay on the covenant path. ff erent than those of the early From eff orts to fi nd peace and healing on the path of forgiveness, “I came to realize in a profound way that the same Son of God who atoned

Although the challenges today are di

pioneers, they are no less challenging.

“It is as important to follow the Prophet and keep our feet fi rmly deeply hurt me.” for my sins, is the same Redeemer who will also save those who have

brokenhearted, captive, bruised and perhaps blinded by hurt or sin. “The

pioneers.” planted on the covenant path of faithfulness as it was for the early Jesus Chirst off ers healing, recovery and deliverance to all who are healing and recovery He off ers is real.”

Elder Paul V. Johnson

Elder Ulisses Soares

General Authority Seventy

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

Like a cancer patient who needs the help of a

Men and women possess specifi c attributes and

divinely appointed responsibilities and fi ll equally

bone marrow donor to save his or her life, no one

is capable of cleansing himself or herself from

di essential roles in God’s plan of happiness. Their

ff erences do not override His eternal promises. “One

sin. “It is only possible through the Savior Jesus

has no greater possibilities for celestial glory than the

Christ and His infi nite Atonement.”

other in the eternities.” When spouses understand this principle, there is

The bone marrow recipient must do what

doctors require of them for the transplant to

no superiority or inferiority in their partnership. “They

work. “Although we can’t save ourselves, when we

become one in thought, desire and purpose with our

submit to the Lord’s will and keep our covenants,

Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, leading and guiding

the way is open for our redemption.”

Like the recipient’s blood cell’s DNA changing to match the the family unit together.” The unity between Adam and Eve “allowed them to walk together with

donor’s DNA, “we can have our hearts changed, have His image in our respect, gratitude and love, forgetting about themselves and seeking each countenances and become new creatures in Christ.”

The people of Zarahemla experienced a mighty change of heart other’s well-being on their journey to eternity.”

(Alma 5:7) because they “were willing to open their hearts and exer- The responsibilities of husband and wife to nurture and preside are op-

portunities, not exclusive limitations. “One person may have a responsibility

cise faith, and then the Lord changed their hearts.”

It can feel daunting to fulfi ll the Savior’s command that “ye should for something but may not be the only person doing it.” Loving parents “will

be perfect even as I” (3 Nephi 12:48). Remember, “We should not strive together to protect and care for the physical and emotional well-being assume we need to do what only the Savior can do in the miraculous of their children.” These responsibilities “do not imply hierarchy and abso-

lutely exclude any kind of abuse or improper use of authority.”

process of our perfection.”

The process of change takes time “and will not be completed until As men and women work together in true partnership, “we will enjoy

the unity taught by the Savior as we fulfi ll the divine responsibilities in our

after this life, but the promise is sure.”

marriage relationships.”

3

Elder James W. McConkie III

Elder Jorge F. Zeballos

General Authority Seventy

General Authority Seventy

As recounted in Mark 2, Jesus returns to Caper-

To design a structure that is seismic-resistant,

naum and villagers gather at the home where He is

a civil engineer makes calculations that indicate

staying and He begins to teach.

the dimensions, qualities and characteristics of the

A man “sick of the palsy” is carried on a mat by

structural elements. These results are translated

four friends but the crowd is so great that getting to

Jesus is impossible. The four climb to the roof and lower their friend

strictly followed. into plans and technical specifi cations that must be

Likewise, it is important to build one’s life by

to Jesus. He looks at the man on the bed, publicly

following divinely designed “plans and technical

forgives him of his sins and physically heals him.

“With that telling of Mark 2 in mind, several important truths specifi cations” — the knowledge of the plan of salvation, the restored gospel of Jesus Christ and the inspired direction

become clear about Jesus as the Christ.”

First, as individuals help others come unto Christ they can do so of living prophets. These plans teach clearly how to construct happy lives resistant to sin and temptation.

with confi dence that He can lift the burden of sin.

Second, “when we bring physical, emotional or other illnesses to As an earthquake leaves its mark even on structures that were

Christ, we can do so knowing He has the power to heal and comfort.” correctly designed and built, the attacks of the adversary can also cause

Third, as individuals make an eff ort to bring others to Christ, they “cracks” in spite of one’s eff orts to build their life according to divine design. But with the gospel of Jesus Christ, “we are still standing, … we

can trust that He sees their true intentions.

All are engaged as Latter-day Saint disciples in the work of bringing are ready to move forward.”

others to Christ. The example of the four friends emphasizes the spiritu- God will never permit His children to be tempted beyond what they al importance of community. “Whether in Argentina or Vietnam, Accra or can resist. The Savior provides an escape when facing adversity, tempta-Brisbane, a branch or a ward, a family or a missionary companionship, tion, incomprehension, infi rmities and even death. Because of the Atone- cult times. ment of Jesus Christ, all can be successful in constructing a life resistant

we each have a corner to carry.”

to sin and temptation and strengthened to endure diffi

Elder D. Todd Christoff erson

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

The doctrine of belonging has three parts: the

role of belonging in gathering the Lord’s covenant

people, the importance of service and sacrifi ce

belonging. in belonging, and the centrality of Jesus Christ to

As Zion is being established on every continent,

the Church will be comprised of members from

every nation and every people. “Having been given

this privilege, we cannot permit any racism, tribal

prejudice or other divisions to exist in the latter-day Church of Christ. …

As our Church population grows ever more diverse, our welcome must

grow ever more spontaneous and warm. We need one another.”

Belonging comes not in waiting for it but in reaching out to help

one another. The pioneers derived a deep sense of belonging, unity and

hope in Christ by the sacrifi ces they made. “Any sacrifi ce we make in

ransom for many.” the Lord’s cause helps to confi rm our place with Him who gave His life a

The highest and deepest sense of belonging is obtained through

keeping covenants with God. All can feel joy in pursuing individually and

communally “the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.”

“Being one with the Father, Son and the Holy Spirit is without doubt

the ultimate in belonging.”

4

Bishop Gérald Caussé

Sister Michelle D. Craig

Presiding bishop

Of the Young Women general presidency

Human interactions with the beauties of nature

An 1857 newspaper article describes a group

can produce some of the most inspiring and

of Latter-day Saint women “dragging handcarts

delightful experiences in life.

“The emotions we feel kindle within us a deep

in the black mud. like beasts” across the Plains. One woman fell

sense of gratitude for our Heavenly Father and His

“I’ve thought a lot about this mud-drenched

woman. Why was she pulling alone? Was she

earth.” Son, Jesus Christ, who created this magnifi cent

a single mother? What gave her the inner

But the work of creation is not an end in

strength, the grit, the perseverance to make

itself — it’s an integral part of God’s plan for His

children. Its purpose is to provide the setting in which men and women such a wrenching journey through mud, pulling may be tested, exercise agency, fi nd joy, learn and progress toward all her possessions in a handcart to an unknown desert home, at times being mocked by observers?”

returning to live with God.

“These wonderful creations were prepared entirely for our benefi t To be such men and women is the call of our day — “disciples

and are living proof of the love the Creator has for His children.” who dig in and fi nd the strength to keep pulling when called to

Our earthly stewardship can be guided by three principles: The walk through the wilderness, disciples with convictions that have

entire earth, including all life thereon, belongs to God. As stewards of been revealed to us by God, followers of Jesus who are joyful and God’s creations, we have a duty to honor and care for them. We are wholehearted in our own personal journey of discipleship.” Disciples of Jesus Christ can believe and grow in three import-

invited to participate in the work of creation.

“I testify that great spiritual blessings are promised to those who ant truths: We can keep covenants, even when it is not easy. We

love and care for the earth and their fellow men and women. As you stay can act in faith. We can be wholehearted and joyful in our devo-faithful in this sacred stewardship and honor your eternal covenants, tion. “When I stumble I will keep getting up, relying on the grace and you will grow in the knowledge of God and His Son, Jesus Christ.” enabling power of Jesus Christ. … This is my path of discipleship.”

Elder Kevin W. Pearson

Elder Denelson Silva

General Authority Seventy

General Authority Seventy

Partaking of the sacrament is a reminder of

A classmate showed and bore testimony of

Christ’s Atonement and the need to always remem-

the Book of Mormon to Elder Silva. That courage

ber Him and keep His commandments.

created a connection between Elder Silva and the

The sacramental blessing on the bread reads,

missionaries when he met them. He learned that

“ ‘And witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father,

being a disciple of Jesus Christ means to defend

that they are willing to take upon them the name of

the truth and proclaim it.

thy Son.’ … How many times have we witnessed unto

The Lord gives the opportunity to do what He

God that we are willing?”

would do if He were on earth — to go forth and

Willingness is proportionate to the amount of

time people commit to be in holy places where the Holy Ghost is present. preach the gospel. “Please, young men, do not Spend time in prayer and less time seeking other opinions. Change daily postpone your preparation to serve the Lord as a missionary.” Young women are welcome to work in the vineyard as well.

news feeds to the words of Christ and living prophets.

Honoring the Sabbath, paying tithing, attending the temple and honor- Those 24 or 18 months of service will pass in the mission fi eld

ing covenants are all powerful indicators of willingness. “Heavenly Father just as they would at home, but the opportunities in the mission fi eld loves us perfectly, but that love comes with great expectations.” are unique. “The privilege of representing the Savior Jesus Christ and

Focusing on the Savior and on covenants brings lasting joy. This is a His Church cannot be ignored.”

day foretold by ancient prophets. The most powerful spiritual infl uence in Youth called to serve on service missions are welcome and

experiences. And people in diff erent stages of life are also necessary

nants. a child’s life is that of parents and grandparents who keep their cove- necessary as well, for service missions also provide indescribable

“Casual and inconsistent covenant keeping leads to spiritual casualty. in the work of the Lord.

The spiritual damage is often greatest on our children and grandchildren. Courage to proclaim the truth and live the truth will mean comfort and peace during the turbulence of the world.

Parents and grandparents, are we still willing?”

“Trust in Heavenly Father and do not give up.”

5

Elder Neil L. Andersen

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

The Savior explained to His disciples that in the time prior to His Second Coming, the wheat — or “the children of the kingdom”

(Matthew 13:38) — would grow side by side with the tares — those who do not love God or keep His commandments.

“This will be our world until the Savior returns, with much that is good and much that is evil on every side.” With the wheat growing amid the tares, how can individuals deepen and strengthen commitment to the Savior?

sacrifi ce.” “First, we can immerse ourselves more completely into Jesus’s life, His teachings, His majesty, His power and His atoning

Second, “we make covenants with Him.” Making and keeping covenants allow the love of the Savior to sink more deeply into one’s heart. Third, “in this sacred quest, we treasure, protect, defend and safeguard the gift of the Holy Ghost with all our heart. … It is a gift beyond price.” Latter-day Saints are “children of the covenant” stretching across the nations and cultures of the world. “Seeking with all our heart to know and love

the Savior, we separate ourselves from the world through covenants with God, being distinct, uncommon and special as we honor Him and His teachings.”

SUN SUNDAY MORNING SESSION

Elder Jeff rey R. Holland Sister J. Anette Dennis Elder Gerrit W. Gong Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles Of the Relief Society general presidency Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

While the atoning

sacrifi ce of Jesus Christ is

unseen pain or sorrows Many individuals have

forever” isn’t just in fairy Being “happy and

central and essential to

and are often judged on

tales. “True, enduring joy

God’s plan of salvation for

their outward appear-

and eternity with those we

His children, The Church of

ance, adding to their

love are the very essence

Jesus Christ of Latter-day

burdens. The Savior has

ness.” of God’s plan of happi-Drawing closer to the

cross as a symbol. Saints doesn’t use the One reason is due

of love.” invited all to live “His way “We are commanded

Savior, including through

to the Church’s biblical

making temple ordinances

roots. The early followers of Jesus chose to not to love others, not to

highlight the crucifi xion and could “convey their judge them. Let’s lay down that heavy burden; and covenants, “we have a profound opportunity gospel identity through other means.” it isn’t ours to carry. Instead, we can pick up and gift to discover new spiritual understanding,

The cross was later introduced as a symbol the Savior’s yoke of love and compassion.” love, repentance and forgiveness with each

of generalized Christianity, “but ours is not a The Lord nourishes those who struggle with other and our families, in time and eternity.”

and peace underscore fi ve doctrinal principles.

‘generalized Christianity.’ … We are, rather, a love and kindness. Followers of Jesus Christ The scriptures and experiences of healing restored church, the restored New Testament should do likewise. By obeying Jesus Christ out of love for Him First, central to God’s plan, Jesus Christ promis-Church. Thus, our origins and authority go and Heavenly Father, “His love will fl ow through es to unite our spirit and body “that we might re-iconography.” back before the time of councils, creeds and us and make all that He asks not only possible ceive a fulness of joy” (Doctrine and Covenants Another is “the emphasis on the complete but eventually much easier and lighter and 138:17). Second, “Atonement — at-one-ment in

miracle of Christ’s mission — His glorious more joyful than we could ever imagine.” Christ — comes as we exercise faith and bring Resurrection as well as His sacrifi cial su When God’s children empathize with those forth fruits unto repentance.” Joy becomes full

and death.” A call that Jesus has given to every one of ff ering who also experience challenges and imperfec- when feeling His grace and forgiveness. tions, it can help them feel that they are not Third, “God knows us perfectly. … With per-

His disciples is in Matthew 16:24: “If any man alone in their struggles. “Everyone needs to fect mercy and justice, He encircles in His arms

judge people according to their works and those

[or woman] will come after me, let him deny feel that they really do belong and are needed of safety the humble and penitent.” The Lord will himself, take up his cross and follow me.” in the body of Christ.” Remember that each person is a child of who choose to repent will be redeemed.

“This speaks of the crosses we bear rather God who He loves. “Are there people in your path who you Fourth, doing proxy saving temple ordinanc-

than the ones we wear. … We follow Him every- have felt inclined to judge? If so, remember es can help “sanctify both giver and receiver.” where, including, if necessary, into arenas fi lled that these are valuable opportunities for us to Fifth, the Golden Rule teaches “a sanctifying with tears and trouble, where sometimes we practice loving as the Savior loves.” symmetry in repentance and forgiveness invites may stand very much alone.”

and desire.” us to off er others that which we ourselves need

6 6

Elder Joseph W. Sitati

President Steven J. Lund

General Authority Seventy

Young Men general president

Patterns of discipleship are “realities that

Following a summer when more than 200,000

govern our lives that we cannot change. When

teenagers fi lled hundreds of sessions of For the

we respect and align what we do with these

Strength of Youth conferences in the United

eternal realities, we experience internal peace

States and Canada for the fi rst time, those youth

and harmony. When we don’t, we are unset-

tled, and things do not work as we expect.”

tions. and others can maintain the fi re of their convic-

Pattern of faith: “Whenever we care to no-

As youth navigate “through arcs of growth and

tice, we see that Heavenly Father has given us

spiritual discovery to places of relative peace,”

sufficient witnesses of truth to govern our lives

so we will know Him and have the blessings of peace and joy.” what should they do to maintain that peace? “We

Pattern of humility: “Humility inclines the heart of the disciple must continue to do those things that brought us there in the fi rst

towards repentance and obedience. The Spirit of God is then able place like praying often, drenching ourselves in scripture and serving to bring truth to that heart, and it will find entry.”

Pattern of love: “When we focus our best efforts on loving God sincerely.” In spite of the challenges they face on a regular basis, today’s

and others, we are enabled to discover our own true divine worth, youth should be commended for the way they lean on the Savior to as sons and daughters of God, with the complete peace and joy successfully overcome sin and avoid temptation. ff of heroes displayed by “Let there be no doubt, it is the very stu

that this experience brings.”

Pattern of service: Love for God and service to others grow our youth when they set their hearts and minds to standing upright

into the attribute of charity. “This resonates with the pattern of against the shifting moral tectonics of our time.” consecrated service in the kingdom of God that is set before us Through trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ, and His covenant path, them.” by the Lord’s living prophets and apostles. We become one with “we can fi nd spiritual confi dence and peace, as we nurture holy our faith.” habits and righteous routines that can sustain and fuel the fi res of

Elder David A. Bednar

President Russell M. Nelson

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

President of the Church

Jesus’ parable of the royal marriage feast de-

The complexities and challenges of the world

picts rebellion to the king’s invitation — refusing to

leave many feeling overwhelmed and exhausted.

attend or being inappropriately attired. Symbolizing

Making and keeping covenants makes life easier.

God’s call and individual responses, it concludes:

The Savior has promised: “Come unto me, all ye

that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give

22:14). “For many are called, but few are chosen” (Matthew

you rest” (Matthew 11:28). “Those who live the

Being chosen is not an exclusive status. “Rather,

higher laws of Jesus Christ have access to His

you and I ultimately can choose to be chosen

higher power. Thus, covenant-keepers are entitled

through the righteous exercise of our moral agency.”

God does not have a list of favorites nor a limit to “the chosen.” to a special kind of rest.” “Instead, our hearts, our desires our honoring of sacred gospel cove- Becase Jesus Christ overcame the world and atoned for all of

nants and ordinances, our obedience to the commandments, and, most God’s children, all can overcome the world with His help. Overcoming importantly, the Savior’s redeeming grace and mercy determine whether the world means overcoming the temptation to care more about

the things of the world than the things of God. It means loving Him

we are counted as one of God’s chosen.”

Each should evaluate temporal and spiritual priorities sincerely and and His Son more than anyone or anything else. By seeking for and

prayerfully to identify what impedes blessings from Heavenly Father and following the promptings of the Spirit and striving to live His higher the Savior. “The Holy Ghost will help us to see ourselves as we really are. laws, “the Savior lifts us above the pull of this fallen world by blessing As we appropriately seek for the spiritual gift of eyes to see and ears to us with greater … rest.” hear, I promise that we will be blessed with the capacity and judgment “My plea to you this morning is to fi nd rest from the intensity, un-to strengthen our individual covenant connection with the living Lord. We certainty and anguish of this world by overcoming the world through also will receive the power of Godliness in our lives — and ultimately be your covenants with God. … Cherish and honor your covenants above

all other commitments. As you let God prevail in your life, I promise

both called to and chosen for the Lord’s feast.”

you greater peace, confi dence, joy and, yes, rest.”

7

President Henry B. Erying

Elder Ryan K. Olsen

Of the First Presidency

General Authority Seventy

Mortality has a mix of physical trials and

His 6-year-old nephew, Nash, helped

opposition from the adversary that each child of

come up with a solution to a project. Elder

Heavenly Father must work to overcome. Those

Olsen asked, “How did you get so smart?”

challenges present themselves regardless of where

Nash confi dently said, “Jesus.” This is a

an individual is on the covenant path.

simple yet profound teaching. The answer to

When President Eyring complained to his

the simplest questions and most complex

mother about a hard moment he was having at

one point in his life, she told him life is supposed

found in Him.” problems is Jesus Christ. “Every solution is

to be hard because it is a test.

He felt encouraged by his mother’s example of following the Savior At the end of Elder Olsen’s mission, he

mission president pointed to a picture of Jesus Christ and said

Moroni 7. and talked about Mormon’s example and legacy of faith as written in was troubled about not being a full-time missionary any more. His

Everyone needs a faithful friend or family member to provide it would all be OK because it is His work. “I felt reassured know-ing that the Savior will help us, not just while we are serving but

encouragement at some point.

“When you sit with someone as their ministering sister or brother; always, if we will let Him.”

you represent the Lord. Think of what He would do or say.” The Savior While serving as a mission president, a sister missionary told praise their e would invite them to come unto Him, encourage them, notice and him she did not feel good enough. He asked her what she would ff orts, and “be the perfect example for them to emulate.” tell someone else who felt the same way. She answered: “I would

lives. He loves you. You are good enough and you have got this!”

follow is the Savior. Even with a good example in this life, the strongest example to tell her that the Savior knows her perfectly. I would tell her that He

“The Savior knows your struggles in detail. He knows your great She realized it applied to her, too. The adversary is the architect of confusion; the Savior is the

potential to grow in faith, hope, and charity.”

Master of simplicity. He is the answer.

Elder Jonathan S. Schmitt

Elder Mark D. Eddy

General Authority Seventy

General Authority Seventy

Throughout scripture are examples of the

learning their name. One simple way to get to know someone is by

miraculous blessings poured out upon those who

Jesus knew and called people by name.

“Just as Jesus knows each of us by name,

lives. chose to try the virtue of the word of God in their

one way we can come to better know Jesus is by

First, Alma reminded his people of how the Lord

learning His many names.”

delivered their fathers and how “they were in the

Just as President Russell M. Nelson and

midst of darkness” but “their souls were illuminat-

other leaders have said, Latter-day Saints can

ed by the light of the everlasting word” (Alma 5:7).

draw closer to the Savior and better develop His

attributes by seeking to understand His various titles and names, “Does your soul ache for illumination? If so, please try the virtue of the word of God.”

and what they mean for us personally. Consider these fi ve titles: Second, Ammon referenced how many of their Lamanite brethren

deeming love. “In all our eff orts, let us remember to try the virtue of the

“Jesus wants for us to know Him because His is the only name word of God, which is in us.”

under heaven whereby we can be saved. … My earnest desire is that Third, Helaman teaches the word of God, “which is quick and power-you will come to know Jesus Christ by His many names and that you ful,” will “divide asunder” the methods of the devil (Helaman 3:29-30). “Are you seeking to cut through all the cunning and the snares and

life.” will become like Him as you exemplify His divine attributes in your the wiles of the devil so prevalent in the philosophies of our day? … Please try the virtue of the word of God.”

8

Elder Gary E. Stevenson

Elder Isaac K. Morrison

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

General Authority Seventy

Refl ect upon four questions.

“Whatever the source of our challenges, they

can be a golden opportunity to grow.”

testimony is?” First, “Do I know and understand what a

While he was serving as a stake president,

Elder Morrison’s family came home from a Church

ny?” Second, “Do I know how to bear my testimo-

activity for lunch. His three sons were playing in

the compound when his wife felt that something

testimony?” Third, “What are the obstacles in sharing my

was wrong. Eventually they checked on the boys

Fourth, “How do I keep my testimony?”

and found their youngest son, 18-month-old Ken-

A testimony is belief in or knowledge of truth,

given as a spiritual witness through the Holy Ghost. Key elements may neth, helpless in a bucket of water. “We rushed include: God is a loving Heavenly Father, Jesus Christ is the Son of the him to the hospital, but all attempts to revive him proved futile.” living God, Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, the Church is God’s re- Though they knew Kenneth would be part of their family eternally, stored Church, and the restored Church is led by a living Prophet today. they were devastated not to be able to raise him in this mortal life.

Individuals bear testimony when they share spiritual feelings with From their loss, they learned specifi c lessons, and felt united and bound by their temple covenants. “We also gained experience neces-

others, either spoken or through righteous behavior.

One obstacle may be uncertainty about what to say. Bear witness sary to minister to others and empathize with their pain.”

that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and thoughts will fl ood into the During tough times, one can feel peace and cheer because of bearer’s mind. Another obstacle can be fear. “Having faith … will allow Him. “The love we feel because of the Savior and His Atonement you to overcome these feelings and freely share what is in your heart.” becomes a powerful resource to us in our trying moments.”

A testimony must be nourished with much care — through the word By exercising faith in the Lord during trials, one grows in disciple-

of God, prayer, obedience to commandments and participating in ship and receives strength and help from the Savior to carry burdens. “As we follow Him, especially in our diffi cult times, we can grow to

temple and family history work.

become more like Him.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook

President Russell M. Nelson

Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

President of the Church

Elder Cook’s great-great-grandfather Heber

The heavens have been open during the

C. Kimball and fellow Apostle Brigham Young

fi ve conference sessions. “I pray that you have

had the responsibility of evacuating the Saints

with them.” recorded your impressions and will follow through

Jail. from Missouri while Joseph Smith was in Liberty

Heavenly Father and His Beloved Son,

About 30 years later, Heber C. Kimball,

then in the First Presidency, taught that: “Many

increase your e Jesus Christ, stand ready to help. “I urge you to

ff orts to seek Their help.”

of you will see the time when you will have all

Season 4 of Book of Mormon Videos is com-

the trouble, trial and persecution that you can

ing, including depictions of the Savior’s appear-

and His work. stand, and plenty of opportunities to show that you are true to God ance to the Nephites. “It is signifi cant that the Savior chose to appear

“To meet the diffi culties that are coming, it will be necessary for to the people at the temple. It is His house. It is fi lled with His power.”

you to have a knowledge of the truth of this work for yourselves.” Never lose sight of what the Lord is doing — He is making His tem-ples more accessible, He is accelerating the pace at which temples

The Book of Mormon prophet Alma gave counsel to his three are built, and He is increasing the ability to help gather Israel.

sons — two were “true to God and His work.” Alma wanted each The Lord is also making it easier for each to become more spiri-to have a testimony of Jesus Christ. His preventive counsel was to tually refi ned. “I promise that increased time in the temple will bless bridle passions, but for those who have transgressed, to repent. your life in ways nothing else can.”

“In Alma’s day, in Heber’s day, and certainly in our day, we all President Nelson’s announcement of 18 new temple locations

need to seek our own testimony of Jesus Christ, bridle our passions, included four in the Mexico City metropolitan area. repent of our sins, and fi nd peace through the Atonement of Jesus “May you focus on the temple in ways you never have before. I Christ and be true to God and His work.”

bless you to grow closer to God and Jesus Christ every day. I love you.”

9
