## The Teacher

The moment I decided that I wanted to be a teacher is very clear in my mind. It was during World War II, and I was stationed on the little island of Ishima in the Ryukus. This island, a small, lonely one, is just off the northern tip of Okinawa.

One summer evening I went out to sit on the beach to watch the sun go down and ponder on my hopes and dreams in life. I remember looking up at the moon and thinking, "That is the very same moon that shines down on my home in Utah." I was thinking about what I wanted to do with my life after the war, should I be fortunate enough to survive. What did I want to be? It was on that night that I decided I wanted to be a teacher.

Several things helped me make this decision. First, I pondered on the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith that a man is saved only as fast as he gains knowledge. There would be no better way to gain knowledge than to teach. Since we are here in mortality to learn and to serve, and learning and teaching go so closely together, I determined that I would be a teacher. Then I could learn; then I could be of service to Him.

In the process of meditating there for several hours, I reconciled the fact that if I chose teaching, I could never  expect to be a wealthy man. I knew that I could not choose wealth and also choose to teach. Yet I was very content with the decision.

That determination to be a good teacher never left me. I thought from time to time that I would like to be a seminary teacher. It offered a great opportunity to serve, and I held in great admiration President Abel S. Rich, President John P. Lillywhite, and Bishop Harold S. Nelson, who had been my seminary teachers. Each time I thought about that, however, I dismissed it from my mind, realizing that I had not attended college before entering the military service and that no doubt only the best of the finest men available were selected to teach seminary. I just put that thought somewhat above what I should aspire to do.

The opening to teach seminary came, however, in a way that convinced me it was an answer to my prayers, for I truly wanted to be of service. Someday perhaps that story can be told, for it is fundamental to my testimony.

After I had been a teacher for a number of years, one September I wrote the following:

"Last Monday, on one of my rare days at home, I was out in a large grove of trees near our little homestead. My little boys were with me, and we were cutting firewood for the fireplace for winter. It was a beautiful, crisp, September morning. The sun was filtering down through the foliage, and I stood and contemplated the scene before me.

"My little boys began to pick sunflowers to take to their mother. Suddenly I was struck with an impression. It was a spiritual experience. I experienced a reverence for life and a humility that is not always constant with us.

"It was September, and school was about to begin. There came to me once more that excitement that comes every year when school time approaches. I have not been free from it as a teacher any more than I was as a student—the pleasant anticipation of knowing that it is school time once again.

"Soon I would be a teacher again. Perhaps few can understand such a feeling. If you are a teacher by profession and do not understand it, something is missing from your life—something you should seek for and find, even at great cost."

Teaching is a great responsibility. If you are a parent or grandparent, if you are called as an officer or a teacher in the Church, or if you are a missionary, you labor under tremendous responsibility to fulfill your callings faithfully and well.

"Why Hadn't the Instructor Told Us?"

Some years ago I had an experience that taught me this lesson. During the winter of 1943, World War II was raging in full intensity. I had enlisted in the Air Force and was assigned to Thunderbird Field, near Scottsdale, Arizona. We were training in open cockpit Stearman trainers.

One day one of the planes crashed, and one of our classmates lost his life. Flight schedules were immediately intensified. This was war and no time for anyone to become jittery.

The cadets in our class had all soloed, and that afternoon found us practicing landings at an auxiliary field. At the close of the day it was my assignment to take a plane across the valley to the main field.

Out of curiosity I decided to fly over the crash site. It was plainly visible from the air. One could see the spot where the plane had hit, burst into flames, and skidded across the desert floor, burning the chaparral in a long, sooty smear. My curiosity satisfied, I then headed back for the base.

We had been taught the various maneuvers: stalls, loops, spins. In order to lose altitude to enter the landing  pattern, I decided to put the plane into a practice spin. That is the quickest way, of course, to lose altitude.

In attempting a recovery from the spin (and perhaps frightened by the thoughts of the accident), I was clumsy and I overcorrected. Instead of a recovery, the plane shuddered violently, stalled, and then flipped over into a secondary spin.

Never have I known such panic. I found myself clawing at the controls. I really don't know what happened—I think I probably let go of the controls. The plane was used extensively as a trainer because it almost had the capacity to fly itself if you'd leave it alone. Finally it pulled out in a long, sweeping skid, just feet above the desert floor.

I quickly recovered my composure and made a normal landing, with the hope that no one had seen my circus performance!

No doubt you too have had a frightening experience where shock set in afterward. Long into that night I experienced almost the same panic as I had had in the plane. My buddy, a member of the Church from southern Utah, who was sleeping in the lower bunk, was awakened by my restlessness. I told him what had happened and asked, "What did I do wrong?"

He told me that his instructor, early in their flight training, had warned against just such an occurrence. He had pointed out the singular danger of a secondary spin and had taken each of his students up and demonstrated how to recover, should it happen. This training, this warning, had insured him against mortal danger.

There arose in me intense resentment for my instructor. Why hadn't he told me? Why hadn't he warned me? Another second or two in that spin, and—well, you would have been spared this story. His negligence as an instructor had come that close to costing me my life.

Great responsibility rests upon those of us who are  leaders and teachers and instructors in the Church. There is the possibility that one for whom we are responsible, if unwarned, may spiritually falter, stall, or spiritually "spinin."

I resented my instructor because he had failed in his duty to warn me of a mortal danger. The next few days I wasn't very good at flying. I was tense and tied up and frightened.

After a particularly bad flight, my instructor said, "What's the matter with you, Packer? You're no good at this. Why can't you loosen up? You keep this up and we're going to wash you right out of the program!" I was afraid to tell him what was bothering me. And then he said, "I have a special assignment for you this weekend. I want you to go into Phoenix and get right good and drunk. You go get loosened up and relax, and maybe we can make a pilot out of you."

You'd have to know how much I wanted those silver wings to know what a trial that became. I could see the thing that I then wanted more than any other thing on earth slipping away from me. There was a great temptation to follow his advice. To imbibe in spirits would loosen me up, he thought, and restore the confidence I had lost. But those spirits are counterfeit spirits. They lift you and then drop you all the lower.

I did go to Phoenix that weekend, but I sought another kind of Spirit. In association with brethren in the priesthood and with members of the Church in worship service, I found it. There came an inspiration and a restoration of confidence. There came an assurance that has sustained me ever since.

In later years, after I became a teacher, I could see more clearly how my flight instructor, with every intention of doing a worthy job of teaching, may have been distracted, or may have forgotten, or may not really have sensed the  importance of that lesson that my buddy's instructor had so thoughtfully given him.

As teachers, we must always be on the alert. From that experience I learned a great lesson about teaching.

Limits Have Been Set

The gift to teach must be earned, and once it is earned, it must be nourished if it is to be kept. If it sleeps too long, it may die. As it works it grows. When a child is born, its little body is created, and, except for the starting process, man has no control over the fact that he is a human being. The Lord in His wisdom has precluded man from tampering with or controlling the development of the human body. The pattern is set. Man cannot make a human into some other animal, or a tree, or an insect. Knowing the ability of man to become wicked, the Lord has set limits on what he may do. Some freedom is given as it relates to plants and animals. Many of the flowers that beautify the world today never existed "naturally." Roses, gladiolas, and camellias as we know them are for the most part the products of the study and efforts of man. He has taken the small, wild variety and through application of natural laws has produced a flower that is more fragrant, more beautiful than any that existed before. The fragrance, the leaf texture, the size, and the color of the flower are controlled by botanists who are familiar with the laws of nature. A botanist can take colors and mix them in flowers almost as an artist would mix paints. But limits are set.

But man cannot cross the species! There are very closely defined limits. A donkey may be crossed with a horse and a mule will be the offspring, but the mule is sterile and cannot reproduce itself. A chicken may be crossed with a pheasant, but the offspring is sterile and cannot reproduce itself. A lion can be crossed with a tiger, but the offspring is sterile and cannot reproduce itself.

Man Controls the Development of Character

These limits keep man, in periods of perversity, from creating monstrosities for his own amusement. Such limitations, however, for some reason do not seem to be in place when it comes to the character and the nature of man. We can tamper with its development and set patterns of creation that can produce a monstrosity. The development lies largely within the control of mankind.

It is the responsibility of the teacher and the parent to mold and build the character and the attitude into something beautiful and enduring. That is a great responsibility. The Lord will not consider lightly how we use the opportunity.

It is good for students when you, as a teacher, will admit on occasion that you love to teach. Such an admission has a good effect upon both the student and you, the teacher. That is true of parents with their children. It gives them great security and makes it possible for them to have trust; it encourages them to bring their questions to be answered. This is important. It is good to let them know on occasion that you love being a parent or a teacher and that it is important. Thereafter you feel an obligation and desire to make your teaching really worthwhile.

A Teacher Should Take Criticism

A teacher should be willing to take constructive criticism. If you can find someone who has the courage to give it to you wisely, it will be among the most valuable contributions to your life.

Shortly after I returned from service in World War II, I was invited to speak in a sacrament meeting in a nearby stake. The patriarch, S. Norman Lee, was a man whom I had known for a number of years. He was on the stand, and after the meeting he complimented me on my talk and said, "I think you mispronounced a word." I was immediately  irritated but passed it off by saying, "Oh, is that so? Well, I will have to try to watch that."

I thought seriously about it afterwards, and the next time I saw him I expressed my appreciation to him, for I realized that he was trying to help me.

After sensing that I had come to appreciate his criticism, he was kind enough thereafter to continue. Over the next ten years, I served as an assistant stake clerk, a stake high councilor, a seminary teacher, and a city councilman, and I spoke in many meetings—church and public—where Brother Lee was in attendance. He always had some comment afterwards by way of coaching me, and I was always grateful to him.

On one occasion I was sitting in the audience at the leadership meeting of a stake quarterly conference. A member of the Council of the Twelve was in attendance and the stake president called on me to give the invocation. The request came so unexpectedly that I was greatly frightened. I thought I did not do very well, and as I came back to my seat Brother Lee, who was sitting next to the aisle, took my arm and pulled me down beside him.

"You were frightened, weren't you," he whispered. When I admitted that I was, he whispered a thought or two on how to prepare for such experiences. I will always be grateful for his suggestions and comments.

When I became the president of a mission and had young missionaries, I used the same procedure with them. Some of them I told exactly what I was going to do. I told them that there's one way a person can be relieved from any correction, and that is to show the slightest resentment. One or two of them did, and I never bothered them with correction again. Others were grateful for it, so I did all I could to help them on the way to success. This, of course, is a contribution to the Church, for they will probably develop into substantial leaders.

On one occasion I was interviewing prospective seminary teachers. One of the applicants was not qualified because all of his training had been in elementary education. I was, however, favorably impressed with him.

There was one thing about him that I knew would be a serious limitation to his ability to teach. All during the interview I struggled with the question of whether I should discuss it with him. Since he was not qualified to be a seminary teacher, I thought, "I'm under no obligation. I'll spare myself the discomfort of touching on such a delicate subject." However, the thought entered my mind, "He's your brother." My only motivation was to help, so finally I ventured.

"Has anyone ever talked to you about your teeth?" I asked. Several of them were deformed and so crooked that they protruded though his lips. He told me that earlier in his life he'd had a little dental attention. Some teeth had been pulled, and he was assured that the others would straighten themselves out; however, they did not.

Perhaps unfortunately, his teeth were so healthy that he'd not found it necessary to go to a dentist in the years since.

"Do you know that you can have that problem corrected?" I said.

"Well, not really," he said.

"You have the makings of a very good elementary school teacher, but I think you will not be in the classroom one day without suffering the nickname of Fang, or Sabertooth, or whatever other name the children can invent. You ought not to suffer that when it isn't necessary. Hasn't anyone ever talked to you about this before?"

He told me they had not, and I was appalled that in an otherwise great college of education not one of the professors would counsel him on something so obvious.

If We Love Them, Help Them

It is not easy to take criticism. Sometimes it is even harder to give it. But a teacher has that responsibility. If we love our students, we will do all we can to help them, even if at times it has the promise of disturbing the relationship between us. When we are called as a teacher, when we are a parent, we have that authority and that responsibility. We must use it righteously.

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever. (D&C 121:41-46.)

That Certain Something

I was called upon almost every day as a seminary supervisor to judge teachers and to judge men—not the ultimate  salvation type of judgment, which is correctly reserved for other officers, but a judgment or appraisal of their abilities as teachers and administrators.

There are few characteristics that have been declared essential in this matter of teaching. It has, for instance, nothing to do with how tall a man is or how much he weighs or where he was born or even where he went to school. It has little to do with the color of his hair or his complexion or even his talents. This ability to teach and to lead men is elusively related somehow to the composite of all of them.

In our work, we coined a word for our own use, meaningless to others, but by definition that certain elusive something that makes one a teacher. It is often most obvious by its absence; its presence can be cultivated and improved upon or it can be smothered or neglected.

It is strange to analyze an individual and find that he is not remarkably outstanding in any single characteristic that one might name and yet when all his qualities and characteristics are formed together in a graceful complementary association, he looms head and shoulders above those with whom he associates. He is a teacher!

"I Want You to Learn the Subject"

Among the great teachers I have known was a short, rather unimpressive man, a professor of mathematics at Washington State College in Pullman, Washington. It was during World War II, and there had been established at many of the universities in the country a college-training detachment for the training of air cadets, who were given three months of concentrated academic training before moving to an air base to be trained as pilots.

I was a high school graduate and had done well in the subjects that I enjoyed—and not so well in others. My overall grade was a very average average. In fact, it might  be encouraging to some high school students to know that the authorization for me to graduate was held up for a day or two because some work for an English class was not complete. There was a question as to whether I would graduate, for I needed every bit of credit in every course.

Mathematics was not my favorite subject. In fact, years later when I was trying to complete a doctorate degree, that subject posed a great trial for me.

At any rate, World War II erupted when I was a senior in high school, and of course all young men looked forward to military service. I wanted to be a pilot. My older brother, Leon, had already graduated as a pilot. Being a very ordinary student, I felt I probably could not pass the qualifying examinations, but I decided to at least make the effort with one or two other young men from our community.

The test was given at the old Salt Lake Air Base. I will not forget how I agonized over that test because I knew I was an ordinary student. When we were finished the sergeant went over the tests. In order to pass, one needed 125 points. He had a cardboard key that he laid over the test and quickly made the first tabulation. My score was 124. My heart sank. I had failed. But without saying anything, he started going over the paper again and checking something else. Finally he glanced at me, saw my agony, and said, "Some of the questions were in two parts, and we give credit for each part of it if you have it right." I think I prayed up those two-part answers. He found two of them, making a full point, and so I passed the test with the exact minimum score that would qualify me.

I remember to this day that one of the questions was a multiple choice question, "What is ethylene glycol used for?" Since I had worked in my father's garage, I knew it was an ingredient in automobile antifreeze. There were two possible right answers to that question. I had one of them. That little bit of practical knowledge I had gained,  without knowing it was worth anything, qualified me to be a pilot and an officer in the Air Force, or at least to make the attempt.

The first assignment was with the college-training detachment at Pullman, Washington. Here there was a great weeding-out of the candidates. We were given an intensive physical and academic training course, and those with deficiencies—physically, emotionally, or academically—were washed out and sent to some other branch of the service, generally to the infantry.

This was sensible, of course, because if we became pilots and were in large planes, we would have the lives of crew members in our hands every moment we were at the controls. Purposely, a lot of pressure was applied in our training, and there was rigid military discipline.

Among the classes was one that loomed as a mighty mountain, impossible for me to climb. That was the course in mathematics. Most of the cadets in our group had attended college for at least a short time and a few were graduates. I went to that class with great apprehension, knowing that surely by comparison I could never pass the course.

But then I met Dr. Schaeffer. He began the course something like this: "During the next three weeks we will spend about two hours a day in the field of mathematics. We will move rather rapidly from basic mathematical computations through an introduction of calculus. What we will do is review all that you have learned in your elementary and high school courses and give you an introduction to the mathematical concepts usually taught the first two years of college."

By that time I was already mentally putting on my infantry boots. But Dr. Schaeffer continued, "I should say at the outset that I am teaching this class for those who do not know the subject, not for those who do. I'm sure  many of you have had the college work and that the overview of the basic subject will be boring to you. But I repeat, I am here to teach those who do not know, so we will move at a pace to accommodate them. I will be available to answer any questions, and you may make appointments with me after hours if you wish. And remember, I want you to learn the subject." That's the way he taught.

I did need special help, and he did give it to me. Out of sheer necessity to survive, I asked many questions in class that otherwise might have been embarrassing. I passed that course, the most difficult by every measure that I was subjected to there, with an adequate grade. I learned most of what I know about mathematics from Dr. Schaeffer.

But more than that, I learned from him a great lesson that I later was to use in teaching. It was the source of great satisfaction, years later when I was a supervisor for seminaries in the Church, to be assigned to Washington State College to visit the institute director there. I contacted Dr. Schaeffer, told the above story to him, and fervently thanked him for being the teacher he was.

	
	
1975
 

 

"Having First Obtained Mine Errand from the Lord"
