## The Question

The simplest way to learn something is to ask a question about it. Questions and answers are essential to any teaching method. They constitute the process most used in teaching in the home. Children are full of questions, and parents need to be equally full of answers.

In all training and teaching and classroom situations we find the question. This was true of Jesus as He taught His disciples or the multitudes. There is something interesting and meaningful about the way He handled questions and answers. He asked many questions. He answered but a few of them.

It is also interesting that the Spirit of the Lord, in teaching Nephi, used many questions:

Behold, what desirest thou? (1 Nephi 11:2.)

Believest thou that thy father saw the tree of which he hath spoken? (1 Nephi 11:4.)

What desirest thou? (1 Nephi 11:10.)

Knowest thou the condescension of God? (1 Nephi 11:16.)

Knowest thou the meaning of the tree which thy father saw? (1 Nephi 11:21.)

Thou rememberest the twelve apostles of the Lamb? (1 Nephi 12:9.)

Answering a Question with a Question

Contrary to what you may suppose, the Lord generally did not answer questions—at least not in the usual way, particularly the questions that came from those who were tempting Him. Generally He did not answer them with a direct answer or an explanation. In fact, He almost always responded by asking a question of those who raised the question in the first place.

Consider the occasion when the tempters asked Him if it was lawful to pay taxes to Caesar. This was a loaded question. If He had answered, "No, it is not lawful to pay taxes unto Caesar," He would have been guilty of treason and subject to death. If He had answered, "Yes, it is legal to pay taxes to Caesar," He would have immediately incurred the wrath of the Jews, who had been conquered by the Romans and detested the heavy taxation. Neither a yes nor a no answer was safe.

Notice how the Savior handled the question asked Him by the Pharisees and the Herodians:

"Tell us therefore, what thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?

"But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?

"Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny.

"And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?"

Notice that He is asking them a question; the initiative is with Him now.

"They say unto him, Caesar's. Then saith he unto  them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's.

"When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way." (Matthew 22:17-22.)

On another occasion He had told the people to love their neighbors as themselves, and so a question came to Him, "Who is my neighbour?"

He might have given a direct answer, "Your neighbor is the one who lives next door to you," or, "Your neighbor is everyone in your block or in your community, or in your nation," or, "Your neighbor in this context is everyone in the world."

But He did not answer the inquiry that way. He began with a narration.

A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.

And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side.

But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him.

And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.

And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee. (Luke 10:30-35.)

When the narration was over He asked, "Whom sayest thou was the neighbour?" And when they had answered, He commended them for the correct answer. That brings us to the point: Who answered the question? Well, of course, His listeners answered their own question after some discussion and teaching. They answered their own question by answering His question.

Be Careful Lest You Answer

You can employ the same techniques. When a student asks a question, be careful lest you answer it! Or more emphatically, be careful lest the teacher answer it. How easy it is for a teacher to respond quickly to simple questions, to close a conversation that might have ignited a sparkling and lively class discussion.

The wise teacher deftly and pleasantly responds, "That's an interesting question. What does the class think of this?"

Or, "Can anyone in the class help with this interesting problem?"

A simple two-way conversation, and you've involved the whole class and their minds come alive and are open to teaching.

Few things are so agonizing for a new teacher as to want to start a discussion and then have everyone remain silent. The use of discussion, simple question and answer, is one of the basic, useful, and important teaching processes.  It often does not go well simply because the teacher does not know how to ask questions or how to respond (or how not to respond) to those that are asked by the class.

Good questions to use when teaching moral or spiritual values, when teaching subjective principles, are questions that ask, "Why do you think?"

"In your opinion, what . . .?"

Or, "In your estimation, how . . .?"

"Where, do you think?"

"In your mind?"

"When?"

Or, "Would you please explain?"

These questions relate little to factual details to be remembered, but they are thought provoking.

Do you remember when you were in your Sunday School class recently? The teacher asked a question. You started to put up your hand, then hesitated and brought it down. You weren't all that positive that you knew the answer. You were sure you did, but you were not positive; and because of the possibility that you might embarrass yourself, you did not respond.

Rescue the Student

Isn't it a pity that in a Sunday School class or a priesthood class we would be so concerned about giving a wrong answer and embarrassing ourselves that we would refuse to participate? And yet that is the way it generally is. It is that way partly because some teachers don't know how to handle questions.

Suppose you are a Sunday School teacher, and in a class of young people you say, "John, please tell us who was the fourth president of the Church."

John blurts out, "Abraham Lincoln."

And of course everyone in the class laughs. They needn't tell him the answer is wrong, or that it's a stupid  answer, or that he himself is stupid. All of this is conveyed when they laugh at him.

A teacher can rescue the student if he's alert. We are wise if we never make a student feel he is stupid or wish he had not replied. Experiences like that make us hesitant to participate and reduce our ability to learn. They also reduce the ability and opportunity for many to teach.

Accept the Responsibility

What can a teacher do in such a case? For one thing, he can take the blame himself. "I'm sorry, John, I didn't make the question clear. It was the Church we were talking about, not the country. Perhaps I didn't explain it plainly enough."

In that way, the teacher accepts responsibility. When a student responds to a question and his answer is not right or is only partly right, the teacher can kindly say, "Perhaps I did not make the question clear."

Or, "I had not thought of it in just that way."

Or, "Perhaps you are thinking of this other instance."

Or, "Your answer indicates a point that perhaps most of us have overlooked."

Or, "I'm glad you have brought that up."

Or merely, "Thank you for your response. I'm still looking for another answer to the question."

Imagine a class of Aaronic Priesthood holders or a Sunday School class. The teacher asks the question, "Which president of the Church led the pioneers west from Winter Quarters to the Salt Lake Valley in 1847?"

John responds, "I think it was Heber J. Grant."

The teacher winces, looks around the room, and says with a note of exasperation in his voice, "Isn't there anyone in the class who can give us a correct answer?" From then on, John will no longer volunteer an answer. He'll even be hesitant to answer when you call on him, because by  your handling of the question and the inflection of your voice you say, "Look, stupid, don't we have enough problems without having dumbbell answers like that in our class?"

John is not the only one who is affected, either. The other students will develop reticence and reluctance. You have only about three chances at something like this, and then it's very difficult to get a class to respond. On the other hand, if John gives an incorrect answer and you rescue him, apologize for the question, and help him out—maybe give him something of a hint—you will find you can do much to encourage participation on the part of the class members.

If we handle questions like this routinely, the class soon develops confidence and class members are willing to respond, even at the risk of giving an incorrect answer; they soon become outgoing instead of withdrawn. The student will not begin to raise his hand and then pull it back for fear of being embarrassed. A teacher must cultivate this method of handling questions. It takes the development of mutual respect.

Reword the Question

There was something else wrong about the first situation. We have talked about the wrong answer, but there is also something wrong with the question. The question, you will remember, was "John, tell us please, who was the fourth president of the Church?" If you frame a question that way, the instant you say "John," the other students in the class relax. They put their minds in neutral and realize that John is on the hook to answer this one. There's no need for them to scratch in their memories to try to remember who was the fourth president of the Church.

If a teacher is alert and wise in posing questions, he  will reverse the order and say, "Tell us please, who was the fourth president of the Church?" Then he will pause briefly and look around the class, at one student or another and yet another. Immediately they are alerted that they may be asked and their minds are thrown into high gear; they begin quickly to think, "Let's see now, Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff. It would be Wilford Woodruff." Then each person in the class is doing something about learning, scratching in his mind to dig up an answer.

After the class members have been working mentally for a minute, the teacher can say, "John," and he will respond, but all of them have participated silently. Remember that the question, "Who is the fourth president of the Church (pause), John?" is a much better question than, "John, who is the fourth president of the Church?"

A Better Question

There is something else about questions that a teacher should keep in mind. Suppose I were to ask you, "Would you please give me the year, the month, the day, and the time of day that the Prophet Joseph Smith was martyred in Carthage Jail?" I doubt if you could answer that. In fact, I think there would be very few who could. Such a technical question is ordinarily not the kind of question that will encourage conversation and participation.

Often a teacher will wonder, "Why can't I get this class to participate? They just don't seem to respond. I will ask a question, and everybody will look blank. Then I'll ask something else, and I don't get a response. Pretty soon the silence is so loud that I read something out of the manual or do something else. I just can't stand the nonparticipation."

It may be that it's the kind of questions you ask. After all, what does it matter what year it was or what day it  was or what time of the day it was? That information is not essential to anyone's salvation.

A much better question would be, "In reviewing Church history, let me remind you that it was in the afternoon of June 27, 1844, that the Prophet Joseph Smith was killed. We know about what time it was because the watch that John Taylor wore was struck by a bullet and stopped at that hour. Tell me, please, why was Joseph Smith willing to go to Carthage when he knew what would probably take place?"

Now that's a question to which more people will respond, and you should have no difficulty getting a discussion started, because they would have some idea as to why the Prophet would be willing to go to Carthage.

There's an even better way to phrase that question, and that is to say, "In your opinion, why did Joseph Smith go to Carthage when he knew he would be in danger?" Then there really can be no incorrect answer, because the class members give their opinions. Their opinions may not be accurate or technically perfect, but they are giving them as you have asked them to—"In your opinion." If you phrase your questions like this, you will have much better opportunity to generate discussion in the class.

Sometimes a well-prepared teacher, with much information about the lesson, is frustrated and unable to get class participation started simply because the question he asks is not the kind of question that makes the class comfortable, and the reactions to incorrect answers dampen student participation.

It is important for a teacher to make sure that the students understand there is only one stupid question, and that is the one that is never asked. It is worth a few minutes in class to explain that no one is all-knowledgeable. No one knows everything; everyone is uninformed in one area or another that is known to most people. It is not out of  place for members of a class or for parents and children to ask questions.

More than once I have scolded members of a class just a little when they seemed to ridicule in one way or another a question asked by one of the group. And I have repeated with some emphasis the statement that there is only one stupid question: the one that isn't asked. Every student should have an open invitation to ask questions all of the time.

We make it a consistent practice in our family to respond to the questions of our children, and in doing so, we find that they ask many questions. If parents are not careful, they can dam up the quest for knowledge.

"You Are My Friend"

A number of years ago I was in the Southwest Indian Mission and waited some time to meet with the mission president, Alfred E. Rohner, who was in an interview with an Indian brother. Afterwards he told us that this Navajo man had appeared at the office and asked to see him. President Rohner invited the man into his office, and they sat there for a long time and said nothing. President Rohner, familiar with the Navajos, knew that this was the "Indian way," that it wasn't necessary to be talking all the while the man was there, and he sat there for a long time.

After considerable time the Navajo asked President Rohner how to spell a word. I have forgotten what the word was—it was not an uncommon word, but a word of three or four syllables. President Rohner gave him the correct spelling, and then the Navajo brother asked if President Rohner would write it on a piece of paper for him. He did so, and the Indian brother gave an indication that he was going to leave. President Rohner was interested in why the man wanted to know how to spell that word, and after visiting with him, he learned something very interesting.

This Navajo brother was working for the tribal council. He was employed on a road crew and was evidently a dependable worker for the week before he had been made foreman of a crew of workmen. At the end of the week it was necessary for him to fill in some forms. He had a meager education and was able to speak English well and write it to a degree. Filling in forms, however, presented something of a challenge. In doing so, he found that he could not spell one of the words. So he had driven seventy miles to mission headquarters to ask President Rohner how to spell it.

President Rohner then asked him, "Why did you come all the way here? There are many people who could have helped you with the spelling. You could have gone to the trading post or stopped at the service station or gone to one of the schools and saved the long trip."

The Navajo man replied in logic that is very sensible to anyone who is a teacher. "You are my friend, so I came here."

Keep that incident in mind when you're dealing with the questions of your little children, of your teenage children, of those whom you teach or whom you direct as an officer or teacher in the Church, or of those with whom you come in contact in your work. It is so easy to pass off questions, to ignore them, or to give some offhand answer. I repeat that we have made it a practice in our family of always responding to questions and stopping whatever we are doing to make explanations. This keeps the lines of communication open. If your own children can come to you with their questions and know that they will not be belittled in any way, many another serious problem is forestalled, In a class, if a student is able to ask questions, the class will be a successful experience, and the class members will enjoy it and will respond. Keep that in mind.

The Right Answers for Wrong Questions

I learned an important lesson about answering questions from President Henry D. Moyle. We were in Alaska to attend a youth conference and were scheduled for a television interview. For some reason the cameras had been set up at Elmendorf Air Force Base, so we went there for the interview. A member of the Church who was a television star at that time also was scheduled to be at the youth conference but at the last minute had to cancel.

When we arrived at the place of the interview the commentator was obviously disappointed as he looked at President Moyle and me and said, "Is this all there is?"

The mission president indicated that we were the two to be interviewed. "We were given to understand that there would be theatrical luminaries present," the commentator responded.

When the mission president explained that the television personality had canceled her appearance, the commentator was obviously irritated. When he became discourteous to President Moyle, I could restrain myself no longer. I said to him, "I'll have you know this is a member of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And in most places in the world the media are very interested and anxious to have an opportunity to schedule an interview with him."

The commentator settled down a little and finally said, "Well, I suppose we might just as well go ahead." He started the interview with questions that exposed his antagonism.

The interview lasted for over thirty minutes. Later, as we were returning to the car, I said, "President Moyle, that was marvelous, just marvelous. How did you do it?"

President Moyle asked, "What do you mean?"

I said, "All those antagonistic questions he asked you; it was just marvelous the way you handled them. He was so antagonistic and bitter and yet the interview itself was successful."

I have never forgotten his answer. He said, "I never pay any attention to the questions—that is, if the interviewer is antagonistic. If he doesn't ask the right questions, I give answers to questions he should have asked."

That short statement from President Moyle held great wisdom, and on a number of occasions I have been rescued in difficult situations by referring back in my mind to his comment.

On one occasion, in Halifax, Nova Scotia, I was invited to appear on a talk show on which people who were thought to be interesting were interviewed. The missionaries had arranged my appearance on the show, thinking it would help the Church. It was obvious to me in the beginning that the commentator wanted to talk about me personally. He asked several questions about my teaching experience, my military experience, and so on, and seemed to be avoiding any questions about the Church.

Remembering what President Moyle had said, I paid little attention to his questions and directed the answers in such a way that I explained the Church program rather than talked about myself.

On another occasion I was scheduled for an interview in Maine. The missionaries who had arranged the radio interview apologized to me beforehand, saying that the commentator appeared to be antagonistic and was intent on embarrassing me and the Church with questions about who could or could not hold the priesthood.

Again I remembered the experience with President Moyle, and when the interviewer raised his first question about the priesthood, I quickly countered with a question: "Do you know anything about the priesthood?"

He said, "No," and I was immediately able to take lead in the interview. "You know about the elders, don't you?" "Not very much," he said. So I began to tell him about the elders who were preaching the gospel in the cities and was able to urge those listening to invite them in and hear their message.

The time allotted for the interview had elapsed before he was able to twist the conversation back to the point where he had hoped to begin.

When Sister Packer and I were touring a mission in South Africa, the branch president in Salisbury, Rhodesia, had arranged a television interview for me with a man who  was known to be very brutal to those who appeared on his show. Again there came into my mind the statement of President Moyle: "If they don't ask the right questions, I give answers to questions they should have asked."

On several occasions, in addition to the experiences mentioned, I have been protected in very challenging circumstances by remembering the counsel by the first counselor in the First Presidency of the Church.

Teachers and students, parents and children would also do well to remember this counsel. Sometimes the question that isn't asked but should have been is as important as the one that is actually asked!

	
	
1975
 

 

Handling Very Difficult Questions
