## Is Like Unto . . .

Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently ( 1975)
	
		CHAPTER SIX

Is Like Unto . . .

There is a practical way in which faith or any other intangible ideal can be transposed into something tangible and teachable. In fact, there is a formula we can use. This procedure can help teachers, especially teachers of religion, immeasurably. It can also help parents in teaching some difficult things to children.

At first the formula may seem too simple to be useful. But as we study it a bit and begin to experiment with it, we find it very useful.

I remind you that this method of teaching comes from the New Testament. And I remind you also that Jesus as a teacher taught unlettered audiences about the invisible, intangible ideals of the gospel. In teaching faith and love and brotherhood and repentance, he employed the technique of likening the intangible, invisible ideal to a wellknown, ordinary object about which His disciples already knew. To relate the unknown to the familiar is known to educators as the principle of apperception. Here is the formula:

_________________ is like ________________

In the first blank enter the idea or ideal that you must teach. For example, in the first blank write FAITH.

Faith is like ________________

Now use your imagination and think of a tangible object the student will recognize that might be likened unto faith. The homier, more commonplace, more ordinary it is, the better your illustration. Perhaps you will use this one: FAITH is like A SEED. Faith really is like a seed—at least Alma thought so:

Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me.

Now behold, would not this increase your faith? I say unto you, Yea; nevertheless it hath not grown up to a perfect knowledge. (Alma 32:28-29.)

Notice that you have reduced faith to a tangible object the students know. Now you have something with dimension. Faith can be compared to a seed. Jesus used this illustration: "Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you shall say unto this mountain, remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible to you." (Matthew 17:20.) In  using the mountain for the comparison, He introduced size, making the lesson more understandable and impressive.

Once you have likened faith to something tangible, you can form word pictures of it, describe it, measure it; you can tell the size, the shape, the color, the texture; you can draw it on the chalkboard, find a picture, make a slide or a flannelboard cutout. You might show some actual seeds as an object lesson—perhaps displaying a seed from a vegetable packet or a stone from a fruit.

The young students could be given some corn seeds to plant in containers. The teacher could water a plant and let other plants wither, to demonstrate, as Alma did, that faith must be nourished.

When the teacher uses comparisons such as these, students soon begin to "see" what faith is like and come close to knowing and understanding a gospel principle.

Apperception—Relating the Unknown to the Familiar—Is a Key to Teaching the Gospel

Apperception can work in many lessons to teach such intangible concepts as faith, hope, charity, love, reverence. They can be taught very effectively and with great meaning even to young minds. Knowing this principle is of great value to the teachers at home or in the Church. It really is not necessary to falter and stumble and half-teach these virtues when they can be successfully taught. To know this one thing is a very important key in teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Suppose we use another illustration. Take the subject repentance.

Repentance is like _______________

What commonplace thing familiar to everyone could be likened to repentance? Suppose we use soap.

Repentance is like _______________Soap

A lesson to explain this idea might be developed as follows:

Repentance is the soap of life. When properly used it can cleanse us from our transgressions; yet some people stay dirty. Why? Why do so many individuals not use repentance when it is individually, immediately, and constantly available to everyone?

You could illustrate the misuse of the ideal in this way. Describe a beautiful, white handkerchief, pure and untouched, that is dropped in the mud. If it can be carefully washed, it will be clean once more. But suppose it is dropped in the mud again and washed again; then into the mud and washed again many times. The handkerchief soon becomes gray and ingrained with dirt, and it is much harder to get it clean, even with strong soap.

On one occasion I sat with a group of seminary teachers, presented this formula, and asked them to put their minds to work on the subject of teaching repentance. In an hour of discussion we produced a dozen or more life situations that might be used.

Use Imagination

It is important to understand that if you are too literal or too technical, no comparison or reference or "liken unto" will satisfy, not even those the Lord used. You must use imagination.

I remember one teacher arguing that repentance really  isn't like soap. For that matter, the kingdom of heaven really isn't like a net, nor are the Pharisees like unto the whited sepulchre. Some creative imagination is necessary. If you don't try to develop that, then you will be a very dull teacher, not an interesting one. If you are determined to be too literal, no apperceptive reference is quite good enough.

Let me illustrate how likening repentance to soap can be used to teach this important gospel principle.

"My! What Filthy Men!"

During World War II, I was being transferred overseas from Langley Field, Virginia. The group I was with was transported in boxcars that had been made into makeshift sleeping cars by attaching bunks to the walls so they could be folded up during the day to allow room for us to move around. We referred to the accommodations as cattle cars. Our meals were served from a camp kitchen and cooked over an open fire in one of the cars. The fire was built on a six- inch layer of dirt.

Our luggage was separated from us the first day, so for six days and six nights we traveled across the southern United States wearing the same uniforms without the possibility of bathing or changing or washing our clothes. Since it was July, the heat added to a very sweaty situation.

We arrived in Los Angeles on Sunday morning and were told we were free until afternoon; then we would report back to the train and continue to a military base in northern California preparatory to going overseas. The ten members of our bomber crew got together in the station and pooled our money. We determined that the one thing we wanted most was a good meal.

We went to a fine restaurant and stood in line waiting to be seated (there were always long lines at restaurants during the war). The civilians in line were in their Sunday  best. I was in front of our crew, and in front of me were several distinguished-looking ladies. They could tell we were there without turning around: our unbathed condition announced that. Finally one woman did turn around. She studied me carefully from head to toe and then announced in a voice loud enough to attract the attention of everyone in the restaurant, "My! What filthy men!"

We endured the humiliation silently, but oh, how I wanted to be clean! How soap would have helped! I will never forget how I determined never to go before the Lord spiritually filthy. If repentance is like the soap of life, I want to use it frequently and properly.

These two examples—likening faith unto a seed as is done in the scriptures, and likening repentance to soap—may provide a lesson for our day, demonstrating how tangible, familiar things from the world about us can be employed as symbols for the intangible, invisible ideals that sometimes are difficult or impossible to describe with words alone.

	
	
1975
 

 

It's in the Book