## Handling Very Difficult Questions

Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently ( 1975)
	
		CHAPTER ELEVEN

Handling Very Difficult Questions

A teacher must expect to be confronted frequently with difficult questions. Often these are questions to which there is no satisfying or comforting answer. A teacher cannot know everything. The Lord has not yet revealed everything. And yet, to a teacher the questions will come, asking about everything. He should have the humility to say, "I don't know." Often that will be the only true answer. If it is something that he should know, it is well to add, "I should know the answer to that, and I can find out the answer. When I have been able to do so, I will give it to you."

When we are teachers in the Church, we will often find ourselves saying, "I do not know the answer, and I do not know anyone who does know the answer to that." We needn't be afraid or ashamed to say that. It won't hurt the students to know that we're not all-knowing.

There are some things that a teacher can keep in mind when a very difficult question arises—and there are some difficult questions that are asked frequently. Sometimes they are asked by those who really do not want to know, but who are antagonistic. Often, however, they are asked by someone who simply doesn't know and doesn't understand and is trying to find an answer. Then we as teachers are obligated to help.

The Principle of Prerequisites

There is a principle of education that we might entitle "The Principle of Prerequisites." Let me illustrate.

Most educational programs require the completion of basic or prerequisite courses before one can register for advanced courses. For instance, one cannot register for Chemistry 171 or 181—advanced courses—until he has completed Chemistry 24, 25, and 26, the basic elementary courses. That is common sense. Without the fundamental principles of chemistry, the 181 course would, at best, be a mistake. To understand it all, even a brilliant mind would need to know about basic elements, about atoms and molecules, about electrons and protons, about valence, compounds, properties, formulas, equations, densities, solutions, suspensions, and mixtures. Chemistry is a vertical field. A foundation of information must be built before one can proceed upward.

Perhaps there may be a genius who could register for the graduate course in chemistry and, without the prerequisite courses or even an introduction to the fundamentals, survive and achieve a top grade. There might be such a student—but there likely isn't. If one should attempt to master the advanced course first, he will end up in confusion and will then learn to dislike the subject and perhaps the teacher, and might wonder about a school that would subject him to such misery.

This elementary principle of prerequisites applies to all disciplines. It relates to all subject matters.

Every student must learn the value of mastering fundamentals. Teachers must know that. There are few things so well demonstrated in the learning process.

If we apply this principle of prerequisites to a very difficult question, we will approach it in an entirely different way. There just isn't much use in trying to answer a difficult question for someone who has not undergone  the prerequisite study of faith, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Unless he knows something about revelation and about authority, whatever answer we give will not be satisfying to him.

I, for one, do not object to having such questions raised anytime, for it immediately gives me the opportunity to deal with fundamental principles of the gospel. Our missionaries try with such effort to get people to listen to the principles and doctrines of the Church, many of whom are not interested. They want to spend the time of day talking about anything but the doctrines. However, when some-one asks a difficult doctrinal question, the way is immediately opened to discuss basic doctrines. Consider an approach such as this: "If you really want to know the answer to that, there are some things I'll have to explain first, or you will never understand the answer when I give it to you. You will have to know that God lives. I know that He lives. [Now you are bearing testimony.] You will have to know that He reveals His mind and will to prophets."

When, as teachers, we are confronted with difficult questions, we must keep in mind the principle of prerequisites, and if the inquirer has not had the prerequisite courses, then we should start there and give him a brief course in fundamentals. He will learn the answer in no other way.

When we are confronted with a difficult question on plural marriage in pioneer days, or why the general public can't enter our temples, or any of a number of others, we must meet the question head-on with forthright candor and not try to avoid it. We must not apologize for the position of the Church. We must not "do battle" for it. We must not try to "convert" the questioner to it. We should explain the reason, but explain it on the basis of the prerequisites. It is a waste of time to try to discuss the question  politically or philosophically or sociologically or ethically; we must get to the point and begin to discuss it theologically. If the questioner won't listen to the prerequisites, he'll not obtain the answer. If he does, he'll not have a problem.

There is another important matter we should discuss. A teacher naturally wants everyone to be satisfied and in agreement with him. That is not always to be. Often in the best teaching someone is left unsatisfied, perhaps even upset. Particularly is this true if we have an encounter with someone who is antagonistic. A mature teacher will know from the beginning that when the conversation is over, someone will be unsettled and upset. Let it not be the teacher. If the student has not had the prerequisite courses nor the basic understanding on which to get an answer, and won't be patient to be taught them, he will end up unsettled and disturbed. But we shouldn't be embarrassed or unsettled or disturbed about his being disturbed.

I think it not unkind to say that if a teacher is uneasy or disturbed about such questions, perhaps the place he needs to look is at the basic courses. Did he skip some of them? Is he uneasy about these questions? A peace of mind about them, of course, is to be found only on his knees. If we are sincere and open, humbly and spiritually tuned, we'll be all right. If we want to be popular and have everyone in agreement with everything we teach, we want something that never will be.

Master the Fundamentals

Now one other illustration on prerequisites. Let's suppose that I am stricken physically and collapse in an area with no nearby hospital. Suppose the first person to my side and without his satchel is my doctor. Suppose he diagnoses that except for immediate surgery my life will be over.

I can conceive of my consenting to his finding an old rusty spoon, sharpening it on a curbstone, boiling it in an old can, and then, with whatever else he might gather to assist him, proceeding with the surgery. At least I'd rather submit to him under those circumstances than be rushed into the operating room of a large hospital, with all its modern equipment, its sterilized atmosphere and precision instruments, and have a nonmedical person proceed to operate.

I'd like to know that the one who is going to operate on me has at least some idea of what he will be looking for when he has me opened up. I don't think I'd be too anxious for my doctor to operate either if he had skipped all the prerequisite courses and had taken, as his initial course, advanced surgery, with me as one of his first patients.

There is good reason to ensure that a medical doctor begins with basic courses in physiology and that it is a long time, indeed years, before he finally touches a scalpel to living flesh. There are some things that he just must know before he arrives at that point.

This ought to be sufficient to fix in our minds the advisability of putting first things first, of mastering the fundamentals and then moving on to more advanced achievement.

Anyone can ask a difficult question. Anyone can tune in from the outside and want to know all about statistical analysis, for example, before he has learned to add and subtract. To attempt to satisfy him on that level is to confuse him.

Reassure Him

The most important thing we as teachers can do with our students is to assure them that we are at peace, to understand difficult, even controversial, issues, we must  realize there are some things that we can't answer. I don't have the slightest embarrassment or hesitancy to say that I do not know why the Lord has done some of the things He has done.

But there are some things I do know. I do know that we will never be without some of these difficult questions. I do not feel that they have ever hurt the church and kingdom of God. I do not think we have lost an honest convert because of the position of the Church on controversial matters. I do know that the more arrogant and academic and self-centered a person is, the less likely he is to be satisfied with an answer that has spiritual implications.

I had the privilege of doing missionary work in an area where there were many investigators with advanced academic degrees. Many of them had great admiration for the Church and perhaps would have joined for the social benefits they observed in it, but some of the difficult questions we have talked about became stumbling blocks for them. Those who sought the answers spiritually, who approached them theologically, and who humbled themselves found sufficient answers and came into the waters of baptism. Others did not. The strait gate and the narrow way repelled them and they proved themselves to be not ready.

Too Sacred to Discuss

I hope these comments will lead you, as a teacher, to face difficult questions without anxiety and without fear. There is one other thing I should add. There may be times when you are asked a question—perhaps about the temple—and you know the answer but you are not authorized to respond, simply because he who asks has not completed the prerequisite courses. The prophet Alma declared:

It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him.

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell. (Alma 12:9-11.)

All teachers are, of course, themselves students. While as teachers there are some difficult questions that we can hardly attempt to answer, likewise as students there are some questions that we could not in propriety ask.

One question of this type I am asked occasionally, usually by someone who is curious, is, "Have you seen Him?" That is a question that I have never asked of another. I have not asked that question of my Brethren in the Council of the Twelve, thinking that it would be so sacred and so personal that one would have to have some special inspiration—indeed, some authorization—even to ask it.

Though I have not asked that question of others, I have heard them answer it—but not when they were asked. I have heard one of my Brethren declare, "I know, from experiences too sacred to relate, that Jesus is the Christ." I have heard another testify, "I know that God lives, I know that the Lord lives, and more than that, I know the Lord." I repeat: they have answered this question not when they were asked, but under the prompting of the Spirit,  on sacred occasions, when "the Spirit beareth record." (D&C 1:39.)

There are some things just too sacred to discuss: not secret, but sacred; not to be discussed, but to be harbored and protected and regarded with the deepest of reverence.

There are many difficult questions, including some that we will not be able to answer, and many things are to be taken on faith. As a teacher, therefore, do not let difficult questions create difficult problems for you or for those you teach.

	
	
1975
 

 

We Are Children of God