## Apperception

Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently ( 1975)
	
		CHAPTER FIVE

Apperception

When we study how Jesus taught, we might note that He employed one principle of teaching more than any other. If we also understand this principle and employ it, it will improve us as teachers of religion perhaps more than any other thing that we could learn about His teaching techniques. Educators refer to it as the principle of apperception.

Understanding Through Previous Experience

Apperception is defined as "the process of understanding something perceived in terms of previous experience." This means that if we have something difficult to teach, such as honesty or reverence or love, we should begin with the experience of the student and talk about the things he already knows. Then when we make a transfer or comparison with what we want him to know, he will perceive the meaning.

Jesus was indeed the master of this process. To analyze how He used the principle and to understand why He used it so frequently is enlightening for anyone who desires to teach successfully in the home or in the Church. We will explain this principle in very elementary terms, because it constitutes such a fundamental part of the teaching of Jesus.

Man Uses Symbols for Communication

The most conclusive certification of man's intelligence is his ability to recreate in symbolic form the world in which he lives. He has produced the alphabet of the language, which is a system for sound. Through it, he is able to write and then to read his writing. He can also verbalize the symbols and write, read, and speak—all in symbols.

For instance, the letters C-A-T are the symbols for cat. Yet they look nothing at all like a cat.

They are not the size of a cat, nor the shape of a cat, nor the anything else of a cat. Nevertheless, a little youngster soon can be taught that those symbols represent cat. They can be vocalized; we can say the word. We can say all of the parts of it separately (C-A-T) or we can put the letters together and say the word in one syllable (CAT). There we have it. In one word only, we can convey the idea: cat.

With the twenty-six letters of the alphabet rearranged into various words, we can convey a great deal about cats. We can "create" sitting cats, sleeping cats, running cats and jumping cats, spotted cats, and striped cats, all with words alone.

If we say it is a large cat, we have introduced size. We can describe just how large the cat is. If we say it is eight inches high at the shoulder, we know that it is a small cat. If we say that it is thirty-four inches high at the shoulder, then we know that it must be a lion or a tiger or one of the very large cats.

In addition to size, we can also talk about color. We can say that it is a brown cat or a black-and-white cat. If we already know that it is a large cat and we say that it is striped with black and orange and some white, we know that it is a tiger.

Shape

With both size and color we have become more specific, but we are by no means through with the tools at our  disposal. We can also talk about shape. With a few words, we could teach a youngster to identify the silhouette of a lion from the silhouette of a tiger of the same size simply by pointing to the shape.

The lion has a mane and a tassel at the end of its tail. That difference in shape would be enough to tell the two apart.

We can also say that the cat has fur and that it is very soft fur, and texture has been introduced to further describe the cat.

Once we have created a word—a noun—we can convey much information about it by using size and shape and color and texture. But that is just the beginning.

Another example: Suppose we have a youngster who has no idea in his mind what an elephant is. He has not seen one, nor has he seen a picture of one. With words, how might we put into his mind the idea of an elephant?

First of all, we would start with something he already knows. He has seen some kind of an animal, of course. We would begin by saying that an elephant is an animal.  Immediately we have taught him a great deal. Now he will not confuse a tree with an elephant, or a mountain with an elephant, or a house with an elephant, or a river with an elephant. He will know it is an animal.

Then we might use the other tools previously mentioned that are available to the teacher. We could tell him what size animal it is—very large—and then compare it to something else he already knows. We could show him how large by saying that an elephant, even a half-grown elephant, could not possibly walk through the door in the room; it is just too big to get through such a small opening.

We could compare it with something else he knows.

We might say that a large elephant is so large that its back would touch the ceiling of the room. Now the youngster has size in mind. Even if that is all he knows about elephants throughout his life, it isn't likely that he will ever see a cat, a mouse, a dog, or even a horse, and make the mistake of saying, "There goes an elephant."

An elephant has a unique shape. With words alone we might describe that shape.

Then there is color. Ordinarily elephants come in only one color. In teaching color, we might show the child something that is gray, something that he knows and can see to compare it with. If we wanted to be very technical, we could tell him about albino elephants; however, white elephants are so rare that this is a technicality. I have been to Africa and have seen wild elephants, hundreds of them,  and I have seen them at the circus and in zoos, but I have not seen a white one, and more than likely neither have you—so that is probably being too technical. We'll discuss the matter of being too technical later.

Texture

There is yet another tool to use, and that is texture. Once we say that an elephant has no fur, that it is not soft like most animals, but has a rough-textured skin, we add to the child's knowledge about an elephant. We can describe the skin as wrinkled and then find something like it that he can see, something he knows; then we will make a comparison with an elephant's skin, saying, "It is like this."

Now our lesson in words is nearly completed, for we have described the size, the shape, the color, and the texture of an elephant. Those things put together set an elephant apart from every other animal on the earth.

There are other steps, such as showing the child a drawing, a small carving or sculpture, or, even better, a photograph of an elephant. And if we could show him a motion picture of an elephant or take him to see an elephant in a zoo, then he would know what an elephant is.

Now that is a lot to say about cats and elephants. I have gone to such length for a significant reason. Most of the things we are obliged to teach can somehow be taught by using the tools we have just discussed. We can recreate the tangible, material world around us in symbols, utilizing some useful tools in making those symbols descriptive. We can convey from one person to another the idea cat or the idea elephant by describing these in terms of size, shape, color, texture, weight, position, and a number of other features.

Teaching Intangible Principles

The reason the teaching of the gospel ofttimes is so difficult is because it is our responsibility to teach such intangible principles as faith, repentance, love, humility, reverence, and modesty. In teaching the gospel, we do not recreate the material world around us; we deal with the intangible world within us, and there is a big difference. None of the ordinary tools are available to us. To convey to a youngster the idea of a cat is much simpler than to convey the idea of faith; faith is very difficult to describe.

For instance, how big is faith? We soon learn that size is not helpful. Only vaguely can we talk to a youngster who knows nothing about faith by talking about an amount, such as much faith, or little faith. We can't tell him what color it is. We can't tell him what shape it is. We can't tell him what texture it is. And that is the point! When teaching moral and spiritual values, most teachers do not realize that the basic tools—the hammer and the saw and the ruler, common basic tools for building material images in other people's minds—are not used in the same way as they are used to teach anything else. They cannot be used directly. A whole new set of tools, designed in a different way, must be employed.

It is far, far easier to recreate the visible, tangible world around us in alphabetical symbols than to recreate the intangible, invisible world within us and have it understood.

For example, consider a scriptural definition of faith: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.)

How much do we know after we have read these words? One would almost have to know what faith is in order for that definition to mean something; then it means very much. It is clarified in the Book of Mormon: "Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if  ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.)

That helps, but if we are starting from a meager knowledge of faith, we still can't talk about it much after pondering over those two scriptures. If a student were to hear them, or even memorize them, he still may not know or understand what they mean or what faith is. As a teacher, we still may not have conveyed the concept of faith.

What do we do, then, if we cannot use the regular basic tools of teaching to convey moral and spiritual values? What do we do with the intangibles? How do we teach them? Well, of course, there is a way. We can tell stories about people and their actions that demonstrate faith. This is helpful and may put the idea of faith in the mind of a student. But it is not the most effective way. A more effective way is to tie the invisible idea of faith to some tangible object the student already knows about and then build from that knowledge. This way will be emphasized in the next chapter.

In the first chapter we mentioned the lens grinder who finally discovered that one little step meant the difference between success and failure in being able to grind the perfect lens. It is like that with teaching.

Use Tangibles to Teach Intangibles

If somehow we might associate faith with something the student already knows about, something that is tangible and measurable in dimensions, then the teaching about it would become much easier. Then we can form words to describe it and create stories about it. We can measure it. Better still, we can draw pictures of it. We can make slides or flannelboard presentations of it. We can show it in color or present it as an object lesson. Then we are on solid ground with the students because students,  generally speaking, are more interested in what they know about than in those things they don't know about.

The letters in the alphabet can be arranged in words, which in turn become symbols for objects in the tangible world about us. We can open a book full of such symbols and read them, and in so doing, we can "see" the things the symbols represent. In a similar way, commonplace things that we already know about can be made to represent intangible, invisible ideals. We can learn to "read" these symbols, and in so doing we can "see" the things that they represent, such as faith, love, charity, and obedience.

That is how Jesus taught. Each of us may learn to teach that way also, and in the next chapter is a formula to make it easier. If we learn to teach as Jesus taught, we can then teach our own children and the other children of our Heavenly Father "all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for them to understand." (D&C 88:78.)

	
	
1975
 

 

Is Like Unto . . .