## We Are Children of God

In many churches of the world a doctrine is taught that holds that men are basically evil; that they are earthy and carnal and devilish, conceived in sin and possessed of a tendency to be wicked. This doctrine holds that the corrupt and evil nature of man must be conquered. It holds out the meager hope that by an extension of grace man may, on occasion, be lifted from his evil, carnal, and groveling state. In simple terms it avers that man is, by his very nature, inclined to be bad.

That is false doctrine. I could not accept it to be true and still be a successful teacher. The doctrine is not only false; it is also very destructive. Should one accept it, the assignment of a teacher to discipline his class or of parents to discipline their children would be hopeless indeed.

Good, Not Evil

How glorious it is to have the revealed word of God, to know that we have a child-parent relationship with Him. If we are of His family, we have inherited the tendency to be good, not evil. We are sons and daughters of God.

The word God, with one letter added, can be changed very quickly to good. The word devil, with one letter deleted, becomes evil. The central message of all revelation is that God is our Father. We therefore are inherently good.

It is essential for a teacher to understand that people are basically good. It is essential to know that their tendency is to do the thing that is right. Such an exalted thought is productive of faith. It makes all the difference when we stand before our own children or go before a class of young people to teach them.

I am fully aware that in the world there are individuals whose basic motivation seems to be contrary and disruptive and evil. I know this exists, but it is against their nature. If we are to teach, we must constantly remind ourselves that we are dealing with the sons and daughters of God and that each, being His offspring, has the possibility of becoming as He is. It is encouraging for a teacher to keep in mind the statement, "As man is, God once was, and as God is, man may become." This ideal was beautifully framed in verse by Lorenzo Snow in his poem "Dear Brother," written in January of 1892, three verses of which I quote:

As Abra'm, Isaac, Jacob, too.First babes, then men—to gods they grew.As man now is, our God once was;As now God is, so man may be,—Which doth unfold man's destiny.The boy, like to his father grown,Has but attained unto his own;To grow to sire from state of son,Is not 'gainst nature's course to run.As son of God, like God to be,Would not be robbing Deity;And he who has this hope within,Will purify himself from sin.

I am aware of those scriptural verses that speak of the fallen state of man. I know that some verses describe man's depravity. However, when we take the revelations as a  whole, that idea is balanced and overshadowed by the constant message that the word father in scripture means father.

A Spark of Divinity

Years ago I determined that if I were to be a teacher, a belief in the goodness of man must be fundamental to my philosophy of life. The day I made that decision, things began to change rapidly. Thereafter there was always hope. No matter how fractious or difficult or lawless others appeared, I knew that somewhere within them was spark of divinity to which we can appeal.

Such basic love and respect are essential to those who would teach. It is essential to the parent as he looks at his children. It is essential to the teacher as he looks at his class. Although at times it is hard to maintain that belief, it nonetheless is true. A fundamental quality of good discipline is the ability to love those whom you are to teach and to maintain a desire to be a servant.

I repeat, I believe that the tendency in the human family is to be good and to do the thing that is right. I believe it is the desire of men to want to possess the noblest virtues. Men, women, and children, given the opportunity, have within them the disposition to do that which they ought to do. Furthermore, it is natural with men to want to learn.

It takes great searching and often great generosity to see the good and the divine in students. Yet such a search will be rewarded. Let me tell you of two experiences.

When I was teaching seminary I frequently heard the name of a boy, a junior in high school, who was the bane of all the faculty. Somehow I had never seen him. "You are not a teacher until you've had him in class," was the expression.

One day during fourth period, the door flew open. In came a young man, about five feet eight, well built, with  heavy shoes. He stomped down the aisle to where I was standing at the chalkboard and thrust an admittance slip at me. In what I thought to be the mimic of a stutterer he said, "I am K-K-K-K-Kenneth."

He needn't have said his name. I knew who it was when he was two steps into the room; his reputation had preceded him. I thought, "What have I done to deserve this?"

I wish I could tell all that happened in the next few months. That would be worthy of a book in itself. Kenneth came from a broken home. He had a major speech impediment. He was a show-off, an interrupter, and a disrupter of the first order. He was something of a natural comedian and was admired and despised by the students at the same time.

Constantly I reminded myself that somewhere inside this boy was the disposition to want to learn.

A month or two later, in an after-school conversation, I was aware that he had not stuttered. He was able to talk to me in an unhesitant flow of words. When I mentioned it he said, "I didn't use to stutter. With a few people I can talk without that. But when I get up in front of a class and try to say something, it's just like somebody puts a steel collar around my throat. The harder I try to talk, the tighter they cinch it up."

Some months later early on a Friday evening he telephoned me at home. There was to be a dance after the basketball game that night, and he was wondering what he ought to wear. "Would a sweater be all right?" His question was incidental and easily answered. I'll not soon forget how I felt after that conversation when I realized the confidence that had been rewarded when he was willing to call me, his teacher, to ask a question like that.

Remember that a fundamental part of discipline is to know and to understand and to believe that all men are  basically good; that we are children with heavenly parentage; that all men are instructed sufficiently that they know good from evil; that there is hope for everyone.

A Lesson Learned

The second such experience occurred during my first year of teaching. In my class was a teenage girl who disturbed me a great deal by a seemingly insolent attitude. She wouldn't participate and she disturbed the class continually. On one occasion I asked her to respond in class with something that took no previous preparation. She said, with some impudence, "I won't."

With some pressing I insisted, but with increased impudence she refused. I said something very foolish to the effect that "students who are not willing to respond are not to be given grades or credit." And under my breath I said, "We'll see. You'll either conform or else."

A few weeks later in a parent-teacher visiting session her mother described her as being shy and retiring and hesitant to participate. Shy and retiring conduct would not have disturbed me; it was the impudence and insolence that had concerned me.

Fortunately, before I could describe her impudence to her mother, her mother added, "That's because of her speech impediment."

In surprise I asked what that was. The mother said, "Oh, haven't you noticed?" I hadn't noticed! "She will do almost anything to keep from participating in groups," her mother informed me. "Her speech impediment is such an embarrassment to her."

After the conference with her mother I felt about two inches tall! I should have sensed that there was some reason for her to react the way she had. I spent that year making my repentance complete. I counseled with the girl  and drew her out. "We will work together on this," I told her.

Before the end of the year she was responding in class and participating often, with the help and cooperation of the other students. She had success experiences many times in appearing before them.

I am still ashamed of my first handling of that situation. But I learned so much from it that I am glad it happened. I think in the long run she came out none the worse, and I came out much the better as a teacher.

Fundamental to the discipline of any child or any class or any organization, fundamental to the success of any teacher, is a knowledge that each one he teaches is a child of God. Fundamental to teaching the gospel is the conviction that men are basically good.

An incident from pioneer days illustrates a successful search for good in the youth of the Church.

Out of Order

In the days of the pioneer settlements it was not uncommon to have a ward marshal whose assignment, under the direction of the bishop, was to maintain orderly conduct among the teenagers.

On a Sunday evening after sacrament meeting, the ward marshal at the little settlement of Corinne came upon a buggy with some teenagers. Since it was his responsibility to check on the young people, he stealthily crept near the buggy to see what was going on.

He managed to reach a rather insufficient tree close to the buggy just as the moon came out. He had to stand more or less at attention to keep from being seen, but he could easily hear all that was transpiring in the buggy.

Later, in reporting to the bishop, he told what had gone on. There had been some jokes told, much laughter, and the usual teenage chatter. He said they sang several  songs. The bishop interrupted with the question, "Well, was there anything out of order in that situation?" His answer: "Yes! Me, behind that ______ tree!"

How often have we scolded our children with "You are a bad boy," or "You are a bad girl"? We do better if we believe that there is no bad boy or bad girl. There are bad things and bad actions. Do not say, "You are a bad boy." Say, "It is a bad thing that you have done." The better approach is, "It is too bad that a good boy like you would do a bad thing like that."

The relationship of an adult to a child is little different from the relationship of an adult to an adult. The feelings of the children are honored. There is little difficulty in control, and the child develops dependability. Little children at an early age can develop a responsible relationship with their parents.

I Will Trust Everyone

A few years ago I indulged on one occasion in some introspection and found there were reasons why I didn't like myself very well. Foremost among them was the fact that I was suspicious of some I met. I had in mind this thought: "What's his angle? What's he going to try to do?" This came about because I had been badly used by someone I trusted. Cynicism and bitterness were growing within. I determined to change and made a decision that I would trust everyone. I have tried to follow that rule since. If someone is not worthy of trust, it is his responsibility to show it—not mine to find it out.

"A" Grade—Number One

Students, including our own children, will rise to our high expectations of them. When I was a teacher, I always made a certain speech on the first day I met a class. I made it to each new group of missionaries that arrived in the  mission field. I have also always tried to convey to others around me the same message. It is a message of confidence. The speech goes something like this:

I assume that you are mature. I look upon you as being old enough to be able to learn and sensible enough to want to. Right now I may not know who you really are or where you have been or what you have done. Most of that, depending on you, will not matter. I take you just as you are and stamp you "A-Grade, Number 1." You can prove yourself to be less than that, but you will have to work at it. I will be very reluctant to believe it. If there is something about yourself that you do not like, now is the time to change it. If there is something in your past that has been disabling, spiritually or otherwise, now is the time to rise above it.

I have found that with remarkably few exceptions the response has been for people to want to rise above themselves. This has a stabilizing effect. It helps immeasurably with discipline and creates an environment where learning can take place.

As I begin a new relationship with anyone—students, missionaries, or those with whom I associate or whom I supervise—it is on the basis of confidence and trust. I have been much happier since. Of course, there have been times when I have been disappointed, and a few times when I have been badly used. I do not care about that. Who am I not to be so misused or abused? Why should I be above that? If that is the price of extending trust to everyone, I am glad to pay it.

I have come to be much less afraid of that possibility than I was before. It is sometimes painful when one is misused or when trust or confidence is not honored. That kind of pain, however, is not unbearable, for it is only pain; it is not agony. The only agony I know is when I discover that inadvertently I have misused someone else. That is torture; that I will avoid.

An Exercise in Confidence

On one occasion when I was teaching seminary, I marked a report card with a B grade. It was the highest grade on the card. All the others were C-, D, or F. When I passed out the card, the boy studied it carefully for a few minutes and then came up, hesitantly, and said, "Brother Packer, I think you have made a mistake. You have given me someone else's grade."

I looked at him with some compassion and said, "No, I think I have not." He showed me his card, and I said, "Yes, that is what I intended to write down." He looked at me quizzically. "If there has been a mistake," I said, "it has been a mistake in timing. Perhaps I have given it to you a little before you have earned it, but I think it is not a mistake."

When the next reporting period came by, I gave him a higher grade—this time by calculating test scores and measuring responses in class and evaluating his performance precisely as I did for all of the other students. I noticed as time went on that the other grades on his report card began to move up also.

It has been my experience that when you approach with such an attitude those whom you teach, whether they be children, students, or persons whom you supervise, they respond in kind. Many who perhaps were not initially worthy of such trust soon earn it. It gives them something to reach for, and they deserve it, for they are children of God.

	
	
1975
 

 

On Teachers "Learning" Students
