## Jesus the Christ as a Teacher

Jesus has been described as a philosopher, an economist, a social reformer, and many other things. But above all, He was a teacher—a teacher of religious doctrine. If you were to ask, "What did Jesus have as an occupation?" there is only one answer. He was a teacher. That single fact, more than any other, lends great dignity to the subject of teaching and establishes a great ideal for all who teach.

Jesus was a teacher. The Gospels say so. Of some ninety times He is addressed in the four Gospels, sixty times He is called "Rabbi," which means "teacher." He is also referred to as "Master," which comes from the Greek word didaskalos, defined as "one who teaches concerning the things of God and the duties of man." This word is sometimes translated as "teacher," at other times as "master."

There is a clearer reason for describing Jesus as teacher than for describing Him as a social reformer, philosopher, or any of the other names He has been called. He was a teacher. That is how He accomplished the things He was sent to do. He taught.

The fact that His followers were referred to as disciples is of great significance, for disciple literally means "pupil" or "scholar," and the disciples were literally His students.  The word discipline is defined as "instruction imparted to disciples or scholars; teaching, learning, education, schooling."

It is also defined as "a particular course of instruction to disciples." In our day the word is used commonly in education as "a branch of instruction or education; a department of learning or knowledge; a science or art in its educational aspect." Further, it is defined as "instruction having for its aim to form the pupil to proper conduct and action; the training of scholars or subordinates to proper and orderly action by instructing and exercising them in the same; mental and moral training; also used figuratively of the training effects of experience, adversity, etc." (Oxford English Dictionary.) To the disciples, Jesus was their Lord and their Rabbi or Master, or, in other words, their Teacher, and they were His disciples, pupils, or scholars. If we will, He likewise is our teacher, and we are His disciples.

Jesus: Our Model as a Teacher

When we begin to analyze ourselves and look to improve ourselves as teachers, what better model could we find? What finer study could we undertake than to analyze our ideals and goals and methods and compare them with those of Jesus Christ?

The Gospels are recorded in 153 pages. One can read them leisurely in an evening and study them carefully in something more. We can compare what we are trying to accomplish with what Jesus accomplished by reading the four Gospels and seeking to find how He did what He did. However important the message He presented, the manner in which He presented it also has great meaning for us. There is no information in print on how to teach moral and spiritual values more important nor, if properly approached, more helpful than is found in the Gospels. They  constitute a treatise on teaching technique surpassed by none.

Some may be hesitant to make that comparison, thinking that in every way He is beyond reach. Consider, please, that He has declared, "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27.) He has enjoined us to be perfect, even as He and the Father are perfect. (See 3 Nephi 12:48.) Would this not relate to teaching as well as, or perhaps more than, anything else that we might do?

I do not hesitate to admit that I desire to teach as He taught. Though that may be far beyond my capabilities, He is, nevertheless, the ideal, and the Gospels are the finest help in print anywhere for solving the problem of how to teach moral and spiritual values.

Except for a few references indicating that He taught in the synagogue (Matthew 4:23, 9:35, 13:54; Mark 1:39, 6:2; Luke 4:15; John 18:20), we do not have any evidence that He taught in what might be termed formal teaching situations. His teaching was done to multitudes or to smaller groups gathered about Him.

That He employed principles of instruction recognized and acknowledged by professional educators in our own day is evident. He recognized those principles that lent themselves to teaching and learning and those that did not. As we proceed through the following chapters, we will point out many examples of this.

Some years ago Ferrot R. Glover wrote a study of Jesus as a character in history and found himself dwelling on Jesus as a teacher. He observed: "I have been treating Him almost as if He were an authority of pedagogy. Fortunately, He never discussed pedagogy, never used the terms I have been using. But He dealt with men, He taught and He influenced them, and it is worth our study to understand  how He did it—to master His methods." (The Jesus of History, New York: Association Press, 1930, p. 84.)

Although Jesus did not discuss the subject of teaching procedures, we can learn a great deal about how to teach moral and spiritual ideals by studying the accounts of His ministry in the Gospels. It is not untoward for any of us to aspire to teach as He taught. It is not untoward for any of us to aspire to be like Him. He was not just a teacher; He was the teacher. Through the centuries and through translation from language to language, His teachings have remained simple and compelling and direct, because they were designed to do just that. In our minds we can go back to that day when He ministered among men. We can pay careful heed to what He is teaching. We can also watch how He did it so that when the commission comes to feed His sheep, we can go and do likewise.

	
	
1975
 

 

Apperception
