## The Ego

I would like to discuss one aspect of physiology and then use it to make a comparison—which, incidentally, is a perfectly respectable principle of teaching. While we will not consider at length the principle of transfer of learning, it is important in the learning process.

Through transfer of learning, experience we have gained in any field of learning can be transferred and made important in any other field. Something a boy learned on a farm may serve him well as an executive in a corporation. Something a man learns on his job as a mail clerk may be useful to him in his Sunday School class. And, of course, all that we teach members of the Church in Sunday School, priesthood quorums, sacrament meetings, conferences, and socials should have application in their life activities.

In this case I simply want to talk about the physical body, which is tangible and visible, and then draw an analogy with the invisible part of our being in order to make an important point.

In the body are ductless glands that regulate and integrate the body through chemical means. The brain, on the other hand, regulates and integrates the body through the nervous system. The secretions of the ductless glands  stimulate or depress; they activate or retard various parts of the body as it reacts to the circumstances around it. These important glands can be as important as the nervous system in influencing behavior.

The hormones produced in the glands govern the development and action of the body in many ways. They determine the growth pattern and the development of the individual. If they are disturbed, the results can be far-reaching and sometimes permanent. Some of them are so essential to life that an individual could not live for long if they were completely lacking. For example, hormones of the pancreas and parathyroids are essential to sustain life.

Although we know much about the glands and the organs of the body and their interrelationship, there is much that we do not know.

In our unseen emotional body are also controls and influences that can stimulate or depress the emotional and spiritual behavior of an individual. These unseen "glands," if not healthy, can cause maladjustment in behavior and development. In this part of us that is not physical are things that are quite as important as the effects of the ductless glands upon the physical body.

Somewhere in the invisible part of us is a center of influence. The word most closely describing it is ego. Among the dictionary definitions for the word ego is self-esteem.

It has a marvelous effect on that part of us that is not physical and an apparent effect on our physical well-being also.

If I were to draw a picture of an ego—a normal, healthy one—I would draw it similar to a small, round balloon.

An ego can be deflated with an action, with an expression, with words, or even with a glance.

The words that work best for puncturing an ego include: "Stupid, can't you do anything right?" "Wrong again." "When will you ever get some sense?" "Get lost." And you, of course, know many others that you have experienced.

Most of us have had our egos deflated, and we know that it can be a painful experience. A story is told of a boy who was six years old before he knew what his last name was. Until then he thought it was Johnny Stop!

If a student's ego becomes deflated, it has a disturbing effect on him. It produces some very apparent effects in him. This type of disorder in the ego is generally fairly easy to correct. It can be inflated with air in the form of words, which are inexpensive and easy to supply. Words that inflate a depressed ego and round it out in a good,  healthy image include these: "That was well done." "You are important." "We think highly of you." "Thank you for your contribution." "It is important that you are here."

We know how grateful we are when someone pumps our ego up a bit. A deflated ego, after all, need not really be a serious disorder, and a parent or a teacher can ordinarily correct the disorder in a moment or two. If it has been deflated several times, it may be a little more difficult, but a treatment of genuine compliments and kind words and encouragement extended over a period of time does the trick.

An Unhealthy Substitute

There is a very serious disorder or disease affecting the ego that is much more difficult to cure. Teachers would do well to diagnose it early. This disease develops when the ego is deflated frequently over a long period of time. It becomes flattened out to the point that it becomes very painful to the individual. If no one inflates it with words of encouragement and kindness, a serious condition sets in. The individual himself begins to inflate his own ego—an artificial process that is not satisfying. It is an unhealthy substitute.

When an individual goes for long periods of time without hearing words of praise, such as "You are someone," he will try to fill in for himself and say, "I am someone." If this becomes habitual, he becomes an egotist. It is pathetic to see an individual with a bad case of egotism.

A wise teacher knows that the treatment for egotism is precisely the same as for a deflated ego. It just has to  be administered a little more carefully, over a longer period of time. While the over-inflated ego must never be punctured too abruptly, it sometimes needs to be pierced just a bit to get it down to normal size.

Encouragement and Love

Teachers should be generous in their praise and encouragement. They can do more to govern behavior through that channel than in any other way. This manner of encouraging good behavior is not new in education.

In 1558 Roger Aschcam, who had been a tutor to Queen Elizabeth in her youth and enjoyed some favors from the royal court, was dining one day with Sir William Cedric and Sir Richard Sackville. The conversation centered around the report of several boys who had run away from Eton because of much beating there. Sir Richard Sackville, who was largely silent during the meal, listened to Aschcam's views on education. Later he drew him aside and proposed that he would finance an educational experiment  for his own son and others based on encouragement and love. The two became lifelong friends, and this conversation inspired Roger Aschcam's immortal book The Scholemaster.

In his book he states:

I will now declare at large why, in mine opinion, love is fitter than fear, gentleness better than beating to bring up a child rightly in learning.

With the common use of teaching and beating in the common schools of England, I will not greatly contend. I do gladly agree with all good schoolmasters in these points: To have children brought to good perfection in learning, to all honesty in manners, to have all faults rightly amended; to have every vice severely corrected. But for the order and way that leadeth rightly to the points we somehow differ.

For commonly many schoolmasters . . . be so crooked a nature as when they get a hard witted scholar they rather break him than bow him, rather mar him than mend him. . . . But this will I say, that even yet the worst of your great beaters as oft punish nature as correct faults.

An example of what parents can learn about discipline is found in a comment of President David O. McKay at Merthyr-Tydfil, Wales, in 1963:

I was reminded of a visit I made home when I was in college. Mother was sitting on my left at the dinner table where she always sat. I said, "Mother, I have found that I am the only member of your children whom you have switched." She said, "Yes, David O., I have made such a failure of you, I didn't want to use the same method on the other children!"

A Child of God

It is important for a teacher to understand that each of his students, whether they be his own children or those  assembled in class, is a child of God. The Lord has not revealed much about our premortal state, but the knowledge that we had one is monumentally significant to parents and teachers. Those things that we do know—that we were individual, that we were intelligent, that some were more intelligent than others, and that we have a parent-child relationship to God the Father—are valuable revelations. For one thing, this concept means that some spiritual ideals that otherwise would be difficult to teach may be caught as well as taught, and are found as a natural possession of even little tiny children.

	
	
1975
 

 

The Teacher
