## You Have Some Teaching to Do

Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently ( 1975)
	
		CHAPTER ONE

You Have Some Teaching to Do

Early in World War II a company that specialized in the manufacture of lenses for optical equipment received a large order from the government for special lenses to be used in bombsights. The relatively few lenses they ordinarily produced were hand-polished by one master craftsman who had learned his art in Europe as a youth. It would be manifestly impossible for him to polish even a fraction of the lenses that were already on order.

In order to resolve the problem, he needed some help. Because the company was an essential defense industry, it was given special priority on workers. A large group of men was tested to find those who would likely make good lens grinders, and those who emerged from this screening process were put into a class with the master craftsman as the teacher. He was simply told to teach them to polish lenses.

Though the old teacher was a competent craftsman, somehow he was not able to teach the students how to polish lenses. He demonstrated repeatedly, and day after day they worked, but they were unable to produce a perfect lens. The situation was becoming critical.

Finally one enterprising young student became convinced there must be an answer to this serious problem, so he watched more carefully than he had before. Then, at the close of the day, he took home some of the castings of lenses and some grinding compound.

The next morning he presented his teacher with a perfect lens, the only one produced after all the instruction. The students, who were all surprised at what he had been able to do, were startled when he said, "I can show you all how to do it." And so he could, and so he did.

"I noticed," he said, "that we have been holding the glass casting against the polishing wheel gripped in our hands as we have been shown to do. However, there is this difference: The master craftsman holds his wrist very rigid and turns his arm only at the elbow. Our wrists have been left loose, and for some reason we have been unable to get the same control. If we keep our wrists rigid as we hold the lens to the grinding wheel, we'll be able to polish perfect lenses too."

A Trick to the Trade

There was a trick to the trade, and he had observed it—a simple thing that any of them could do once they were shown.

So it is with teaching. Among the myriads of things that can be successfully taught is the art of teaching. There are certain principles that apply to the teaching, or the learning, of almost any subject. In teaching we find what might be called tricks to the trade. Some of these techniques are little things that anyone can do; others need to be studied and practiced. But with many of these techniques, it is enough for us just to have them pointed out. We need to be alerted to those things that successful teachers do, for they may well mean the difference between success and failure. Certainly they will make us much better teachers.

Everyone Is a Teacher

Much of what we do is teaching. Showing a youngster how to tie his shoe, showing a boy how to run the lawnmower, teaching a young person how to drive a car, helping a daughter with a new recipe, giving a talk in church, bearing testimony, conducting a leadership meeting, and, of course, teaching a class—all of this is teaching, and we are doing it constantly.

Every member of the Church teaches for virtually his whole lifetime. We are teaching when we preach or speak or respond in meetings, for preachers are teachers—at least they generally are, and certainly they always should be. The similarity of the words preach, teach, and speech is not accidental. When we are speaking and preaching, we are teaching.

When we see a list of the verbs that describe teaching, we realize that all of us are doing it most of the time. Such verbs include instruct, educate, edify, school, tutor, prime, coach, profess, enlighten, inform, direct, guide, show, inculcate, infuse, instill, imbue, impregnate, implant, disseminate, propagate, indoctrinate, expound, explain, interpret, lecture, hold forth, preach. And there are others, each of them being just another way to say "teach."

We have teachers serving in all the organizations of the Church. A great deal of teaching is done in the priesthood quorums; indeed, all priesthood holders are eligible for appointment as priesthood home teachers. The title "teacher" has been given to one of the offices in the Aaronic Priesthood. The auxiliaries are staffed with teachers and with officers, all of whom train or teach.

The prophet is a teacher; his counselors are teachers; the General Authorities are teachers. Stake presidents and mission presidents are teachers; high councilors and quorum presidents are teachers; bishops are teachers; and so through all of the organizations of the Church.

The Church moves forward sustained by the power of the teaching that is accomplished. The work of the kingdom is impeded if teaching is not efficiently done. The growth of the Church depends upon teaching, for missionaries are, above all, teachers. They are constantly teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. Their testimonies are borne in order that others may be taught, and perhaps the most important verb synonymous with teaching in the Church is the verb testify.

Teaching Moral and Spiritual Values

This book is written to help you become a better teacher. The discussions are about the teaching of moral and spiritual values, an area that is much neglected. You won't find much about it in the literature in the field of education.

On the other hand, if you want to teach any one of a myriad of other subjects, such as English or mathematics, history or geography, you can get help from almost any library, and certainly from any college or university library. The teaching of such subjects has been taken over by the public schools. Parents, for instance, are only indirectly involved in teaching their youngsters the basic mathematical skills. Nor do parents need to do too much about teaching youngsters how to construct sentences. If they can teach them good study habits, the children will learn the rest in the public schools.

When we want to teach honesty, chastity, obedience, reverence, humility, kindness, and citizenship, however, we must search for help, for not much has been written about how to teach these virtues.

Over the years I have thought constantly about the teaching of moral and spiritual values. I have been assigned to do some of it myself and to supervise others who were  either called or hired to teach, and I want to share with you some of the lessons I have learned.

You won't find much academic jargon in the chapters that follow. A few professional terms will be introduced to help you become acquainted with them, and simple definitions of them as they are used in textbooks on education will be included. You can get more information from those other sources if you wish.

This, rather, is a collection of ideas and suggestions and experiences and illustrations that may be helpful to anyone who has the responsibility to teach—suggestions particularly on how to teach moral and spiritual values.

Some of the examples illustrate teaching in the family, some are from classroom experiences, and others relate to training and administration. But all are about teaching, and the principles apply to all of us in all of our teaching.

If we apply these principles, we can respond to the Lord's instruction when he said, "I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom. Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand." (D&C 88:77-78.)

	
	
1975
 

 

Don't Leave It to Chance