## The Gospel Is Like a Keyboard

On one occasion in General Conference I wanted to talk on the subject "The Only True and Living Church" and use as the basic text Doctrine and Covenants 1:30.

And also those to whom these commandments were given, might have power to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleased, speaking unto the church collectively and not individually.

I did not want to say that all of the other churches were without truth, for they have some truth—some of them a great deal of it. They have a form of godliness. Often the clergy and adherents are not without dedication, and many of them practice remarkably well the virtues of Christianity. They are, nonetheless, incomplete, and the Lord has declared: "They teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof." (Joseph Smith 2:19.)

How could I get the idea across that all churches perhaps have an element of the truth, but there is only one with the fulness of the gospel?

In using the formula for likening, I determined that the gospel is like a piano keyboard. After finding something with which to compare the gospel, something that would be familiar to everyone who would be listening, it was much easier to prepare the talk, part of which I will quote:

Like a Keyboard

"The gospel might be likened to the keyboard of a piano. A full keyboard with a selection of keys on which one trained can play a variety without limits—a ballad to express love, a march to rally, a melody to soothe, and a hymn to inspire—an endless variety to suit every mood and satisfy every need.

"How shortsighted it is, then, to choose a single key and endlessly tap out the monotony of a single note, or  even two or three notes, when the full keyboard of limitless harmony can be played.

"How disappointing when the fulness of the gospel, the whole keyboard, is here upon the earth, that many churches tap on a single key. The note they stress may be essential to a complete harmony of religious experience, but it is, nonetheless, not all there; it isn't the fulness.

"For instance, one taps on the key of faith-healing, to the neglect of many principles that would bring greater strength to faith-healing itself.

"Another taps on an obscure key relating to the observance of the Sabbath—a key that would sound different indeed, played in harmony with the essential notes on the keyboard. A key used like that can get completely out of tune.

"Another repeats endlessly the key that relates to the mode of baptism and taps one or two other keys as though there were not a full keyboard. And again, the very key they use, necessary as it is, just doesn't sound complete when played alone to the neglect of the others.

"There are other examples, many of them, in which parts of the gospel are endlessly stressed and the churches build upon them, until alone they sound nothing like they would if blended with the full measure of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

"We don't say that the key of faith-healing, for example, is not essential. We not only recognize it, but we also rely on it and experience it; however, it alone is not the gospel, nor its fulness.

"We would never hold that baptism was not essential, absolutely essential, for it constitutes the official enrollment in the Church and kingdom of God. If that key, however, is played alone, without the counterpart key of authority, the fulness and the harmony are gone and it becomes dissonant. Without the key of faith and of repentance, it  is meaningless, and perhaps worse, it is counterfeit. This happens when the authority we speak of is lacking.

Power and Authority

"Now we do not say other churches are wrong so much as we say they are incomplete. The fulness of the gospel has been restored. The power and authority to act for Him is present with us. The power and the authority of the priesthood rest upon this church. The Lord revealed:

This greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of Godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of Godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh. (D&C 84:19-21.)

A Single Key

"It is not unusual to find people who take an interest in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints but give only casual attention to the ideal that the fulness of the gospel is here.

"They become attracted by a single key, a doctrine. They investigate it by itself alone. They want to know all there is about it without reference—in fact, with specific objection and rejection—to anything else.

"They want to hear that key played over and over again. It will give them little knowledge unless they see that there is a fulness; other complementary ideals and doctrines that present a warmth and a harmony and a fulness, that draw at the right moment upon each key, which if played alone might seem discordant.

"Now, that danger is not limited to investigators alone. Some members of the Church who should know better  pick out a hobby key or two and tap them incessantly, to the irritation of those around them. They can dull their own spiritual sensitivities. They lose track that there is a fulness of the gospel, and they become as individuals, like many churches have become. They may reject the fulness in preference to a favorite note. This becomes exaggerated and distorted, leading them away into apostasy." (General Conference address, October 1971.)

Just as an Illustration

It should be very clear that although I likened the gospel to a piano keyboard, I was not interested in teaching about pianos or keyboards. I was just using the keyboard as an illustration. I do not play the piano, and I know relatively little about a keyboard. Yet that did not make the comparison or the "likening" less meaningful, either to me or to those who heard the sermon. I know from the response that many could "see" what I was trying to teach. I might have talked at length trying to describe the ideas, quoting from many sources, including scriptures, and yet I would not have been successful in teaching what I desired.

There is one other very important point that must never be overlooked. When you successfully employ the principle of apperception, or liken something from the unseen world within you to the real world around you, the lesson can repeat itself. You can understand why someone would tell me, "Often when I see a piano keyboard I think of the fulness of the gospel." It is as though the lesson is repeating itself in the mind of that individual. That is one reason why the more commonplace and close to everyday life the comparison is, the more powerful your lesson.

That is why the Lord, when He was teaching, used such illustrations as He did. They were close to the people. We can use the very same method, as illustrated in the following story.

Thoughts Are Like Water

When I was about ten years old we lived in a home surrounded by an orchard. There never seemed to be enough water for the trees. The ditches, always freshplowed in the spring, would soon be filled with weeds. One day, in charge of the irrigating turn, I found myself in trouble.

As the water moved down the rows choked with weeds, it would flood in every direction. I raced through the puddles trying to build up the bank. As soon as I had one break patched up, there would be another.

A neighbor came through the orchard. He watched for a moment, and then with a few vigorous strokes of the shovel he cleared the ditch bottom and allowed the water to course through the channel he had made. "If you want the water to stay in its course, you'll have to make a place for it to go," he said.

I have come to know that thoughts, like water, will stay on course if we make a place for them to go. Otherwise our thoughts follow the course of least resistance, always seeking the lower levels. I was told a hundred times or more as I grew up that thoughts must be controlled. But no one told me how.

In an attempt to tell the youth of the Church how to control their thoughts, the principle of likening was useful again:

The Stage of Your Mind

"The mind is like a stage—the curtain is always up except when we are asleep. There is always some act being performed on that stage. It may be a comedy, a tragedy, interesting or dull, good or bad; but always there is some act playing on the stage of the mind.

"Have you noticed that without any real intent on your part, in the middle of almost any performance, a shady little thought may creep in from the wings and attract your attention? These delinquent thoughts will try to upstage everybody.

"If you permit them to go on, all thoughts of any virtue will leave the stage. You will be left, because you consented to it, to the influence of unrighteous thoughts. If you yield to them, they will enact for you on the stage of your mind anything to the limits of your toleration. They may enact a theme of bitterness, jealousy, or hatred. They may be vulgar, immoral, or even depraved.

"When they have the stage, if you let them, they will devise the most clever persuasions to hold your attention.  They can make it interesting all right, even convince you that it is innocent—for they are but thoughts.

"What do you do at a time like that, when the stage of your mind is commandeered by the imps of unclean thinking? Whether they be the gray ones that seem almost clean or the filthy ones that leave no room for doubt?

"If you can control your thoughts, you can overcome habits—even degrading, personal habits. If you can learn to master them, you will have a happy life.

A Favorite Hymn

"I would teach you this. Choose from among the sacred music of the Church a favorite hymn, one with words that are uplifting and music that is reverent, one that makes you feel something akin to inspiration. Go over it carefully in your mind. Memorize it. Even though you have had no musical training, you can think through a hymn.

"Now, use this hymn as the place for your thoughts to go. Make it your emergency channel. Whenever you find that these shady actors have slipped from the sidelines of your thinking onto the stage of your mind, put on this record, as it were.

"As the music begins and as the words form in your mind, the unworthy thoughts will slip shamefully away. The hymn will change the whole mood on the stage of your mind. Because it is uplifting and clean, the baser thoughts will disappear, for while virtue, by choice, will not associate with filth, evil cannot tolerate the presence of light.

"In due time you will find yourself, on occasion, humming the music inwardly. As you retrace your thoughts, you discover that some influence from the world about you has encouraged an unworthy thought to move on stage in your mind, and the music has almost automatically begun.

"Once you learn to clear the stage of your mind from unworthy thoughts, keep it busy with learning worthwhile things. Change your environment so that you have things about you that will inspire good and uplifting thoughts. Keep busy with things that are righteous.

"Young people, you cannot afford to fill your minds with the unworthy hard music of our day. It is not harmless. It can welcome onto the stage of your mind unworthy thoughts and set the tempo to which they dance, and to which you may act." (General conference address, October 1973.)

It is easier, so very much easier, when we take such elusive things as thoughts and compare them with something the students already know about, in this case the actors on a stage. It is more interesting, particularly to the young people. They remember it, and teaching has taken place.

	
	
1975
 

 

A World of Examples
