## Don't Leave It to Chance

While everybody in the Church is a teacher, was a teacher, or will be a teacher, if you have children or grandchildren you are continuously a teacher. The principles of good teaching are particularly important to you, perhaps more important in your teaching responsibilities as a parent than in any other teaching assignment you may have. Parents are teachers, for the Lord has said:

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. . . .

And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord. (D&C 68:25, 8. Italics added.)

This responsibility is repeated in the following:

The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth.

Light and truth forsake that evil one.

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall,  men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God.

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers.

But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. (D&C 93:36-40.)

The obligation rests upon parents to teach their children. In order to fulfill that commandment, in the very beginning a parent becomes a teacher.

It has been said that the responsibility of Church members is divided into three main categories: to provide for the salvation of the living members of the Church, to accomplish the necessary work for our kindred dead, and to preach the gospel to all the world. All of these responsibilities require learning, and all that is learned must somehow be taught. We are among those who must teach it.

To need to teach, to want to teach, and to be called to teach sometimes are not enough, however, and teaching can be a frustrating and disappointing—and sometimes a failing—endeavor.

Feeding a Kitten

An example may illustrate. In the early days of our marriage, I was in the bedroom of our home one day when I heard a loud, screeching noise. Running to the kitchen, I found the refrigerator door standing open, a puddle of milk on the floor, and a trail of milk splashed across the floor to the back door. As I reached the back door, the screeching began again, and I saw an interesting sight.

On the doorstep sat our five-year-old son, feeding his little kitten. Enough milk had stayed in the bowl to more than fill the tiny animal. One hand held the struggling kitten tightly around the throat, while the other one held a back leg. The boy dipped the little kitten head-first into  the milk, and the little animal complained loudly and struggled to escape drowning. Finally it maneuvered its free foot to a position where it could scratch the little child on the wrist, and he quickly dropped the animal into the bowl. Before the boy could recover from the pain, the kitten had scrambled out of the bowl and raced around the corner of the house to safety under a woodpile.

Our son didn't notice me watching. Frustrated and disappointed, he began to cry. All his efforts to feed his hungry kitten had failed. The elements of success were all  present: He had the kitten; it was hungry; and he had milk, an ideal food for kittens. Nevertheless, something had gone wrong; something about the way he attempted to get the two together had resulted in frustration and failure. The kitten remained hungry and, as our son learned from experience, was all the more difficult to feed the next time. I tried to show him a better way, but it was only after several attempts, and considerable coaxing, that confidence was restored enough that the little kitten would come willingly to a little boy who wanted to feed it.

Surely there are few who have escaped the frustrated, thwarted feelings of that little boy. Such feelings come often—probably more often than necessary—to the teacher. Almost every day, on every turn, we are confronted with someone who is in need of instruction, perhaps even hungry for it. As a parent or teacher or leader, we not only can supply it, but it is our obligation to do so. Yet frequently something about the way one tries to do it repels the student, and the teacher ends up scratched or bitten by the very one he hopes to nourish.

The Finest of the Fine Arts

It doesn't have to be that way. We can learn to teach. There are some special challenges in teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. The teaching of faith and repentance and virtue and humility poses challenges not found in teaching most other subjects. Teaching has been described as "the finest of the fine arts." I think this is true, but if we do not know some of the techniques, it can be the most difficult as well.

For instance, compare teaching with composing music. Suppose you are a composer and awake in the night with a beautiful melody lingering in your mind. You ponder it. It is an inspiration—you must record it. You leave your bed, rush to the piano, and begin to set down the notes.  The composition has begun. As you finger the keyboard, the melody fits together and you sense the inner excitement of creation. You sense that it is the best you have ever done.

Suppose, however, that you must leave the score on the piano where many pass by, and any of them are free to tamper with your composition. Time after time you come back to find that someone with permanent ink has scratched through a note, sometimes a whole line—changed it, transposed it.

Can you imagine the difficulty of composing under such circumstances? How earnestly you would wish just to be left alone with your composition until it is completely finished, to have others touch your work only if you invite them to do so. Imagine the difficulty of erasing some of those notes to put your arrangement back the way it should be.

Or suppose you are a painter and have a painting appear on the canvas of your mind, as if by inspiration. You do some sketching and marvel at how quickly it falls together as a composition. It is already created now in your mind; only the process of putting the paint down on the canvas remains to create it materially. You work carefully on this piece, for it is to be your very finest. A good many sittings will be necessary for you to do it well. It is a landscape, so you set up your easel in full view of the subject from which you received the inspiration, even though you are near a busy pathway. At times you must leave your easel, the unfinished painting, and your materials where they are. Any passerby has access to your brushes and your painting.

Can you imagine your frustration when some sidewalk superintendents add their little bit to your work? "A very interesting painting," one of them says, "but this tree is  out of balance. I think I'll move it over here and paint over the other one."

Another says, "This has too much of the natural look. I think the sky ought not to be blue. Bright red will make it more exciting."

"Much too old-fashioned, too Victorian," another says, as he picks up the brush and works away on your painting.

The least temperamental among us would want to give up in frustration under those circumstances.

A teacher works under circumstances similar to those we have mentioned. That is true particularly of the parent, for always the parent is a teacher. Teaching is the finest of the fine arts, and unless we are trained, in many ways it is also the most difficult. Our subjects do not sit still and wait for us to come back and compose a little or paint a little. They do not hold themselves in some kind of suspension until we decide to teach a little.

Many agencies are clamoring for the attention of our members, young and old alike. Providentially, most of these agencies are good and will perhaps contribute much to our teaching. However, some of them are unspeakably perverse, and their influence must be continually erased. The teaching we do must be so indelible, effective, and impressive that it cannot be erased. Then if it is covered over temporarily by falsehoods or wickedness, a good scrubbing will still leave our work intact and perhaps even a little brighter. We must teach and teach well, and teach permanently. As parents, as teachers, as officers in the Church, that is our obligation and our opportunity.

Teaching Is More Than Example

In the home and in the Church, we must teach our children moral and spiritual values. We can do some of this teaching simply by example. Without that, of course, our teachings are counterfeit. But example alone may not  be the most efficient way to teach. If we live the gospel fully, chances are our children and others around us will learn much from our example. They may even get a testimony because of us. But why leave it to chance? With proper attention, righteousness can be taught.

A few years ago I had a pointed discussion with the principal of one of our Church schools. No religion classes were being taught in his school; he said the teachers couldn't spare the time for that. He added, "Since all the teachers and most of the students are members of the Church, they will get testimonies just by association. After all," he added, "don't we open all of our assemblies with prayer?"

I asked what he did about teachings in some of the textbooks that could be morally misleading. His answer was that the atmosphere of the school would reinforce the students adequately, and chances are they would gain testimonies from being taught secular subjects in a spiritual environment.

But why leave our teaching to chance? We can teach a child to be honest as well as we can teach him to compute mathematical figures, use correct pronunciation, or read properly. We employ a different set of teaching tools to do so effectively, but it can be done.

	
	
1975
 

 

The Gift to Teach
