## On Teachers "Learning" Students

Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently ( 1975)
	
		CHAPTER THIRTEEN

On Teachers "Learning" Students

When we are teaching moral and spiritual values, we should understand that children have a well-developed sense of right and wrong. It can be appealed to. There are many things that they know simply because they know them. It is important for teachers, including parents, to study those whom they teach. Young people have well-defined guidelines in their minds on what is fair and what isn't fair. Sometimes these even become exaggerated.

We need to understand whom we are teaching. We must remember that they came from a preexistent state, and while much is not remembered, there still can be considerable spiritual maturity.

The following statement from President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., is important for teachers:

"Our youth are not children spiritually; they are well on towards the normal spiritual maturity of the world. I say once more there is scarcely a youth that comes through your door who has not been the conscious beneficiary of spiritual blessings, or who has not seen the efficacy of prayer, or who has not witnessed the power of faith to heal the sick, or who has not beheld spiritual outpourings, of which the world at large is today ignorant. You do not  have to sneak up behind this spiritually experienced youth and whisper religion in his ears; you can come right out, face to face, and talk with him. You do not need to disguise religious truths with a cloak of worldly things; you can bring these truths to him openly, in their natural guise. Youth may prove to be no more fearful of them than you are. There is no need for gradual approaches, for 'bedtime' stories, for coddling, for patronizing, or for any of the other childish devices used in efforts to reach those spiritually inexperienced and all but spiritually dead." ("The Charted Course of the Church in Education," pp. 8-9. This article is reprinted in the appendix of this book.)

Children Already Know

We do not often give credit for the spiritual maturity of children, particularly little children. There are some things they know. They need not be taught them; they just know them to begin with.

Let me give you an example. While our children have been growing up, we have purposely lived in a rural setting where we could keep some animals and birds about, for several important reasons. One is that we have chores, regular responsibilities that cannot be put off and that must be attended to on at least a daily basis. From this our youngsters have learned to work and to be dependable.

On one occasion a hen had hidden a nest away under a manger in the barn. The nest was discovered by our little girl. When the chickens were hatched, the tiny ones began to peep. She wanted to see them and hold them but was confronted by a very angry hen protecting her chicks. When I came home in the evening, she came running to the car and excitedly told me of her discovery, pleading with me to let her hold some of the baby chicks. It was not easy to get the hen to cooperate, but finally I had a double-handful of little chicks. There were black ones,  white ones, striped ones, and spotted ones, and as the children gathered around, admiring them with childish expressions, I let our little girl hold one.

"That will make a nice watch dog when it grows up, won't it?" I said. She wrinkled up her little nose and looked at me quizzically. It was obvious that she didn't believe what I said, so I hurriedly corrected myself. "It won't turn into a dog, will it?" As she shook her head, I said, "It will make a nice horse, won't it?" She looked at me as though I did not know very much. She knew and wondered why I didn't seem to know that the little chicken would never grow up to be a dog or a horse or an elephant or even a turkey, but when it grew up it would be a hen or a rooster; it would follow the pattern of its parentage.

How did she, a four-year-old, know that? We had never taught it to her. She knew it as children know many things. Many lessons, basic and sacred in life, children know and understand without being taught.

It is easy, then, to explain that when we reach our full development in the eternities ahead, we will be gods. We too will follow the pattern of our parentage. God has created us to address him as Father!

I have always been interested in the fact that little children know what dreams are. It would be impossible to show them, and it is difficult to describe what a dream is. But there really is no need to do so, for children seem to know.

Another scripture is very important for a teacher to understand: "All men are instructed sufficiently that they know good from evil." (2 Nephi 2:5; Helaman 14:31.)

Parents and teachers need to know that a youngster can tell right from wrong. This knowledge may be distorted or perverted or covered up in unfortunate life experiences, but intuitively, as a part of the spiritual endowment of all humanity, there is a knowledge of right from wrong.

That gives me great hope, for then I understand that every child of God, however reprobate he may have become, however degenerate he may seem to be, has hidden within him the spark of divinity and a sensitivity to that which is wrong as compared to that which is right.

It is important for a teacher to understand that little teaching will be accomplished, little learning will take place, unless a one-to-one relationship exists between the teacher and each student. Emerson, in his essay "Of Spiritual Laws," stated: "There is no teaching until the pupil is brought into the same state or principle in which you are; a transfusion takes place; he is you, and you are he; there is a teaching; and by no unfriendly chance or bad company can he ever quite lose the benefit."

The teacher immediately responds, "How can there be a one-to-one relationship if I have thirty students in the class?" In that case the teacher must simply have a one-to-one relationship repeated thirty times over. That one-to-one relationship can exist in your mind. You can create it and maintain it and sustain it and not lose it—this often by great conscious exertion. Students can feel it when it is there. It means you take the time to learn thirty names, to check out thirty backgrounds, to draw thirty students into class discussions, to pass out thirty words of encouragement, all personalized.

"Watch Out for February"

For six years Elder A. Theodore Tuttle and I supervised the seminaries under the direction of William E. Berrett, who was the administrator. We held conventions about the Church, meeting with seminary teachers and stake presidents. After a year or two we discovered something interesting about February. We might schedule a convention in Phoenix for February and then find out that a teacher in Idaho Falls or Logan was in such difficulty that one of  us had to visit him. This occurred so often at that time of the year that we eventually did not schedule conventions between the middle of January and the middle of March. That was when we had the largest outcropping of discipline problems.

It was not too difficult to determine why. The answer is helpful to both parents and teachers. School begins in the fall. There's a certain excitement and interest on the part of all the students. Athletic activities and many other activities go on into the holidays. The Christmas and New Year's holidays are full of excitement, but when they are over, the school routine settles down to a long grind, looking toward spring activities and graduation. The days are short, the nights are long, and the weather is often cold and disagreeable. If anyone is going to have the blahs, that's an ideal time for it.

We began to alert the teachers in the preschool conventions to "watch out for February." We told them to plan their year with some interesting activities and their very best teaching scheduled for January and February. If a teacher (or a parent) is forewarned, he can prepare himself and lift the young people just a little bit more to compensate for the tensions and pressures of that seasonal dreariness.

I have come to believe that this is worth knowing, not only for teachers, but for everyone. If you get a little depressed during those dreary days, do not begin to think that you're psycho-something-or-other.

For missionaries, this was well worth knowing. Occasionally a missionary told me in an interview, "I'm not doing very well. I just seem to be depressed and discouraged." Unless there was an unusual reason for these feelings, my answer was, "Well, I'm glad to hear that. At least now we know that you're normal. Enjoy the feeling—it  probably won't last. And the first sunny day will do wonders for it."

We know from the Book of Mormon that there must be opposition.

"For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my first-born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad." (2 Nephi 2:11.)

It helps a great deal if we realize that there is a certain healthy element in getting the blues occasionally. It is quite in order to schedule a good, discouraging, depressing day every now and again just for contrast.

"You Miss Your Horse, Don't You?"

Shortly after I was called as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, I was a member of the Missionary Committee and was working in the Missionary Department. I had a call from a mission president in New York who said that a missionary had run away and they had found he had taken a bus west, no doubt heading for his home in Idaho.

The mission president said the missionary didn't like missionary work. He didn't like anything about it. He had gone into the mission field the previous September and had enjoyed it up until early spring; then he could stand it no longer. He decided he would just quit and go home. The mission president counseled with him, but that made little difference.

With a little checking of the schedules, we were able to meet the missionary at the bus station and take him to the office for a chat. We talked about his life and his activities, and it didn't take long to discover what the problem was. Finally I said, "You miss your horse, don't you?"

Tears welled up in his eyes, and he said, "You're going to laugh at me, aren't you?"

"No, my boy, I won't laugh at you," I said, "because I understand! Isn't it true that this roping horse you have mentioned frequently in your conversation was the center of your life? Isn't it true that you'd hurry home after school so you could change clothes and get out to the corral and work with your horse? Those were choice hours to you, weren't they? And isn't it true that there was something about the days of early spring that made it glorious to get home from school and work with that beautiful animal before the sun went down? And isn't it true that when missionary work was slow, every now and again a day would remind you of home? Finally you could stand it no more, and you just had to go home."

Then he knew I understood. After a long talk we went to lunch and then to the airport so he could catch the next plane back to his mission. Because he understood a few things about himself, there was no question now that he could finish his mission.

Know Yourself

If you want to know about students, learn as much as you can about yourself. As you begin to gain deep insights into your own reactions and feelings and sensitivities, you will come to know much about your students. There is an expression, "Go to your bosom and ask your heart what it doth know." If we make this inquiry, we will come to know much about our students. We can come to know it by knowing ourselves.

One of the most significant statements in the discourses of President Brigham Young was on this subject:

"The greatest lesson you can learn is to know yourselves. When we know ourselves, we know our neighbors. When we know precisely how to deal with ourselves, we  know how to deal with our neighbors. You have come here to learn this. You cannot learn it immediately, neither can all the philosophy of the age teach it to you; you have to come here to get a practical experience and to know yourselves. You will then begin to learn more perfectly the things of God. No being can thoroughly know himself, without understanding more or less of the things of God; neither can any being learn and understand the things of God, without knowing himself; he must know himself, or he never can know God." (Discourses of Brigham Young, selected and arranged by John A. Widtsoe, Deseret Book Company, 1946 ed., p. 269.)

Know Your Students

Teacher, someday put your class to work filling in forms or reading or writing a treatise on some subject, and then stand at the head of the class and study each student intently for a few moments. The good teacher has already studied the lesson. The superb teacher also studies the students; he studies them seriously and intently.

Two things may well occur. First, if you look at your students and wonder why they think and act and feel as they do, you may learn many, many things, and you will be more keenly equipped to help them. Second, as you study carefully their features and expressions, there may well up in your heart a warmth of Christian compassion that comes all too infrequently even to a dedicated teacher. The feeling is akin to inspiration, a feeling of love. This love will compel you to find the way to do well the work of the Lord: feeding His sheep.

	
	
1975
 

 

The Ego