## A World of Examples

Some years ago I was on a plane bound for Seattle, Washington, from Spokane. I had been attending a religious emphasis week at the University of Idaho at Moscow, Idaho, and was on my way to Seattle to meet with the stake leaders regarding the seminary program. There were not many passengers on the plane and I found a seat alone, hoping to sleep during the trip, which would take something more than an hour.

I was momentarily irritated when someone sat next to me, and willingly consented to his request to borrow the newspaper I had on my lap. This will keep him busy, I thought. But he soon began to mutter, "Awful, miserable, terrible," and when I responded, he pointed to the front page of the newspaper, a typical city paper with the sordid, the ugly, and the tragic openly reported on the front page.

He said the newspaper was typical of humanity and of life—miserable, meaningless, and in all ways useless and futile. Finally I had to protest and insist that life was purposeful, that there lives a God who loves His children, and that life is good indeed.

An Atheist

The young man introduced himself as an attorney. When he learned that I was a minister he said, with some  emphasis, "All right, we have one hour and twenty-eight minutes on this flight, and I want you to tell me what business you or anyone else has traipsing about the earth saying that there is a God and that life has any substantial meaning."

He then confessed himself to be an atheist and pressed his disbelief so urgently that I finally said, "You are wrong, my friend. There is a God. He lives. I know He lives."

I then bore testimony to him that God lives and that Jesus is the Christ and that I knew it to be so. This testimony fell on doubtful ears. "You don't know," he said. "Nobody knows that. You can't know it."

I would not yield, and the attorney finally said, condescendingly, "All right, you say you know, then [inferring, 'if you are so smart'] tell me how you know."

I felt helpless at this, perhaps the ultimate of questions. I said, "The Spirit of the Holy Ghost has borne witness to my soul."

The attorney said, "I don't know what you are talking about."

I found that the words prayer, discernment, and faith were meaningless to him, for they were outside his experience.

Seeing me helpless to explain how I knew, he finally said, "You see, you don't really know. If you did know, you'd be able to tell me how you know." (The implication of his words was that anything we know we can readily explain with words alone.)

The Taste of Salt

I felt that I may have borne my testimony unwisely, and I prayed in my heart that if the young attorney could not understand my words, he could at least feel the sincerity of my declaration.

"All knowledge is not conveyed in words alone," I  said. I then asked this question: "Do you know what salt tastes like?"

"Of course I do," was his reply.

"When did you taste salt last?"

"I had dinner a short time ago and I tasted salt then."

"You just think you know what salt tastes like," I said.

"I know what salt tastes like as well as I know anything," he insisted.

"If I gave you a cup of salt and a cup of sugar, and let you taste them both, could you tell the salt from the sugar?"

"Now you are becoming juvenile," was his reply. "Of course I could tell the difference. I know what salt tastes like!"

Then I asked one further question. "Assuming that I have never tasted salt, can you explain to me in words just what it tastes like?"

After some thought the attorney ventured, "Well, it is not sweet and it is not sour."

"You've told me what it isn't," was my answer, "not what it is."

After several attempts he admitted failure in the little exercise and found himself quite as helpless as I had been to answer his previous question: how I know the gospel is true.

As we walked into the terminal I bore testimony once again and said, "I claim to know there is a God. You ridiculed that testimony and said that if I did know I would be able to tell you exactly how I know. My friend, spiritually speaking, I have tasted salt. I am no more able to convey to you in words how this knowledge has come than you are able to perform the simple exercise of telling me what salt tastes like. But I say to you again, there is a God. He lives. Just because you don't know, don't try to tell me I don't know, for I do."

Techniques and Tools

This confrontation is an illustration of how difficult it is to teach the very things that we are commissioned to teach in the Church. When we teach moral and spiritual values, we are teaching things that are intangible. Perhaps no teaching is so difficult to accomplish, nor so rewarding when successfully done.

There are techniques to employ and tools to use. There are things that teachers can do to prepare themselves and their lessons so that their students, whether it be their own children or those whom they are called to teach in classrooms or whom they are leading as officers in the Church, can be taught, and their testimonies can be conveyed from one to another.

I would like to point out that in the previous experience, while the subject of our conversation was revelation, the discussion for the most part was about salt. It is probable that very little would have been accomplished if I had continued to speak of inspiration, of the Spirit of the Holy Ghost, or of testimony. Those terms were totally out of his experience, and if we made a point at all, it was because we began with something he knew—salt.

Incidentally, as we walked into the terminal he muttered, over and over again, speaking softly and to himself, "I don't need your old religion for a crutch, understand; I don't need it."

Subject ideas for comparisons and references are everywhere, and there are many of them in our surroundings if only we can see them. Consider the following illustration.

A New World

During World War II, I was in cadet training at Thunderbird Field near Scottsdale, Arizona. We would on occasion go into Phoenix on the weekend, and on Sunday afternoon we would be finding a way back to our base.  Scottsdale, Arizona, in those days was a rural suburb of Phoenix and consisted of not much more than an intersection.

One Sunday several of us were not able to get a ride, so we began the long walk back to the base. As we were hiking along, an old car drew up and a gentleman offered us a ride. There were more of us than could get in his old car, but there were running boards on which we could stand, and so he drove slowly along as we chatted. Several complained about the desert and how dry and dead and lifeless it was. Finally he stopped the car and said he wanted to show us something.

He then told us he was a teacher of natural sciences, and we spent some time walking into the desert. He showed us plants and animals and living things and opened our eyes to a new world. He pointed out shriveled and supposedly dead plants.

"All they await is the spring rains," he said. "Take this," he added, pointing to a shriveled lump of dried vegetable matter, "put it in water, and within hours it will unfold and become green. It is really a very beautiful plant if you will study it closely; it is unnoticed because no one really bends over to look at it."

The desert never was the same to me after that. Always thereafter it was beautiful and intensely interesting.

Once we understand the principle of apperception, the whole world comes alive like that. We see examples that are meaningful everywhere we turn.

This principle of teaching opens up a world of visual aids. When we are in command of it, we can add the eyes to our means of communication. Using examples our students can literally see, we can then lead them to see invisible ideals. A picture is worth a thousand words.

Once a teacher begins to look about for things to "liken" in his lessons, it becomes a new world. He then knows that to realize an ideal means he must sometimes idealize the real.

	
	
1975
 

 

The Question
