## "Having First Obtained Mine Errand from the Lord"

You have no doubt noted some repetition in these chapters. You may wonder, for instance, why the same scripture is used to illustrate two principles. There is a message in that.

The chapter "Like unto a Glove" demonstrates the use of an object lesson and is placed with the chapters on visual aids. It might quite as well be used as a part of the chapters on apperception.

You will find that basic principles of teaching are closely related. When you practice and use one effectively, you soon find yourself using several of them. It helps to know that you can begin almost anywhere and as you discover and use one principle, you locate the hiding places of many others.

One further word about repetition. Repetition is an important procedure in all teaching. Don't overlook the significance of the fact that Moroni visited Joseph Smith three times during the night and a fourth time the next day, with the same—precisely the same—message. Many teachers and most speakers try to cover too much. They race from one subject to another when they might better be repeating one simple idea. It is good advice to tell your listeners what you are going to tell them, tell them, and  then tell them what you have told them. That is a useful technique.

Never apologize for repetition. Someone once asked President Heber J. Grant, "When are you going to stop talking about the Word of Wisdom?" He replied, "As soon as the people begin to live it."

You have been diligent in coming this far in the book and I cannot finish this work without returning to the theme that I hope has been apparent through all of the chapters. The title of the book is found in Doctrine and Covenants 88:77: "Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand."

We have talked much about theory and about principle in this book. There is a way in which "you may be instructed more perfectly" in them. I have reserved till the last my comments on this sacred subject.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., closed his landmark sermon, "The Charted Course of the Church in Education," with a prayer upon those who teach, which I quote:

May God bless you always in all your righteous endeavors, may He quicken your understanding, increase your wisdom, enlighten you by experience, bestow upon you patience, charity, and, as among your most precious gifts, endow you with the discernment of spirits that you may certainly know the spirit of righteousness and its opposite as they come to you; may He give you entrance to the hearts of those you teach and then make you know that as you enter there you stand in holy places, that must be neither polluted nor defiled, either by false or corrupting doctrine or by sinful misdeed; may He enrich your knowledge with the skill and power to teach righteousness; may your  faith and your testimonies increase, and your ability to encourage and foster them in others grow greater every day—all that the youth of Zion may be taught, built up, encouraged, heartened, that they may not fall by the wayside, but go on to eternal life, that these blessings coming to them you through them may be blessed also. And I pray all this in the name of Him who died that we might live, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, Jesus Christ. Amen.

I have always felt that we stand in holy places when we are given entrance to the hearts of those we teach. There are ways in which we may be sustained spiritually and made equal to the opportunity. One of the most important is found in these lines:

Wherefore, I Jacob, gave unto them these words as I taught them in the temple, having first obtained mine errand from the Lord.

For I, Jacob, and my brother Joseph had been consecrated priests and teachers of this people, by the hand of Nephi.

And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day. (Jacob 1:17-19. Italics added.)

I emphasize the expression "having first obtained mine errand from the Lord."

There is a great power operative over the Church and kingdom of God. There are sources of intelligence available to all who teach in the Church—if they teach diligently. There is that sacred process by which pure intelligence  may be conveyed to the mind in an instant, so that a teacher can know what he needs to know in his moment of need.

We should constantly teach under inspiration. We have the right to teach under inspiration in the home and in the Church. And should we have teaching to do in our other pursuits of life, it is not untoward to call upon the Lord for inspiration in that teaching also.

It is not necessary for a parent or a teacher to know everything. If you are living properly and are prepared to receive inspiration, you may receive it. Consider carefully this verse: "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man." (D&C 84:85. See also D&C 100:6 and Matthew 10:19.)

On one occasion in a meeting I heard President Marion G. Romney say, "I always know when I am speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost because I always learn something from what I've said."

Parents and teachers in the Church should move forward with confidence and with courage, knowing that they will be sustained if they have in reality "obtained their errand from the Lord." It takes courage. There have been times when I have deserved and I have received chastisement and correction from the Lord because I lacked sufficient courage. I think I shall tell you of one of them.

Shortly after I was called as an Assistant to the Twelve, I had a call in the wee hours of the morning from a very close friend. He and his wife were expecting a new addition to their family, and in the final days before the child was to be born, a critically serious complication had developed. He asked if I would join him in administering to his wife. There was little chance, the doctors thought, that the child would be saved, and the mother's life was in danger as well. At my friend's request, I gave his wife a blessing.

When morning came I went to the office and spent a day in misery and torment. I had been prompted while blessing her to promise that all would be well, but there ran through my mind the prediction of the doctors. Likewise, I had entertained the thought, what happens when exaggerated promises are made in blessings and then not fulfilled? Does that not destroy faith? These thoughts were in my mind at the time we performed the administration. The blessing I pronounced was in general terms; I had not followed the inspiration that came.

That evening when I returned home my friend called to see me again, just to talk. He was beside himself with worry over his wife. We sat down on a bench in the yard and talked. I told him to be at peace, that his wife would be all right and the child would be born without mishap. What is more, I said, "This will be the easiest of her deliveries. That is the blessing that was on my mind this morning, but that I didn't have faith enough to give."

After the conversation, for the first time I felt good. The agony that I had experienced all day had vanished.

The next morning I was called to the hospital in the early hours on another mission, to see someone else. In the hallway I met the family doctor of the woman to whom I had administered. When I inquired about her, he said, "We just brought her from the delivery room. Everything is fine. It was the easiest of her deliveries."

I learned a great lesson from that. We must be sensitive to the Spirit. We must be tuned in, and have the courage and faith to follow the promptings of the Spirit. If we do not listen to the voice of the Spirit, there is not much purpose in the Lord's communicating to us through that channel.

Power comes when a teacher has done all that he can to prepare, not just the individual lesson, but in keeping his life in tune with the Spirit. If he will learn to rely on  the Spirit for inspiration, he can go before his class—or, in the case of the parent, he can meet with his children—secure in the knowledge that he can teach with inspiration.

The Master Teacher

And now I should like to close this book where we began—by acknowledging and paying homage to Him who is the Master Teacher. It is He who should be our ideal. No treatise on how to teach compares with a careful study of the four Gospels. Brief though they are, there is enough in these scriptures to open the doors to all the essential principles of teaching necessary to one who would succeed in teaching moral and spiritual values.

The question might be asked, What manner of teacher ought we to be? Even as He is! In the course of my efforts to teach His gospel, I have come to know Him—Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father.

The account in the New Testament is true. He was born of Mary in the meridian of time. He lived a life that drew Him close, in His early years, to all of the things in the ordinary tangible world about Him. He said and heard and felt all that transpired in the humble village life and the humble family life of His day. Though He was to ascend on high, during His life and during His teaching He was among the people. I have come to know that He lives and have been called to bear special witness of Him.

I stand in reverence before Him with deep regard for what He taught and with deep regard for how He taught.

Teach ye diligently and His grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things pertaining unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand. Of this I bear witness.

	
	
1975
 

 

The Charted Course of the Church in Education by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.
