Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

PREFACE

The Old Testament is considered by most people to be the book of scripture most difficult to understand and appreciate. Yet it was essentially the Old Testament that was available when Jesus Christ counseled that the scriptures should be searched diligently because they testified of him. It was also of this scripture and its companion, the New Testament, that Brigham Young stated:

"In all my teachings, I have taught the Gospel from the Old and New Testaments. I found therein every doctrine, and the proof of every doctrine, the Latter-day Saints believe in. . . . There may be some doctrines about which little is said in the Bible, but they are all couched therein." (JD 16:73.)

Of the Bible and its companion scripture, the Book of Mormon, the Lord said to a latter-day prophet: "And again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel . . . in the Bible and the Book of Mormon." (D&C 42:12.)

Many reasons have been given by people as to why they do not study the Old Testament more diligently—it is too long, it was written too many years ago and does not apply today, there are too many voids in the record and some overlapping and duplication, it is not always presented chronologically, it contains too much history and too many "endless genealogies," and so on.

One purpose of this book is to help you appreciate and understand the Old Testament. To help achieve this objective, several study and teaching features have been included in this book.

Part I contains a brief historical overview of the major families in the Old Testament, including their most important beliefs, customs, traditions, and practices, and their routes of travel and places of residence. Old Testament prophecies related to three major time periods are then listed and thoroughly documented: prophecies fulfilled within the period of the Old Testament, prophecies fulfilled in New Testament times, and prophecies to be fulfilled in the latter days.

Next are selected quotations from presidents of the Church on the major Old Testament prophecies to be fulfilled in the latter days, including such topics as the gathering of Israel (Judah, the dispersed of Israel, and the ten "lost" tribes), the building up and redemption of Israel, events preceding and associated with the second coming of Jesus Christ, and the Millennium.

The concluding segments in Part I include excerpts from four documents related to Old Testament topics:

To assist in subsequent referencing, major topics and sections of Part I are indicated by numbers in the margins of the pages.

Part II, which comprises the bulk of the book, consists of observations, definitions, and explanations of topics, expressions, and words that might be hard to understand. These are identified by book, chapter, and verse, and are often supplemented by quotations, usually by General Authorities of the Church.

The Appendix contains hundreds of words and terms from the King James text, listed alphabetically, that might be hard to understand because of changes in meaning or problems of translation, or because they are idioms or parts of difficult expressions. Explanations, definitions, and alternate readings from the Hebrew and other sources are provided for these items.

This book has been planned to supplement the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Bible, with its many excellent aids including: extensive cross-references to all the standard works; comprehensive footnotes from the Hebrew, Greek, Joseph Smith Translation, and other versions and editions of the Bible; thorough chapter headings; Topical Guide and Bible Dictionary entries; and gazetteer and maps. I feel that this special edition of the Bible is the most important biblical publication since 1611, when the first edition of the King James Bible was printed. I also believe that the LDS edition of the King James Bible, together with the other scriptures and the inspired teachings and commentaries of modern prophets, seers, and revelators, is sufficient for a thorough study and understanding of the Old Testament. A Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament encourages the use of the new Bible and is designed to augment the instructional aids in that superb edition.

I have frequently quoted: "One of the best ways to learn something is to teach it." I will now add another expression: "One of the best ways to learn something is to write about it." The past few months of intense research, thought, and writing on the Old Testament have brought with them a greater love, appreciation, and understanding of this sublime scripture. If this present book will help you experience these same feelings, then one of my hopes will have been realized.
