Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

OLD TESTAMENT PROPHECIES FULFILLED IN THE OLD TESTAMENT

In addition to knowing the beliefs, customs, and practices of the Israelites, one must be acquainted with the major events, groupings, travels, and places of residence of these people in order to understand fully the Old Testament story.

For several hundred years after the time of Jacob (Israel), the Old Testament is concerned with the descendants of all of Jacob's twelve sons. This period covers the time of bondage in Egypt and of the exodus (covered in the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy), the era of the judges in the promised land (covered in Joshua, Judges, Ruth and 1 Samuel 1-9), and the time of the united kingdom under kings Saul, David, and Solomon (covered in 1 Samuel 9-31, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings 1-11, 1 Chronicles, and 2 Chronicles 1-10).

Upon the death of Solomon and the beginning of the divided kingdom, the record then alternates between two major groups: (1) the northern kingdom (kingdom of Israel), led primarily by descendants of Joseph, with headquarters in the middle section of the land—Shechem and Samaria, and (2) the southern kingdom (kingdom of Judah), led by descendants of Judah, with headquarters at Jerusalem (covered in 1 Kings 12-22, 2 Kings 1-15, and 2 Chronicles 11-32).

About 722 B.C. the Assyrians swept out of the north, captured the northern kingdom, and took many of the peoples of that kingdom captive into Assyria. The next year (721 B.C.) these captive Israelites, representing approximately ten of the twelve tribes of Israel, were lost to history; throughout the remainder of the record and of history they are referred to simply as the "ten lost tribes of Israel."

The remainder of the historical record is concerned almost exclusively with the history of the kingdom of Judah, inhabitants of which are primarily from the tribe of Judah, the neighboring tribes of Simeon (to the south) and Benjamin (to the north), and remnants of all the tribes whose ancestors had immigrated to the kingdom of Judah earlier—especially members of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, who "fell . . . out of Israel in abundance" during a time of spiritual famine in the north. (See 2 Chronicles 15:9.)

The biblical record catalogs the fall of the peoples of Judah into almost complete apostasy, follows them into captivity in Babylon, returns with them to the promised land after Cyrus of Persia conquers Babylonia, and remains with them during the rebuilding of the temple to the end of their written biblical record. The historical sections concerned almost exclusively with the peoples of the kingdom of Judah are 2 Kings 16-25 and 2 Chronicles 33-36; the "prophetic" books concerned with this period of Judah's history include parts of Amos, Isaiah, Hosea, and Micah and all of Nahum, Jeremiah, Obadiah, Zephaniah, Habakkuk, Daniel, Ezekiel, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.

The prophecies of Old Testament prophets concerning these early scatterings, captivities, and gatherings of segments of the house of Israel were fulfilled in Old Testament times—that is, both the prophecies and accounts of fulfillment of the prophecies are contained within the present Old Testament. These include the following events:

(TG: Israel, Bondage of, in Egypt, p. 233. BD: Abraham, Covenant of, p. 602; Captivities of the Israelites, p. 631.)

(TG: Israel, Deliverance of, pp. 233-34; Israel, Land of, pp. 235-36. BD: Exodus, Book of, p. 668; Moses, pp. 734-35; Wilderness of the Exodus, p. 789.)

(TG: Israel, Bondage of, in Other Lands, p. 233; Israel, Ten Lost Tribes of, pp. 237-38. BD: Israel, Kingdom of, p. 708.)

(TG: Israel, Bondage of, in Other Lands, p. 233. BD: Diaspora, p. 657; Dispersion, p. 658.)

(TG: Israel, Bondage of, in Other Lands, p. 233; Israel, Judah, People of, p. 235; Israel, Scattering of, p. 237. BD: Assyria and Babylonia, pp. 615-16.)

(TG: Israel, Deliverance of, pp. 233-34; Israel, Gathering of, p. 234; Israel, Restoration of, pp. 236-37. BD: Assyria and Babylonia, pp. 615-16.)

The Old Testament prophets also foresaw the eventual dispersion of virtually the entire house of Israel among the nations of the earth, but the fulfillment of this prophecy was not completed until New Testament times when the Jews were scattered by the Romans in the days of Nero, Vespasian, and Titus.

(TG: Israel, Bondage of, in Other Lands, p. 233; Israel, Scattering of, p. 237.)
