Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

THE PRINCIPLE OF GATHERING

Prophets Have Testified Concerning the Gathering

"All that the prophets that have written, from the days of righteous Abel, down to the last man that has left any testimony on record for our consideration, in speaking of the salvation of Israel in the last days, goes directly to show that it consists in the work of the gathering." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:260.)

"The gathering . . . is as necessary to be observed by believers, as faith, repentance, baptism, or any other ordinance. It is an essential part of the Gospel of this dispensation, as much so, as the necessity of building an ark by Noah, for his deliverance, was a part of the Gospel of his dispensation." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 19:192.)

"One of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of Israel (of whom the Lamanites constitute a part)—that happy time when Jacob shall go up to the house of the Lord, to worship Him in spirit and in truth, to live in holiness; when the Lord will restore His judges as at the first, and His counselors as at the beginning; when every man may sit under his own vine and fig tree, and there will be none to molest or make afraid; when He will turn to them a pure language, and the earth will be filled with sacred knowledge, as the waters cover the great deep; when it shall no longer be said, the Lord lives that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, but the Lord lives that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither He has driven them. That day is one, all important to all men." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:357.)

The Keys of Gathering Have Been Restored

"Six years after the Church was organized, the keys of gathering were committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple. The record of that marvelous restoration is given in these words: [D&C 110:11, quoted.] The spirit of gathering has been with the Church from the days of that restoration. Those who are of the blood of Israel, have a righteous desire after they are baptized, to gather together with the body of the Saints at the designated place. . . .

"Thus, clearly, the Lord has placed the responsibility for directing the work of gathering in the hands of the leaders of the Church to whom he will reveal his will where and when such gatherings would take place in the future." (Harold B. Lee, CR, Apr. 1948, p. 55.)

"It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. . . .

"It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:423-24.)

The Gospel Includes the Spirit of Gathering

"When the Lord restored the Gospel the spirit of gathering came with it. The Lord commanded the people to gather together, and that they should not only be organized as a Church, but that they should be organized under the laws of the land, so that they might not be helpless and dependent and without influence or power; but that by means of united effort and faith they should become a power for the accomplishment of righteousness in the earth." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, Apr. 1900, p. 47.)

"The Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ is a gathering spirit. Its tendency is to gather the virtuous and good, the honest and meek of the earth, and, in fine, the Saints of God. The time has come when the Lord is determined to fulfill his purposes. . . .

"The Lord does not require every soul to leave his home. . . . But He does require them to hearken to counsel, and follow that course which He points out, whether to gather or stay to do some other work. . . .

"Perhaps some of you are ready to ask, 'Cannot the Lord save us as well where we are as to gather together?' Yes, if the Lord says so. But if He commands us to come out and gather together, He will not save us by staying at home." (Brigham Young, HC 6:12.)

The Church Believes in and Practices Gathering

"Why is it that you are here to-day? and what brought you here? Because the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four quarters of the earth have been committed to Joseph Smith, and he has conferred those keys upon others that the gathering of Israel may be accomplished, and in due time the same thing will be performed to the tribes in the land of the north. It is on this account, and through the unlocking of this principle, and through those means, that you are brought together as you are to-day." (John Taylor, JD 25:179.)

"The gathering of Israel is one of the important doctrines taught by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and is presumptive evidence of the divine mission of Joseph Smith. The Church must not only teach this doctrine of the gathering, but must also practice it. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stands alone among the Christian churches teaching and practicing the gathering of its members, in fulfilment of the ancient prophets." (Joseph Fielding Smith, RT, p. 139.)
