Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

THE GATHERING OF JUDAH TO THE "LAND OF JERUSALEM"

Jews to Return and Govern in Their Own Land

"The Lord has decreed that the Jews should be gathered from all the Gentile nations where they have been driven, into their own land, in fulfillment of the words of Moses their lawgiver." (Wilford Woodruff, WW, p. 509.)

"The God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has set His hand again the second time to recover the remnants of his people." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:313.)

"By the authority of the Holy Priesthood of God, that has again been restored to the earth, . . . Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ have been to the Holy Land and have dedicated that country for the return of the Jews; and we believe that in the due time of the Lord they shall be in the favor of God again." (Heber J. Grant, CR, Apr. 1921, p. 124.)

"The descendants of Abraham . . . expect to see [the] promise fulfilled, when his descendants will again inherit that land of promise, and when all things spoken of by the mouth of the Prophets will be accomplished. The measuring line will yet go forth again in Jerusalem, and Jerusalem will yet be inhabited on its own place, even in Jerusalem." (John Taylor, JD 18:325.)

Judah Remembered in Dedicatory Prayers of Temples

"O Lord . . . have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed;

"And the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of David;

"And the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give to Abraham, their father." (Joseph Smith, D&C 109:60-64.)

"Wilt thou show unto [the sons of Judah] mercy, . . . They have been trampled under foot of the Gentiles and have been made a hiss and a byword in the fulfillment of the words of Moses, their law giver, and of Jesus of Nazareth. We pray Thee, O Thou great Eloheim, that their past sufferings may suffice. Inspire their hearts to return home to Jerusalem, the land of their fathers, and to rebuilt their city and temple. Prepare them for the coming of Shiloh, their king." (Wilford Woodruff, WW, p. 493.)

"Have thou mercy upon Judah and Jerusalem; hasten the going forth of this sacred record [the Book of Mormon] to the Hebrews of all nations; raise up men and means to carry the glad tidings of thy returning favor to that afflicted people. Wilt thou hear and answer the prayers of thy servants and turn away the barrenness of their land? Make it very fertile as in days of old; turn the hearts of the exiles to thy promises made to their fathers, and let the land of Jerusalem become inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein, that they may rebuild their city and temple, that the glory of the latter house may be greater than that of the former house." (Lorenzo Snow, MS 50:390.)

"We thank thee, O God, our Eternal Father, that the land of Palestine, the land where our Savior and Redeemer ministered in the flesh, where he gave to the world the plan of life and salvation, is now redeemed from . . . thralldom. . . . We acknowledge thy hand, O God, in the wonderful events which have led up to the partial redemption of the land of Judah, and we beseech thee, O Father, that the Jews may, at no far distant date, be gathered home to the land of their fathers." (Heber J. Grant, IE 26:1077.)

"Wilt thou, O Lord, have in remembrance the promises made by thee to Judah in his stricken and scattered condition. Hasten the time when he shall be restored to the land of his inheritance. Remove from him thy displeasure, and may the days of his tribulation soon cease, and Jerusalem rejoice, and Judah be made glad. . . .

"Wilt thou, O gracious Father, in thy wisdom and mercy, speedily fulfil thy promises unto Israel and cause that they may again be gathered and hearken unto the voice of thy servants, the prophets, and thereby merit the rich blessings thou hast promised them when they acknowledge Jesus Christ, thy Beloved Son, as their Redeemer." (George Albert Smith, IE 48:562-65.)

"Wilt thou, O Lord, remember thy covenants with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob concerning their seed. . . .

"And hasten the day, O Lord of Hosts, when the scattered remnants of Judah, after their pain, shall be sanctified in holiness before thee and shall build again the waste places of Jerusalem, that they may once again be numbered with thy people; that the promises may be fulfilled, 'for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'" (Harold B. Lee, E, Mar. 1972, p. 10.)

Gold and Silver to Help Reclaim the Land

"These fleeing Jews [will] take back their gold and silver to Jerusalem and re-build their city and temple . . . as the Lord lives. Then the gentiles will say, 'Come let us go up to Jerusalem; let us go up and spoil her. The Jews have taken our gold and silver from the nations of the earth—come let us go up and fight against Jerusalem." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 22:173.)

"The time is not far distant when the rich men among the Jews may be called upon to use their abundant wealth to gather the dispersed of Judah, and purchase the ancient dwelling places of their fathers in and about Jerusalem, and rebuild the holy city and temple. . . . The Lord has decreed that the Jews should be gathered from all the Gentile nations where they have been driven, into their own land, in fulfillment of the words of Moses their law-giver." (Wilford Woodruff, MS 41:244.)

Judah to Be Redeemed

"The day of the return is here. . . . Judah is to be redeemed from all his rebellion and will once more occupy the lands of his inheritance. Nations may oppose it; Arabs may fight it; but every opposition in the due time of the Lord will melt away and Israel will again possess the land northward and southward, and eastward and westward, for all this land was given to Abraham and Israel by the Lord, for an everlasting possession." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, p. 234.)

"The Israelites of the Kingdom of Judah were carried into Babylon about 130 years later [after the captivity of the ten tribes] and when they returned they were known as Jews. It seems a little strange that in this present time, when again the government of the Jews is established, that they call it Israel instead of Judah. In doing so, perhaps they have built better than they knew, for eventually this land is to be inhabited by those of the other tribes of Israel and it will not be a kingdom just of Jews. . . . That . . . is the fulfillment of prophecy." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, p. 234.)

"After the Jews are gathered to Palestine in sufficient numbers and have built cities, cultivated farms and orchards, formed their government and executed their laws, they will have taken only the preparatory steps towards their redemption and the redemption of their land." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, p. 236.)

The Gospel to Be Preached to the Jews in Their Own Land

"The promise is . . . made to the Jews that they shall be gathered again, after their pain and suffering. They will gather as predicted by Zechariah and by the Lord in . . . revelation (D&C 45) in their unbelief. They will begin to believe in Christ but will not be ready to accept him in his full right as their Deliverer and as the Son of God. (See 2 Nephi 30:5-8.) In this state they shall gather to Jerusalem and its vicinity." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:265.)

"The Jews have got to gather to their own land in unbelief. . . . They do not believe in Jesus of Nazareth now, nor ever will until he comes and sets his foot on Mount Olivet and it cleaves in twain, one part going towards the east, and the other towards the west. Then, when they behold the wounds in his hands and in his feet, they will say, 'Where did you get them?' And he will reply, 'I am Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, your Shiloh, him whom you crucified.' Then, for the first time will the eyes of Judah be opened. They will remain in unbelief until that day." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 15:277-78.)

"When the Gentiles reject the Gospel it will be taken from them, and go to the house of Israel, to that long suffering people that are now scattered abroad through all the nations upon the earth, and they will be gathered home by thousands, and by hundreds of thousands, and they will re-build Jerusalem their ancient city, and make it more glorious than at the beginning, and they will have a leader in Israel with them, a man that is full of the power of God and the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 2:200.)

"The time has at last arrived when the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has set His hand . . . to . . . establish that covenant with them, which was promised when their sins should be taken away." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:313.)

"The restored gospel of Jesus Christ is to be preached to the gathered Jews, and the Saints are glad to behold the signs of the coming day." (Joseph F. Smith, IE 21:261.)

"The time is rapidly approaching when [the gospel] will be preached to the Jews, who are to gather in from their long dispersion, upon the land of their inheritance. Palestine is to be inhabited as a city without walls and the glory of the Lord will rest upon his chosen people, when they repent of their sins and turn unto him." (George Albert Smith, MS 83:2.)

"So it is not a far distant day . . . when that great race of people that has done so much for us, the people beloved of the Lord, they of whom He spoke so tenderly and affectionately upon many occasions, . . . will . . . rejoice in the knowledge that God is our Father, that He is a personal being, that Jesus Christ, His Son, was the manifestation of God in the flesh, the Redeemer of the world, and that He is our elder brother." (George Albert Smith, Liahona, Vol. 5, pt. 2, p. 838.)

A Temple to Be Built in Jerusalem

"What was the object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world? . . .

"The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose. . . .

"It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:423-24.)

"I remember, some time ago, having a conversation with Baron Rothschild, a Jew. I was showing him the Temple here, and said he—'Elder Taylor, what do you mean by this Temple? What is the object of it? Why are you building it?' Said I, . . . 'You will build a Temple, for the Lord has shown us, among other things, that you Jews have quite a role to perform in the latter days, and that all the things spoken by your old prophets will be fulfilled, that you will be gathered to old Jerusalem, and that you will build a Temple there; and when you build that Temple, and the time has arrived, "the Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to this temple."'" (John Taylor, JD 18:199-200.)

Nations of the Earth to Fight Against Jerusalem

"O house of Judah. . . . it is true that after you return and gather your nation home, and rebuild your City and Temple, that the Gentiles may gather together their armies to go against you to battle, to take you a prey and to take you as a spoil, which they will do, for the words of your prophets must be fulfilled; but when this affliction comes, the living God, that led Moses through the wilderness, will deliver you, and your Shiloh will come and stand in your midst and will fight your battles; and you will know him, and the afflictions of the Jews will be at an end, while the destruction of the Gentiles will be so great that it will take the whole house of Israel who are gathered about Jerusalem, seven months to bury the dead of their enemies, and the weapons of war will last them seven years for fuel, so that they need not go to any forest for wood. These are tremendous sayings—who can bear them? Nevertheless they are true, and will be fulfilled, according to the sayings of Ezekiel, Zechariah, and other prophets. Though the heavens and the earth pass away, not one jot or tittle will fall unfulfilled." (Wilford Woodruff, WW, pp. 509-10.)

Resurrected Jesus Christ to Appear to the Jews

"At [the coming of the Savior] the Mount of Olives will cleave in twain and the besieged Jews will flee for safety into the valley thus created. Then the Savior will come and they will see the wounds in his hands and in his feet and in the spirit of deep sorrow and remorse they will bow down and acknowledge him as their long-expected Messiah. They will be forgiven and in sincere repentance will acknowledge him as their King. Then shall they be cleansed, and the sanctuary of the Lord will be established among them forever. The nations of the earth will come to their end; the wicked will be destroyed, and Christ will be proclaimed as 'King over all the earth, and his name one.'" (Compare D&C 45.) (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, p. 238.)

"We have a great desire for their [Jews] welfare, and are looking for the time soon to come when they will gather to Jerusalem, build up the city and the land of Palestine, and prepare for the coming of the Messiah. When he comes again, he will not come as he did when the Jews rejected him. . . .

"When the Savior visits Jerusalem, and the Jews look upon him, and see the wounds in his hands and in his side and in his feet, they will then know that they have persecuted and put to death the true Messiah, and then they will acknowledge him, but not till then. They have confounded his first and second coming, expecting his first coming to be as a mighty prince instead of as a servant. They will go back by and by to Jerusalem and own their Lord and Master. [D&C 109:62-64; 110:11.]" (Brigham Young, JD 11:279.)

"When [the Jews'] enemies come upon them and part of the city is taken, there shall come a great earthquake and the mount of Olives shall cleave in twain forming a valley into which the Jews shall flee for safety. At that time Christ will appear to them and show them his hands and his feet, and they shall fall down and acknowledge him as their King and Redeemer." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:265.)

"This is the will of your great Elohim, O house of Judah, and whenever you shall be called upon to perform this work, the God of Israel will help you. You have a great future and destiny before you and you cannot avoid fulfilling it; you are the royal chosen seed, and the God of your father's house has kept you distinct as a nation for eighteen hundred years, under all the oppression of the whole Gentile world. You may not wait until you believe on Jesus of Nazareth, but when you meet with Shiloh your king, you will know him; your destiny is marked out, you cannot avoid it." (Wilford Woodruff, WW, p. 509.)
