Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

THE GATHERING OF THE DISPERSED OF ISRAEL, INCLUDING LAMANITES

(Note: Various terms have been used to denote this aspect of the gathering—"dispersed of Israel," "remnants of Israel," "seed of Joseph," "Ephraim," "seed or descendants of Lehi," "Lamanites," etc.)

The "Dispersed of Israel" Includes the Lamanites

"I am looking for the fulfillment of all things that the Lord has spoken, and they will come to pass as the Lord God lives. Zion is bound to rise and flourish. The Lamanites will blossom as the rose on the mountains. . . . Every word that God has ever said of them will have its fulfillment, and they, by and by, will receive the Gospel. It will be a day of God's power among them. . . . Their chiefs will be filled with the power of God and receive the Gospel, and they will go forth and build the new Jerusalem, and we shall help them. They are branches of the house of Israel." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 15:282.)

"[From the Book of Mormon] we learn that our western tribes of Indians are descendants from that Joseph who was sold into Egypt, and that the land of America is a promised land unto them, and unto it all the tribes of Israel will come, with as many of the Gentiles as shall comply with the requisitions of the new covenant." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 17.)

"The Book of Mormon has made known who Israel is, upon this continent. And while we behold the government of the United States gathering the Indians, and locating them upon lands to be their own, how sweet it is to think that they may one day be gathered by the Gospel!" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:358.)

"We pray . . . our Lord Thou wilt make bare Thine arm in the preservation and salvation of the small remnants of the Lamanites that are left in the land. Deliver them, we pray Thee, from the hands of the Gentiles who are bringing about their threatened anihilation from off the earth. Inspire their hearts with Thy spirit, that they may receive the Gospel of the Son of God, that they may be prepared to build up Zion, and to fulfill the covenants and promises made to them by their forefathers who inherited this land." (Wilford Woodruff, WW, p. 493.)

"We beseech thee, O Lord, that thou wilt stay the hand of the destroyer among the descendants of Lehi who reside in this land and give unto them increasing virility and more abundant health, that they may not perish as a people but that from this time forth they may increase in numbers and in strength and in influence, that all the great and glorious promises made concerning the descendants of Lehi may be fulfilled in them; that they may grow in vigor of body and of mind, and above all love for Thee and Thy Son, and increase in diligence and in faithfulness in keeping the commandments which have come to them through the gospel of Jesus Christ." (Heber J. Grant, TMH, p. 177.)

"Wilt thou, O Lord, remember thy covenants with . . . Lehi and Nephi and thy 'other sheep' on the American continent; that their descendants should have the blessings of the gospel, 'which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal.' Cause that the scattered remnants of thine ancient chosen people may open their hearts to the message of those living prophets whom thou dost now send to them." (Harold B. Lee, E, Mar. 1972, p. 10.)

The Day of the Lamanite Is Here

"The day of the Lamanite is here and the gospel brings opportunity. . . . They must have the emancipating gospel. . . . They must hear the compelling truths. Millions through North America are deprived, untrained, and achieving less than their potential. They must have the enlightening gospel. It will break their fetters, stir their ambition, increase their vision, and open new worlds of opportunity to them. Their captivity will be at an end—the captivity of misconceptions, illiteracy, superstitution, fear. 'The clouds of error disappear before the rays of truth divine.'

"The brighter day has dawned. The scattering has been accomplished—the gathering in process. May the Lord bless us all as we become nursing parents unto our Lamanite brethren and hasten the fulfillment of the great promises made to them." (Spencer W. Kimball, FPM, p. 358.)

"The day of the Lamanite is surely here and we are God's instrument in helping to bring to pass the prophecies of renewed vitality, acceptance of the gospel, and resumption of a favored place as part of God's chosen people. The promises of the Lord will all come to pass; we could not thwart them if we would. But we do have it in our power to hasten or delay the process by our energetic or neglectful fulfillment of our responsibilities." (Spencer W. Kimball, FPM, p. 349.)
