Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

RETURN OF THE TEN LOST TRIBES

Prophecies Concerning the Lost Tribes Will Be Fulfilled

"All that God has said with regard to the ten tribes of Israel, strange as it may appear, will come to pass. They will, as has been said concerning them, smite the rock, and the mountains of ice will flow before them, and a great highway will be cast up, and their enemies will become a prey to them; and their records, and other choice treasures they will bring with them to Zion. These things are as true as God lives." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 21:301.)

"We know nothing about them [the ten tribes of Israel] only what the Lord has said by His Prophets. There are Prophets among them, and by and by they will come along, and they will smite the rocks, and the mountains of ice will flow down at their presence, and a highway will be cast up before them, and they will come to Zion, receive their endowments, and be crowned under the hands of the children of Ephraim." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 4:231-32.)

"Remember, O Lord, Thy covenant people in the north country; hasten the day when they shall come in remembrance before Thee, when their prophets shall smite the rocks and the mountains of ice shall flow down before them. May the highways speedily be cast up in the midst of the great deep, that they may come over dry shod. May the everlasting hills tremble at their presence and their enemies disappear before them. May they come forth unto Zion and bow the knee, that they may be crowned under the hands of Ephraim, Thy servant." (Wilford Woodruff, WW, p. 493.)

Some of Lost Tribes Together in a Group

"In the scattering of Israel the descendants of Jacob were driven into all lands and climes and have mingled among all nations. There is, however, a body of these tribes hidden away, where they are we do not know, but the Lord says they shall come from the North. Isaiah has spoken of them (Chap. 43:15-21), and Jeremiah speaking of their return has said: [Quoted Jeremiah 16:14, 15.] Here the Lord says that these people have prophets among them, and Joseph Smith at a conference of the Church held in June, 1831, said: 'John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, King of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion.' This is the mission given to John portrayed in the symbol of the little book which he was given to eat, in the tenth chapter of Revelation. (See Sec. 77:14.)

"When these Israelites come to Zion they will bring their rich treasures to the children of Ephraim, and the children of Ephraim will give unto them the blessings of the fulness of the Gospel. This also is according to the predictions. Ephraim received the birthright in Israel and in these last days he stands in his place at the head of the tribes of Israel. It will be his duty, therefore, to crown the tribes of Israel, when they come to Zion. We are also promised that their enemies will be a prey to them when the Lord brings them on their journey. An highway will be thrown up in the midst of the great deep. Barren deserts shall then become fruitful with springs of water, and the parched ground shall not longer be a thirsty land." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:265.)

"Notwithstanding all that has been written, there are many members of the Church who think that these 'lost tribes' were scattered among the nations and are now being gathered out and are found through all the stakes and branches of the Church. They reach this conclusion because the general opinion is that these tribes went into the North, and it is the northern countries from whence most of gathered Israel has been found. . . .

"Speaking of this, Elder Orson F. Whitney has said:

"'It is maintained by some that the lost tribes of Israel—those carried into captivity about 725 B.C.—are no longer a distinct people; that they exist only in a scattered condition, mixed with the nations among which they were taken by their captors, the conquering Assyrians. If this be true, and those tribes were not intact at the time Joseph and Oliver received the keys of the gathering why did they make so pointed a reference to "the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north"? . . . What need to particularize as to the Ten Tribes, if they were no longer a distinct people? And why do our Articles of Faith give these tribes a special mention?' (See SNT, p. 174.)

". . . The Savior also bore witness that these tribes were in a body like the Nephites and he would visit them. [3 Ne. 15:20 and 16:1-4.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, pp. 185-88.)

Ten Tribes to Come from the North

"Whether these tribes are in the north or not, I am not prepared to say. As I said before, they are 'lost' and until the Lord wishes it, they will not be found. All that I know about it is what the Lord has revealed, and He declares that they will come from the North. He has also made it very clear and definite that these lost people are separate and apart from the scattered Israelites now being gathered out. If this be not true, then the commission of Moses to the Prophet Joseph Smith is without meaning. [Quoted D&C 110:11.] The statement that the tribes are to be led from the north harmonizes perfectly with the words of Jeremiah (Jer. 16:14-15) and Section 133, verses 26 to 34. Surely there must be a time when this great body of people will come to the children of Ephraim to receive their blessings." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, p. 186.)
