Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

EVENTS AND CONDITIONS PRECEDING THE SECOND COMING

Signs of the Second Coming Have Commenced

"I will prophesy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at your doors." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:390.)

"When I contemplate the rapidity with which the great and glorious day of the coming of the Son of Man advances, when He shall come to receive His Saints unto Himself, where they shall dwell in His presence, and be crowned with glory and immortality; when I consider that soon the heavens are to be shaken, and the earth tremble and reel to and fro; and that the heavens are to be unfolded as a scroll when it is rolled up; and that every mountain and island are to flee away, I cry out in my heart. What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness!" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:442.)

Wars and Calamities

"The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes.

"I saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, and brother murdering brother, women killing their own daughters, and daughters seeking the lives of their mothers. I saw armies arrayed against armies. I saw blood, desolation, fires. The Son of Man has said that the mother shall be against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother. These things are at our doors. They will follow the Saints of God from city to city. Satan will rage, and the spirit of the devil is now enraged. I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry peace? No! I will lift up my voice and testify of them." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:391.)

"We see nations rising against nations; we hear of the pestilence destroying its thousands in one place and its tens of thousands in another; the plague consuming all before it, and we witness this terror that reigns in the hearts of the wicked, and we are ready to exclaim, 'The Lord is certainly about bringing the world to an account of its iniquity.' Let us reflect, then, in the last days, that there was to be great tribulations; for the Saviour says, nation shall rise against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be famine, pestilence, and earthquakes in divers places, and the prophets have declared that the valleys should rise; that the mountains should be laid low; that a great earthquake should be, in which the sun should become black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon turn into blood; yea, the Eternal God hath declared that the great deep shall roll back into the north countries and that the land of Zion and the land of Jerusalem shall be joined together, as they were before they were divided in the days of Peleg. No wonder the mind starts at the sound of the last days." (Joseph Smith, Inspired Prophetic Warnings, Lundwall, pp. 41-42.)

"The servants of God will not have gone over the nations of the Gentiles, with a warning voice, until the destroying angel will commence to waste the inhabitants of the earth, and as the prophet hath said. 'It shall be a vexation to hear the report.' I speak thus because I feel for my fellow men; I do it in the name of the Lord, being moved upon by the Holy Spirit. Oh, that I could snatch them from the vortex of misery, into which I behold them plunging themselves, by their sins; that I might be enabled by the warning voice, to be an instrument of bringing them to unfeigned repentance, that they might have faith to stand in the evil day!" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:263.)

"When the testimony of the Elders ceases to be given, and the Lord says to them, 'Come home; I will now preach my own sermons to the nations of the earth,' all you now know can scarcely be called a preface to the sermon that will be preached with fire and sword, tempests, earthquakes, hail, rain, thunders and lightnings, and fearful destruction. . . . You will hear of magnificent cities, now idolized by the people, sinking in the earth, entombing the inhabitants. The sea will heave itself beyond its bounds, engulphing mighty cities. Famine will spread over the nations, and nation will rise up against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and states against states, in our own country and in foreign lands; and they will destroy each other, caring not for the blood and lives of their neighbours, of their families, or for their own lives." (Brigham Young, JD 8:123.)

"You will see worse things than [the Civil War], for God will lay his hand upon this nation, and they will feel it more terribly than ever they have done before; there will be more bloodshed, more ruin, more devastation than ever they have seen before. . . . There is yet to come a sound of war, trouble and distress, in which brother will be arrayed against brother, father against son, son against father, a scene of desolation and destruction that will permeate our land until it will be a vexation to hear the report thereof." (John Taylor, JD 20:318.)

Wickedness to Increase

"My testimony is this unto all men and nations, that . . . you live in the age in which God will bring to pass the fulfillment of that word of prophecy and prediction which has been spoken by all the prophets since the world began. . . .

"Thrones will be cast down, nations will be overturned, anarchy will reign, all legal barriers will be broken down, and the laws will be trampled in the dust. You are about to be visited with war, the sword, famine, pestilence, plague, earthquakes, whirlwinds, tempests, and with the flame of devouring fire, by fire and with the sword will God plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord will be many. The anger of the Lord is kindled and his sword is bathed in heaven, and is about to fall upon Idumea, or the world. . . . The fig trees are leafing, and the signs of all heaven and earth indicate the coming of the Son of Man. The seals are about to be opened; the plagues to be poured forth. Your rivers and seas will be turned to blood and to gall. And the inhabitants of the earth will die of plagues. . . . The question may be asked why these judgments are coming upon the world in the last days? I answer because of the wickedness of the inhabitants thereof . . . the whole earth is filled with murders, whoredoms, blasphemies, and every crime in the black catalogue that was manifest in the antideluvian world, or Sodom and Gomorrah, until the whole earth groans under its abominations, and the heavens weep, and all eternity is pained, and the angels are waiting the great command to go forth and reap down the earth. This testimony I bear to all nations under heaven, and I know it is true by the inspiration of Almighty God." (Wilford Woodruff, MS 41:241, 245-46.)

"Consider for a moment, brethren, the fulfillment of the words of the prophet; for we behold that darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the inhabitants thereof—that crimes of every description are increasing among men—vices of great enormity are practiced—the rising generation growing up in the fullness of pride and arrogance—the aged losing every sense of conviction, and seemingly banishing every thought of a day of retribution—intemperance, immorality, extravagance, pride, bindness of heart, idolatry, the loss of natural affection; the love of this world, and indifference toward the things of eternity increasing among those who profess a belief in the religion of heaven, and infidelity spreading itself in consequence of the same—men giving themselves up to commit acts of the foulest kind, and deeds of the blackest dye, blaspheming, defrauding, blasting the reputation of neighbors, stealing, robbing, murdering; advocating error and opposing the truth, forsaking the covenant of heaven, and denying the faith of Jesus—and in the midst of all this, the day of the Lord fast approaching when none except those who have won the wedding garment will be permitted to eat and drink in the presence of the Bridegroom, the Prince of Peace!" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:5.)

"The Lord is withdrawing His Spirit from the nations of the earth, and the power of the devil is gaining dominion over the children of men. See how crime is increasing. What will the end be? Death, destruction, whirlwinds, pestilence, famine and the judgments of God will be poured out upon the wicked; for the Lord has withheld these judgments until the world is fully warned." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 22:175.)

God Will Prevail and Rule

"If your eyes were opened, you would see his hand in the midst of the nations of the earth in the setting up of governments and in the downfall of kingdoms—in the revolutions, wars, famine, distress, and wretchedness among the inhabitants of the earth. In these manifestations you would discern the footsteps of the Almighty just as plainly as you may see the footsteps of your children upon the soft earth." (Brigham Young, JD 7:144.)

"The judgments will begin at the house of God. We have to pass through some of these things, but it will only be a very little compared with the terrible destruction, the misery and suffering that will overtake the world who are doomed to suffer the wrath of God. It behooves us, as the Saints of God, to stand firm and faithful in the observance of his laws, that we may be worthy of his preserving care and blessing." (John Taylor, JD 21:100.)

"We read in the Scriptures of a time that is coming when there will be a howling among the merchants in Babylon, for men will not be found to buy their merchandise. This is in accordance with the prediction of John the Revelator. And the gold and the silver and the fine linen, etc., in Babylon will be of no avail. But before that time comes, we as a people must prepare for those events, that we may be able to live and sustain ourselves when in the midst of convulsions that by and by will overtake the nations of the earth, and among others, this nation. The time that is spoken of is not very far distant." (John Taylor, JD 21:33.)

"God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out." (Wilford Woodruff, YWJ 5:512.)

"We are living in a period of time when upheavals in the world are daily, almost momentary. Marvelous things are occurring. The map of the world is changing. The order of government is being modified. In our own nation we are almost helpless before the problems that confront us, notwithstanding we are probably the wealthiest and most powerful nation in all the world. What is our difficulty, brethren and sisters? It is that men refuse to hear what the Lord has said. They refuse to pay attention to his wise counsel. They absolutely neglect to give credence to the things that he teaches us, and he will not be mocked. He gives us the advice and the counsel that we need, but he will not compel us. But if we refuse we lose our opportunity, and it passes away from us, in many cases to return again no more forever." (George Albert Smith, CR, Apr. 1933, p. 71.)

Elijah the Prophet to Return

"There is a custom among the Jews, described by Alfred Edersheim, in his book, 'The Temple,' in which it is said at the feast of the passover the Jews look for the return of Elijah. I will let Mr. Edersheim tell the story: . . . 'Jewish tradition has this curious conceit: That the most important events in Israel's history were connected with the Paschal season. . . . Hence to this day, in every Jewish home, at a certain part of the Paschal service—just after the "third cup" or the "cup of blessing," has been drunk—the door is opened to admit Elijah the prophet as forerunner of the Messiah, while appropriate passages are at the same time read which foretell the destruction of all heathen nations.'—pp. 196-97.

"At the very time, on the third day of April, 1836, when Elijah appeared and committed his dispensation to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the Jews were celebrating the Paschal feast and opening their doors to receive Elijah. He came, but not to the Jewish homes, but to two humble youths in the house of the Lord in Kirtland." (Joseph Fielding Smith, RT, pp. 170-71.) (Note: See commentary for Mal. 4:5.)
