Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

THE SECOND COMING OF JESUS CHRIST

Jesus Christ Will Descend from Heaven

"The coming of the Son of Man never will be—never can be till the judgments spoken of for this hour are poured out: which judgments are commenced. . . .

"Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, etc.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance. There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the East." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:336-37.)

"The Lord Jesus Christ is coming to reign on earth. The world may say that he delays his coming until the end of the earth. But they know neither the thoughts nor the ways of the Lord. The Lord will not delay his coming because of their unbelief, and the signs both in heaven and earth indicate that it is near. The fig trees are leafing in sight of all the nations of the earth, and if they had the Spirit of God they could see and understand them." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 16:35.)

"Do you know that it is the eleventh hour of the reign of Satan on the earth? Jesus is coming to regin, and all you who fear and tremble because of your enemies, cease to fear them, and learn to fear to offend God, fear to transgress his laws, fear to do any evil to your brother, or to any being upon the earth, and do not fear Satan and his power, nor those who have only power to slay the body, for God will preserve his people." (Brigham Young, JD 10:250.)

"[The Savior] will never come until the Jews are gathered home and have re-built their Temple and city, and the Gentiles have gone up there to battle against them. He will never come until his Saints have built up Zion, and have fulfilled the revelations which have been spoken concerning it. He will never come until the Gentiles throughout the whole Christian world have been warned by the inspired elders of Israel." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 18:111.)

"You and I live in a day in which the Lord our God has set his hand for the last time, to gather out the righteous and to prepare a people to reign on this earth,—a people who will be purified by good works, who will abide the faith of the living God and be ready to meet the Bridegroom when he comes to reign over the earth, even Jesus Christ . . . and be prepared for that glorious event—the coming of the Son of Man." (Joseph F. Smith, MS 36:220.)

"We believe that Jesus Christ will descend from heaven to earth again even as He ascended into heaven. 'Behold, He cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see Him, and they also which pierced Him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of Him.' He will come to receive His own, and rule and reign king of nations as He does king of saints; 'For He must reign, till He hath put all enemies under His feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.' He will banish sin from the earth and its dreadful consequences, tears shall be wiped from every eye and there shall be nothing to hurt or destroy in all God's holy mountain." (Brigham Young, JD 11:123-24.)

Generation Known, but Not Day nor Hour

"I will take the responsibility upon myself to prophesy in the name of the Lord, that Christ will not come this year, . . . and I also prophesy, in the name of the Lord, that Christ will not come in forty years; and if God ever spoke by my mouth, He will not come in that length of time. Brethren, when you go home, write this down, that it may be remembered.

"Jesus Christ never did reveal to any man the precise time that He would come. Go and read the Scriptures, and you cannot find anything that specifies the exact hour He would come; and all that say so are false teachers." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:254.)

"I have asked of the Lord concerning His coming; and while asking the Lord, He gave a sign and said, 'In the days of Noah I set a bow in the heavens as a sign and token that in any year that the bow should be seen the Lord would not come; but there should be seed time and harvest during that year: but whenever you see the bow withdrawn, it shall be a token that there shall be famine, pestilence, and great distress among the nations, and that the coming of the Messiah is not far distant.'" (Joseph Smith, HC 6:254.)

"No man knows the day or the hour when Christ will come, yet the generation has been pointed out by Jesus himself. . . . The Savior, when speaking to his disciples of his second coming and the establishment of his kingdom on the earth, said the Jews should be scattered and trodden under foot until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. But, said he, when you see light breaking forth among the Gentiles, referring to the preaching of his Gospel amongst them; when you see salvation offered to the Gentiles, and the Jews—the seed of Israel—passed by, the last first and the first last; when you see this you may know that the time of my second coming is at hand as surely as you know that summer is nigh when the fig tree puts forth its leaves; and when these things commence that generation shall not pass away until all are fulfilled.

"We are living in the dispensation and generation to which Jesus referred." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 14:5.)

"The hour and day of the Lord's future advent is withheld from the knowledge of both men and angels; yet the signs, so definitely specified as harbingers of His coming, are multiplying apace. The prevailing unrest among men and nations, the fury of the elements, widespread destruction by land and sea, the frequency and intensity of volcanic and earthquake disturbances—all tell to the well-tuned and listening ear that the gladsome yet terrible day of the Lord is nigh—aye, even at the doors!

"A sure indication of the great event, as specified by the Lord Himself, was and is that the Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world. The missionary service of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints attests the progressive fulfilment of this prediction." (Heber J. Grant, MS 91:34.)

"There is something also to be looked to in the future. The Son of God has again to figure in the grand drama of the world . . . when he will go forth as a man of war and tread down the people in his anger and trample them in his fury, when blood should be on his garments and the day of vengeance in his heart, when he would rule the nations with an iron rod and break them to pieces like a potter's vessel. . . .

"When he comes again he comes to take vengeance on the ungodly and to bring deliverance unto his Saints; 'For the day of vengeance,' it is said, 'is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. (Isaiah 63:4) . . . When the Son of God shall come the second time with all the holy angels with him, arrayed in power and great glory to take vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the Gospel, or when he shall come in flaming fire, [hopefully] we shall be among that number who shall be ready to meet him with gladness in our hearts and hail him as our great Deliverer and friend." (John Taylor, JD 10:115-16.)

Earth to Be Burned at His Coming

"Now, when Christ comes, we will get a new heaven and a new earth and all of these corruptible things will be removed. They will be consumed by fire; and somebody said, 'Brother Smith, do you mean to say that it is going to be literal fire?' I said, 'Oh, no, it will not be literal fire any more than it was literal water that covered the earth in the flood.'. . .

"To my great astonishment this has been misunderstood by some, who failed to recognize the irony of this remark. For the benefit of such I will say I do not know of any other kind of water except literal water—H2O, the kind we drink, bathe in, and which makes floods and drowns people. I think fire which consumes will also be literal when it comes." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, p. 41.)

"It is not a figure of speech that is meaningless, or one not to be taken literally when the Lord speaks of the burning. All through the scriptures we have the word of the Lord that at his coming the wicked and the rebellious will be as stubble and will be consumed. Isaiah has so prophesied. . . . Surely the words of the Lord are not to be received lightly or considered meaningless." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:238.)
