Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

"A REVIEW OF GOD'S CONCERNS WITH THE CHILDREN OF ABRAHAM," BY ANTHONY W. IVINS

(Note: The following excerpts are from a talk by Anthony W. Ivins of the First Presidency, presented at the general conference of the Church on April 5, 1925.)

To properly comprehend the great plan of human redemption, designed by the Father for the blessing of his children, it is necessary that we be familiar with his hand-dealings with the people of the world, from the beginning of time, as we count it, until the present. It is not sufficient that we familiarize ourselves alone with the dispensation in which we live, important though that be. We must know something of the past, as history has written it, the present as we see and understand it, and the future as the prophets have declared it. Without this grouping of the past, the present and the future, our vision will be restricted, and incomplete.

Looking Back Four Thousand Years

I desire . . . to take you back more than four thousand years, to a period of time when an event occurred which was of transcendent importance to us, when a promise was made by the Lord which has not yet been fully fulfilled, but toward the fulfilment of which we are rapidly moving.

The Promise to Abraham

It was about 122 years after the deluge that the Lord called Abram, who at that time was seventy-five years of age, and a direct descendant of Shem, the chosen son of Noah, commanding him to go out from the country of his kindred, and from his father's house, into a land which he promised to give him, and to his posterity after him, for an ever-lasting inheritance. In obedience to the word of the Lord, Abram went from Haran to which place he had been taken by his father, from Ur of Chaldea, and pitched his tent in the land of Canaan. Twenty-four years later the Lord spoke to him as follows: [Quoted Gen. 17:1-6.]

God's Promise Never Fails

We have here a promise made by the Lord, which, judged by human standards, was impossible of fulfilment. Abraham was an hundred years old, and his wife, Sarah, ninety years of age, a supposedly barren woman, but the Lord had spoken, and his word never fails. Isaac was born, and the Lord repeated to him the promise made to his father. Isaac in turn, became the father of Jacob, through whose lineage, and the twelve sons who were born to him, the foundation was laid for the twelve tribes of Israel, the progenitors of a mighty nation.

The History of Israel and the Story of Joseph

To follow the history of this interesting people from that time to the present in detail, would be impossible in the short time which is at my disposal. You who are familiar with the story know that twelve sons were born to Jacob, six of whom, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar and Zebulon, were the sons of Leah, his first wife. Joseph and Benjamin the sons of Rachel; Dan and Naphtali the sons of Bilha, the handmaid of Rachel; and Gad and Asher, the sons of Zilpah, the handmaid of Leah.

You are familiar with the story of Joseph, who was sold by his brethren to passing Ishmaelites who carried the boy into Egypt, and sold him to Potiphar, a captain of the king's guard. How he was cast into prison, and finally released and made the vice-regent of the king, the most powerful personage, except the Pharaoh, in all Egypt. You know how famine came to the land, which made it necessary for Jacob to send his sons to Egypt to procure food, where these men discovered that the governor of all the land was their younger brother, whom they had sold into slavery, and after returning to Canaan brought down their father and all of their possessions into Egypt, and were established in the land of Goshen, where they became a numerous people.

But Egypt was not the heritage of Israel. Naturally they would have remained there and been absorbed by the Egyptians, but the Lord had decreed otherwise. He had given them Palestine as the land of their inheritance, and their return to that land was inevitable, even though it were against their will.

After remaining in Egypt more than two hundred years, some chronologists say four hundred, the Lord delivered them from the bondage of the Egyptians, through his servant Moses, and under the leadership of Joshua they again entered and took possession of the promised land, a great people. From the seventy souls who went into Goshen with Jacob, there went out 603,500 men more than twenty years of age, men able to bear arms, probably not less than three millions of people in all.

The history of the Israelitish people, from the time they crossed the river Jordan, under Joshua, and subdued Jericho, until the establishment of the kingdom, under Saul, about four hundred years, is one of almost constant war and contention, which resulted in the subjugation of neighboring kingdoms and peoples, until Israel, under David became the possessors of Palestine from Dan on the north to Beersheba on the south.

It was under Solomon that Israel reached the zenith of her power and glory as a nation and kingdom. One hundred and twenty years had elapsed from the establishment of the kingdom, under Saul, until the division of the nation, which occurred during the reign of Rehoboam, the son of Solomon. Five hundred years in all, since the return from Egypt. Years of conflict among themselves and with other peoples, years of faithlessness on the part of Israel, and suffering because of their transgression and indifference to the words of the prophets whom the Lord sent among them to call them back into the old way of righteousness, but they said, we will not walk therein. When the watchmen whom the Lord placed on the towers of Zion sounded the warning trumpet they said, we will not hearken.

The Day of the Prophets

It was the day of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and others of the prophets of old, through whom the Lord strove to keep the people in the path of righteousness and justice, the only road that leads to ultimate success, for final triumph has never been achieved and never will be, by a nation which denies the living God, and departs from the path which he has marked out for us to follow. In their pride of conquest Israel saw, in the glory which had come to them, fulfilment of the promise made by the Lord to Abraham. He had given them the land of promise, from north to south, and east to west, they were in possession of it, and in their pride believed themselves strong enough to hold it forever.

The Dissolution of Israel

The dissolution of Israel, as a great nation, commenced when the ten tribes, under the leadership of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, broke away from Judah and Benjamin and established the kingdom of Israel, with Samaria as its capital city, while Judah and Benjamin, with a part, at least, of the tribes of Simeon and Dan retained Jerusalem as the capital city of their kingdom.

Both nations rapidly relapsed into idolatry, Israel to the worship of the golden calf of the Egyptians, while Judah, to a great extent, turned to the worship of Bel of the Babylonians, and the idolatrous gods of the nations with which they were surrounded.

In this condition Israel continued until about seven hundred years before Christ, when the Assyrian armies, under Sennacherib overcame the Israelitish armies, captured Samaria, carried the Ten Tribes captive into Assyria, at the head of the Euphrates, and brought people from their own country whom they established in the cities of northern Palestine, and the identity of Israel as a distinct people, was lost to the world.

Judah continued to maintain a semblance of power for more than one hundred years after the fall of Israel, when they suffered the same fate. Judea was overrun by the Babylonian armies under Nebuchadnezzar, Jerusalem taken, the temple desecrated, and despoiled of its wealth, and Judah carried captive into Babylon, as their brethren had been carried into Assyria.

The Christian Era Ushered In

This hasty and imperfect review brings us to the ushering in of the Christian Era.

After the fall of the Babylonian kingdom to the armies of Media and Persia, King Cyrus permitted the Jews to return from Babylon to Palestine and rebuild their city and temple which had been destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. With great enthusiasm this work was undertaken, and it appears that the Jews who returned from the Babylonian captivity showed greater faith in the God of their fathers than had been manifested before they were carried [a]way.

The Fate of the House of Israel Foretold

The fate which befell the House of Israel had been plainly outlined by the prophets whom the Lord had sent to warn them that the penalty of disobedience would be the dissolution of the nation, and that they would be taken from the land of their inheritance, and scattered among the strange and unbelieving nations of the world. A final fulfilment of this prophecy occurred when, about one hundred years after the birth of the Redeemer, Judea was trodden down by the Roman armies under Vespasian and his son Titus, Jerusalem taken, the temple destroyed, and the Jews scattered among the nations of the world, where they have remained until the present day.

The prophets Zechariah and Ezekiel had declared that the shepherds would neglect the flock, and that the sheep would be scattered, and become the prey of strange nations. To all human appearance, judged by every law of human reasoning, the promise made to Abraham had failed, he had been promised that Palestine should be the everlasting heritage of his children, and now they held dominion over no part of it. The end, it appeared, had come, the words of the prophets had been literally fulfilled, the promise made by the Lord if ever to be realized was still future.

Israel Not Forsaken of the Lord Shall Be Gathered Again

Notwithstanding the fact that the Israelitish people had been scattered and lost to the world, to become the prey of strange and unbelieving nations, the Lord had not forgotten nor forsaken them. He remembered the covenant made with their father Abraham, and decreed that it should be verified. The prophet Jeremiah, six hundred years before the birth of Christ, speaking upon this subject, declared that the Lord who scattered Israel would gather him again, in these words: [Quoted Jer. 31:10-12.]

Isaiah, seven hundred years before the birth of the Redeemer, referring to this same matter, said: [Quoted Isa. 11:10-13.]

Christ's Promise to Israel Prior to His Crucifixion

During his ministry among the Nephite people, upon this continent, after his resurrection from the dead, the Redeemer of the world, referring to this matter used the following language: [Quoted 3 Ne. 20:29-31.]

More definite and direct on this subject than any other, and to which I desire more particularly to call your attention, are the words of the Redeemer, just prior to his crucifixion. He called his disciples together, and in answer to questions which they propounded, spoke as follows: [Quoted D&C 45:18-20.]

This was literally fulfilled at the time of the taking of Jerusalem by Titus, the son of Vespasian. [Quoted D&C 45:21-30.]

That the final destiny of Judah was different to that of Joseph is plainly indicated by the blessing pronounced upon him by his father.

The Blessings of Jacob

Just before his death, Jacob called his sons to him and gave to each his last blessing. Upon Judah he pronounced the blessing of leadership, declaring that the scepter of power should not depart from his house until the coming of Shiloh, to whom the Jews looked forward as their final king.

When he laid his hands upon the head of Joseph, he said:

"Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well, whose branches run over the wall. The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors, unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills. They shall be upon the head of him who was separated from his brethren."

The promise made to Abraham gave to him and his posterity after him the land of Canaan, which was to be the land of his inheritance, and this promise was renewed to Isaac, and to Jacob, and the Lord, through the latter, enlarged this promise to Joseph, his heritage, like a fruitful bough by a well, whose roots are well watered, ran over the wall, and extended beyond the heritage of Judah to the utmost bounds of the Everlasting hills, to America, where the Zion of our God is to be established.

The Destiny of Israel Plainly Indicated

The scripture which I have just read indicates plainly the unchangeable decree of the Lord regarding the destiny of the Israelitish people. Scattered and lost to the world as they have been, they are not lost to the Lord, nor has he forgotten the covenant which he made with their father Abraham, and which was reconfirmed upon the heads of Isaac and Jacob.

The Work Begun in This Dispensation

With the opening of the present gospel dispensation, . . . the Lord commenced the work which is destined to result in the establishment of Ephraim, and other descendants of Joseph upon this continent, where the Zion of our God is to be established, and the restoration of the Jews to Palestine, the land of their fathers.

With the organization of the Church the Lord made plain the duty of its members. Men holding the restored priesthood, with its keys of authority, were sent into every country where they were permitted to go, proclaiming the opening of a new gospel dispensation, calling the people to repentance, and bearing witness that the mountain of the Lord's House was to be established in the tops of the mountains, and to be exalted above the hills, where we are today and that people from all nations should flow unto it, in order that they might be taught the way of the Lord, and learn to walk in his paths.

The Jews to Be Restored to the Promised Land

The promise made by the Lord, regarding the restoration of the Jews to the Promised Land was not overlooked. At the conference of the Church, held on the 6th of April, 1840, . . . Orson Hyde, a member of the Council of the Twelve, and John E. Page were called to go on a special mission to Jerusalem, for the purpose of dedicating the Holy Land for the latter-day gathering of the remnant of Judah. John E. Page failed in the accomplishment of the mission which was assigned him, but Orson Hyde, after surmounting many difficulties, a year and a half later knelt upon the Mount of Olives, and dedicated Palestine as the gathering place of the scattered remnant of Judah, and this servant of the Lord, moved upon by the spirit of prophecy, declared that inasmuch as it was by political power and influence that the Jews were scattered, it would be by political power and influence that they would be gathered, and that England was destined to be the nation which would take the leading part in the work of restoration.

More than seventy-five years had elapsed, almost a generation, as the scripture counts time, since the light of the gospel had broken forth among those who sat in darkness, since Orson Hyde dedicated the land of Palestine for the latter-day gathering of scattered Judah, and the Holy Land still remained under the dominion of the Turk, the star and crescent still floated from the minaret of a Moslem Mosque, where the temple of Solomon once stood.

The Great War and British Protectorate

Then came the great world war, and final peace at Versailles when Great Britain was given the responsibility of establishing and maintaining a protectorate over the Holy Land. The British armies, it is true, had already occupied Jerusalem, but it was with the signing of the treaty of Versailles that the first definite step was taken looking to the fulfilment of the words of the prophets, who had declared the redemption of Israel, and the restoration of Judah to the lands of their fathers, thousands of years ago.

Interest of the Jews in the Restoration

The interest manifested by the Jewish people in the restoration of Palestine has few parallels in the history of the world. One is reminded of the zeal which their fathers showed as they returned from Babylon to Jerusalem to rebuild their city and temple, when women as well as men worked, and gave lavishly of their most cherished possessions that the task might be accomplished.

Jewish societies have been organized in various parts of the world, having for their purpose the creation of a publicly recognized, legally acquired home in Palestine, and the building up of the Jewish homeland in the Canaan of their fathers. Many millions of dollars have been subscribed by Jews throughout the world, to be used in the purchase of land, and the development of the dormant resources of the country. . . .

A movement such as this cannot fail to excite the interest and admiration of the civilized world. The Hebrew people have suffered during the past centuries as no other people have ever suffered, so far as my study and observation entitle me to judge. They have been scattered among strangers, where they have been denied the right of citizenship, and participation in the commercial and industrial activities of the people. They have been ruthlessly robbed of that which they have honestly acquired by the labor of their own hands. Worse than all, pogroms have been declared against them, when the protection of the law has been officially declared to be inoperative, and permission given to wicked men and women to despoil them of their goods, and even deprive them of life itself.

The Movement Must Elicit Praise and Sympathy

The wonder is that they have survived and maintained their nationality during all these centuries of affliction, and now that they are undertaking to establish a home in the land of their fathers, where they may live in peace, and be a blessing to the non-progressive people who have so long dominated it, they certainly must elicit the praise and sympathy of all right thinking people.

The Hand of the Lord in It

From a human point of view it is a movement of great interest, but to me the one outstanding feature is the manifest hand-dealing of the Lord, which I see in it, and which they themselves do not fully realize. It will come in a natural way, it may be England, it may be some other nation, but it will be the Lord who will direct.

The Lord Will Use the Nations to Accomplish His Purpose

When Cyrus led the victorious Medio-Persian army to the overthrow of the great Babylonian kingdom he was not aware that he was fulfilling the words of the prophets who had lived long before, but he did so in wondrous detail. When Alexander of Macedon halted his army, after he had crossed the Dardanelles and won the battle of Granicus, and notwithstanding the protest of his generals delayed his campaign against Persia, in order that he might besiege and finally destroy Tyre, he had no knowledge of the fact that the prophets had declared that the greatest maritime city of the world should be destroyed in just that manner, but it was nevertheless true.

So will the Lord continue to use the nations for the accomplishment of his purposes, until the words of his servants the prophets have all been fulfilled, until Zion is established, Judea redeemed, and his will done upon earth, as it is done in heaven.

God bless the Jews in this important work. May the eyes of their understanding be opened, and the time soon come when Shiloh, to whose coming they have so long looked forward, shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, and they recognize in him, Jesus of Nazareth, the Redeemer of the world, whom their fathers rejected. And may we, Latter-day Saints, we people who are of Ephraim, appreciate the part we are playing in this great latter-day drama, the like of which was never played before, and never will be again.
