Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

"A MESSAGE TO JUDAH FROM JOSEPH," BY EZRA TAFT BENSON

(Note: The following excerpts are from a talk given to Mormons, non-Mormons, and Jews May 2, 1976, by President Ezra Taft Benson of the Council of Twelve Apostles, at Calgary, Alberta, Canada.)

Our affinity toward modern Judah . . . is prompted out of a knowledge of our peculiar relationships together—relationships which claim a common heritage. Jeremiah has prophesied that in the latter times "the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together." (Jeremiah 3:18.)

Kindred Doctrines of the Mormons and the Jews

Among the kindred doctrines of the Mormons and the Jews is our mutual belief in Jehovah, a God of revelation. We share a common belief in the Messiah who will come. We further hold reciprocal beliefs in prophets. We hold a common commitment to the return of the Jews to the "land of Jerusalem," in fulfillment of the words of the ancient prophets. There are many other doctrinal and social similarities.

Foundation of the Church Known as "the Mormons"

The foundation of the Church which is sometimes referred to by nonmembers as the "Mormon" Church, is a belief in revelation—modern revelation by God of his purposes and directions to living prophets.

We believe as Amos declared: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

We declare that secrets long since hidden through the ages have been revealed again through a prophet by the revelation of "a new and everlasting covenant" to Israel. That prophet's name was Joseph Smith. . . .

The Mormons' Interest in the Jews

From the very inception of this latter-day work, which claims to be a restoration of the covenants given by God to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, this church has had a deep interest in the remnant of the house of Israel, the descendants of Judah.

In 1836, the Mormons completed their first temple at Kirtland, Ohio. In the dedicatory prayer which was offered on that occasion, Joseph Smith petitioned the "Lord God of Israel":

"O Lord . . . thou knowest that thou hast a great love for the children of Jacob, who have been scattered upon the mountains for a long time. . . .

"We therefore ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed;

"And the yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of David;

"And the children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give to Abraham, their father." (Doctrine and Covenants 109:60-64.)

This was said during the Passover season, March 27, 1836.

The Orson Hyde Expedition to Israel

Before Joseph Smith was killed, he dispatched an apostle by the name of Orson Hyde to dedicate the land of Palestine for the return of the Jews. This concern for a homeless people and the sending of this apostle was done at a time when the Mormons themselves were virtually homeless, having been dispossessed of their lands and possessions in Missouri.

Orson Hyde left on his assignment in the fall of 1840. He arrived in Palestine in October 1841. On October 24, 1841, he ascended the Mount of Olives all alone, built an altar to the Lord, and offered a dedicatory prayer. [Quoted portions of that prayer; see Part I 192-200.]

The Mormon Interest in the Jews Is Based on Kinship

Historically, we must recognize that this interest in the restoration of the Jews to their homeland is older than modern Zionism and the great work of Theodor Herzl and others. There were a number of Christian sects in the nineteenth century which held millennial views and saw the return of the Jews to their homeland as a "sign of the times" which would precede the second advent of Jesus Christ. The Mormon interest was and is more than this. Our concern and interest is a kinship to our Jewish brothers.

Our common heritage goes back to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. God reiterated to Jacob the same promises which were given to Abraham, and then gave Jacob the new name of Israel. His posterity—all those who descended through his twelve sons—were known by this designation. They were variously referred to as the "house of Israel," "children of Israel," or "tribes of Israel." I emphasize that all of his posterity received the family name designation through the twelve sons. Today it has become common practice to identify only one of his twelve sons, Judah, with the family designation "Israelite" because they have maintained their separate identity.

Israel's Blessing to Joseph

As you carefully read the forty-ninth chapter of Genesis, you will find that Jacob, or Israel, pronounced blessings on all his twelve sons. Each was given a peculiar and distinctive blessing. Time will only permit a consideration of the blessings of two of these sons, whose blessings were preeminent above the blessings of the others. I refer to the blessings pronounced on Judah and Joseph. May I read first the blessing pronounced on Joseph:

"Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

"The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

"But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

"Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

"The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren." (Genesis 49:22-26.)

There are several points which we should note carefully about this blessing:

Later I shall comment on the interpretation of this blessing as it affects the relationships of the present-day Mormons and Jews; but first it will be instructive to review the history of the descendants of Israel after they came into the land promised to Abraham as "the land of Canaan . . . an everlasting possession." (Genesis 17:8.)

The Scattering of Israel

For a time the confederated tribes were a united monarchy under Saul, David, and Solomon, but ultimately they divided into two major kingdoms. The kingdom to the north—which comprised 10 1/2 tribes, including the descendants of Joseph—retained the designation Israel. The kingdom to the south—made up primarily of the tribe of Judah—adopted the name of Judah. (See 1 Kings 11:31-32; 12:19-24.)

Prophets were raised up among these two nations to call them to repentance because of their idolatry and wickedness. The prophet Amos predicted the results of this disobedience to God.

"Now shall they [Israel] go captive with the first that go captive." (Amos 6:7.)

"I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth." (Amos 9:9.)

The northern kingdom, Israel, was subsequently taken into captivity by the Assyrians 721 years B.C.E., or Before Common Era. The Old Testament contains no history of Israel, nor of Joseph's descendants after this date. Are we to believe that God's promises to Joseph were for naught, that the prophecy of his posterity being numerous, "running over the wall," being sorely persecuted, and going to the "utmost bound of the everlasting hills" would not be fulfilled?

Separate Records to Be Kept

Because of the division which occurred between the two kingdoms, the Lord made special provision that separate records were kept. The prophet Ezekiel spoke of these records in these words: [Quoted Ezek. 37:15-20.]

From this commandment from God to the prophet Ezekiel, these provisions should be noted:

Where is the fulfillment of this important commandment? Who claims to have the record of Joseph today?

The Book of Mormon Fulfills Joseph's Prophecy

The record of Joseph has been brought forth in this day to Joseph Smith by a messenger sent from God. That record is called the Book of Mormon, named after one of the seed of Joseph who abridged the records of his people. The record tells the account of a colony of Israelites, descended from Joseph, who left Jerusalem before its great destruction during the Babylonian seige under King Nebuchadnezzar. It tells how these descendants of Joseph came "over the wall"—a metaphoric expression which denoted a barrier to them. That barrier was the great ocean between the continents of Asia and the Americas. This record tells how they were guided by the hand of the Lord to the land of America, a land of promise to Joseph and his descendants, a land "of everlasting hills." It tells how Joseph's posterity became very numerous upon the land until they filled it with a mighty nation. All this was in fulfillment of Joseph's blessing! The Book of Mormon further records the destruction of this mighty civilization because of their departure from the commandments of the God of Israel.

The records of these people lay buried in the earth for centuries. Then in 1827, a heavenly messenger turned them over to Joseph Smith. They were subsequently translated from their ancient reformed Egyptian writing into the English language and were published to the world in the year 1830.

The Judean prophet Ezekiel had declared that these records were to be "one in thine hand." I witness before you the fulfillment of that prophecy—the record of Judah in one hand, the record of Joseph in the other—one in our hands today.

Judah's Scattering and Persecution

But what about the prophecies that pertain to the house of Judah? The northern tribes of Israel were not the only ones to be dispersed according to prophecy. Judah, the southern kingdom, was also to be scattered:

"And the Lord said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there." (2 Kings 23:27; italics added.)

The history of the scattering of the nation Judah is so well known as to be regarded proverbial. Under the seizure of Babylon, the nation was taken into exile. A remnant returned to rebuild Jerusalem and the temple after the Persians came into power. Since that time, except for a short period of independence under the Maccabees, Judah has been under the yoke of foreign domination: the Macedonian Empire; the tripartite government rule by Egypt, Syria, and Macedonia; Syrian domination; then the Roman rule, and a final dispersion among all nations.

Time will not permit extensive comment about the depth of the suffering and their persecution among many nations. Some of the most evil of those deeds were perpetrated upon the remaining Jews in Palestine in the name of Christianity during the Crusades. Will Durrant has correctly written of this sad chapter of human suffering, "No other people has ever known so long an exile, or so hard a fate." . . . Yes, the prophecies regarding the dispersion and suffering of Judah have been fulfilled. But the gathering and reestablishment of the Jews was also clearly predicted.

Prophecies Concerning the Gathering of Israel and the Jews

This predicted gathering has three phases: the gathering of Israel to the land of Zion, the American hemisphere; the return of the Ten Tribes from the north countries; and the reestablishment of the Jews in Palestine which had been long ago predicted by the prophets in these words: [Quoted Isa. 11:11-12; Jer. 30:3; 31:31; Zech. 10:6, 8; 2 Ne. 10:8-9; 25:15-17; Isa. 29:14.] In 1950, I said, "There has been much confusion over the Palestine question—much talk of division of the land, of quotas, import restrictions—but out of it all I cannot help feeling that we will see a complete fulfilment of the prophecies which have been made regarding this people. These prophecies are in rapid course of fulfilment before our very eyes today." (Conference Report, April 1950, p. 77.)

Since that time, the nation of Israel has fought three wars, regained Jerusalem and the western wall (Wailing Wall), and added the Golan Heights and much of the Sinai Peninsula to its territory.

The Blessing of Israel Pronounced on Judah

We previously considered the blessing that Jacob, or Israel, pronounced on Joseph. Let us now consider the blessing pronounced on Judah:

"Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee.

"Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?

"The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.

"Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:

"His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk." (Genesis 49:8-12.)

The great blessing to Judah is that it contemplated the coming of Shiloh who would gather his people to him. This prophecy concerning Shiloh has been subject to several rabbinic and Christian interpretations and the object of considerable controversy. The interpretation given this passage by the Mormon Church is one based on revelation to modern prophets, not on scholarly commentary. It was revealed to Joseph Smith that Shiloh is the Messiah. . . . (See Genesis 50:24, Inspired Version.)

"The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come." (Genesis 49:10.) We see the fulfillment of the Shiloh prophecy this way: Judah came to power when David was exalted to the throne. Even after the division of the northern and southern kingdoms, the kings of Judah sat on the throne. Following the Babylonian captivity, "lawgivers" were provided to the Jewish remnant who returned to Jerusalem. Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah are examples. Subsequently, the Sanhedrin was established, and it continued as the ruling body of the Jews until the destruction of Jerusalem and the scattering of the Jews. From that time, the Jews had no lawgiver to whom they could turn. Shiloh had come. He was Jesus of Nazareth, who was later crucified as "King of the Jews."

Christian history has emphasized the point that the Jews as a nation rejected their Messiah. Overlooked has been the fact that many Jews did believe him to be the Messiah. Among those Jews who did so were his twelve apostles and thousand of other Jews who were converted by their ministry. We declare that after his ministry in Palestine, the resurrected Messiah personally visited the house of Joseph in this land of America, taught them, blessed them, and renewed the everlasting covenant with them. His ministry to America is recorded in the Book of Mormon.

The Story of Joseph Revisited

You will recall the episode of Joseph and his brethren in the Old Testament, and how he was sold into Egypt. You will remember that, because of a famine in the land of Canaan, his brethren were compelled to go to Egypt to purchase corn from the granaries. Joseph had risen to the position of governor over the land, and was in charge of those granaries. One of the most touching scenes recorded in the Torah is when Joseph made himself known to his brethren: "I am Joseph your brother . . ." (Genesis 45:4.)

To you, our friends of modern Judah, we declare, "We are Joseph, your brothers." We claim kinship with you as descendants from our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We belong to the same family. We, too, are the house of Israel.

There is yet another parallel to this story of Joseph.

The brethren of Joseph in times past came to him during a famine for physical sustenance. Today there is another famine in the land, "not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the words of the Lord." (Amos 8:11.)

Has not the Lord God said through Isaiah, "Every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters. . . .

"[I will] satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not." (Isaiah 55:1; 58:11.)

We are also cognizant of God's charge to Judah through his prophet Jeremiah:

"For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water." (Jeremiah 2:13.)

Of far greater value than the physical sustenance that Joseph of old provided his brethren is the sustenance that modern Joseph has to offer modern Judah today. We offer freely bread to eat and water to drink. I repeat, our interest in Judah is one of kinship, for we are your brothers. We come with a message and say, "We have 'living water' from its true source and well, which, if a man will drink it, 'shall be in him a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life.'" (D&C 63:23.)

In Jacob's blessing to Judah, he declared: "Judah is . . . as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?" (Genesis 49:9; italics added.) We come as messengers bearing the legitimate authority to arouse Judah to her promises. We do not ask Judah to forsake her heritage. We are not asking her to leave father, mother, or family. We bring a message that Judah does not possess. That message constitutes "living water" from the Fountain of living water.

Our prophet, Joseph Smith, was given a commandment by the Lord to turn "the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto the Jews." (D&C 98:17.) We are presently sending our messengers to every land and people whose ideology permits us entrance. We have been gathering Joseph's descendants for 146 years. We hope you, who are of Judah, will not think it an intrusion for us to present our message to you. You are welcome to come to our meetings. We display no crosses. We collect no offerings. We honor your commitment to your unique heritage and your individuality. We approach you in a different way than any other Christian church because we represent the restored covenant to the entire house of Israel.

Yes, we understand the Jews, . . . because we belong to the same house of Israel. We are your brothers—Joseph. We look forward to the day of fulfillment of God's promise when "the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel." (Jeremiah 3:18.)

A Blessing on Judah

As one who, by special assignment, has been given authority in the house of Israel today, I ask the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to bless my brethren of Judah and have mercy on them; that the land to which Judah has returned after a long night of dispersion shall be fruitful, prosperous, and become the envy to her neighbors; that the nation Israel shall be delivered from all her oppressors and enemies; that Judah will "draw water out of the wells of salvation" (Isaiah 12:3) and fulfill all those prophecies that God declared through his prophets Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah, even that prophecy through Zechariah that "the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again" (Zechariah 2:12).

I witness to you, my brothers and sisters of all the house of Israel, that I know that the God of heaven presides over the destinies of all his children. I witness that he has set his hand a second time to recover his people from the four corners of the earth to the lands of their inheritance. I testify that he has restored his new covenant with Israel. I know the Book of Mormon is a truthful account of God's dealings with the house of Joseph, that its testimony is true, and that it is the word of the Lord to the Gentiles, Jews, and all the house of Israel. I further witness that Joseph Smith was what he represented himself to be, a prophet of the living God and a messenger of the new covenant to Israel. I would urge all to give heed to the message given by God through him.
