Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

PART II

A COMPANION TO YOUR STUDY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

GENESIS

Genesis is a Greek word meaning origin or beginning. The book of Genesis serves as an introduction to the remainder of the Bible. For background on the book of Genesis, see "Genesis" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 678-79.

1-6 The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible makes a tremendous contribution to the first six chapters of Genesis. As the Lord had foretold to Moses when the book of Genesis was first written, by the time of Joseph Smith the "children of men" would have taken many truths from the original book and would esteem the words of the Lord "as naught." (See Moses 1:40-41.)

A careful comparison of the King James text of Genesis chapters one through six, verse thirteen, with the corresponding materials of the Joseph Smith Translation reveals that the Joseph Smith Translation contains over twice as many verses as the King James Version.

1-2 Although many scholars and students, both religious and nonreligious, have offered many theories and explanations on the creation of the earth, it is still not certain exactly what processes were followed by God in its creation.

Mankind will probably not know the precise details of the creation of the earth until Jesus Christ comes on the earth to reign himself, for he has stated that when he comes he "shall reveal . . . things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made." (D&C 101:32-33.)

The following statement concerning the creation has been provided by the first president of the Church in this dispensation:

This earth was organized or formed out of other planets which were broken up and remodeled and made into one on which we live. The elements are eternal. . . . In the translation "without form and void," it should read, "empty and desolate." The word created should be "formed or organized." (Joseph Smith, CDG, p. 271.)

1:1 The Hebrew word translated "create" by the King James translators means "organize," "fashion," or "form." Joseph Smith has provided the following commentary on this point:

You ask the learned doctors why they say the world was made out of nothing; and they will answer, "Doesn't the Bible say He created the world?" And they infer, from the word create, that it must have been made out of nothing. Now, the word create came from the word Baurau which does not mean to create out of nothing; it means to organize; the same as a man would organize materials and build a ship. Hence, we infer that God had materials to organize the world out of chaos—chaotic matter, which is element, and in which dwells all the glory. Element had an existence from the time he had. The pure principles of element are principles which can never be destroyed; they may be organized and re-organized, but not destroyed. They had no beginning, and can have no end. (TPJS, pp. 350-52.)

1:1 Joseph Smith has analyzed the very first Hebrew word of the Bible, and the first sentence:

I shall comment on the very first Hebrew word in the Bible; I will make a comment on the very first sentence of the history of creation in the Bible—Berosheit. I want to analyze the word. Baith—in, by, through, and everything else. Rosh—the head. Sheit—grammatical termination. When the inspired man wrote it, he did not put the baith there. An old Jew without any authority added the word; he thought it too bad to begin to talk about the head! It read first, "The head one of the Gods brought forth the Gods." That is the true meaning of the words. Baurau signifies to bring forth. . . . Thus the head God brought forth the Gods in the grand council.

I will transpose and simplify it in the English language. . . . The head God called together the Gods and sat in grand council to bring forth the world. The grand councilors sat at the head in yonder heavens and contemplated the creation of the world which were created at the time. (TPJS, pp. 348-49.)

1:1 God is a title, not a name. As a title, it could refer to several different personages. The "God" who created this earth was Jesus Christ (the pre-earthly Jehovah), as is made clear in this statement by Joseph Fielding Smith:

Under the direction of his Father, Jesus Christ created this earth. No doubt others helped him, but it was Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, who, under the direction of his Father, came down and organized matter and made this planet, so that it might be inhabited by the children of God. . . .

. . . . We know that Jesus our Savior was a Spirit when this great work was done. He did all of these mighty works before he tabernacled in the flesh. (DS 1:74-75.)

1:3 According to Brigham Young, "light" came to the earth when the earth was moved near the sun:

When the Lord said—"Let there be light," there was light, for the earth was brought near the sun that it might reflect upon it so as to give us light by day, and the moon to give us light by night. This is the glory the earth came from, and when it is glorified it will return again unto the presence of the Father, and it will dwell there, and these intelligent beings that I am looking at, if they live worthy of it, will dwell upon this earth. (JD 17:143.)

1:24-25 Animals have spirits and will be resurrected, according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

Animals do have spirits and . . . through the redemption made by our Savior they will come forth in the resurrection to enjoy the blessing of immortal life. The Bible as it has come to us through numerous translations and copies does not contain the information concerning the immortality of the animal world in the clearness which, without any doubt, it was invested with the pure inspiration of the revelations of the Lord. However, there are some passages which still remain bearing witness to the eternal nature of the animal world. (AGQ 2:48.)

1:26 The plural pronouns in this indicate very clearly that God was talking to someone else: "Let us make man in our image." (Italics added.) The question has been asked, "To whom was God speaking on this occasion?" The answer has been provided by God himself in another scripture.

"And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness." (Moses 2:26.)

The "Only Begotten" of God was the pre-earthly Jehovah, who came to earth as Jesus Christ. Thus, God the Father was speaking to Jesus Christ on that occasion.

1:26-27 The terms "in our image" and "after our likeness" indicate that God had bodily parts just as man does. This truth has been taught by Joseph Smith.

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. . . . If you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another. (TPJS, p. 345.)

1:26-28 When God gave power to Adam to "have dominion" over the cattle (v. 26), to "have dominion" over the fish and fowl (v. 28), to "subdue the earth," and "to multiply and replenish [fill] the earth," he was bestowing priesthood authority upon Adam. Joseph Smith taught that since that time the priesthood has always been bestowed or revealed under Adam's authority:

The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Gen. 1:26, 27, 28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven.

The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority.

. . . The Priesthood is everlasting. (HC 3:385-87.)

1:28 The fact that God spoke to Adam and Eve indicates that they had a language common to each other. Joseph Fielding Smith has commented concerning this "Adamic" language:

When Adam was in the Garden of Eden he lived in the presence of God. . . . He was taught His language, and so Adam had a perfect language. It was not a bow-wow language, as some will tell you. It was the Lord's language. (ST, p. 40.)

Wilford Woodruff related the following experience in regard to "the pure language" of Adam:

I read over several of the old sermons of Joseph [Smith] that were not recorded anywhere except in my journal. We passed a pleasant evening together, and before they left they sang in tongues in the pure language which Adam and Eve spoke in the Garden of Eden. This gift was obtained in the Kirtland Temple through a promise of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He told Sister Whitney if she would rise upon her feet she should have the pure language. She did so, and immediately began to sing in tongues. It was nearer to heavenly music than anything I ever heard. (Wilford Woodruff, WW, p. 355.)

The footnote for this verse in the Bible suggests that "replenish" might better have been translated as "fill." Joseph Fielding Smith explains why:

Replenish, however, is incorrectly used in the King James translation. The Hebrew verb is Mole meaning fill, to fill, or make full. This word Mole is the same word which is translated fill in Genesis 1:22, in the King James Bible, wherein reference is made to the fish, fowl, and beasts of the earth. (AGQ 1:208-9.)

Spencer W. Kimball has indicated that the commandment to fill the earth was to be carried out only after Adam and Eve were married by the Lord:

The first commandment recorded seems to have been "Multiply and replenish the earth." Let no one ever think that the command came to have children without marriage. No such suggestion could ever have foundation. When God had created the woman, he brought her unto the man and gave her to him as his wife, and commanded, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." (Gen. 2:24.) (BYUSY, Sept. 1973, p. 262.)

1:29 Many things that were created by God for the good of man have been used by man in a detrimental way. Spencer W. Kimball has stated:

These plants were made expressly for man, since he is the supreme creation with divine potential. But through the ages, man has corrupted the use of many of the products and used them for his downfall; corn, barley, dates, grapes, and other crops have been diverted from "food" channels for which they were created into destructive, death-dealing liquor. And that which was good for man has become destructive and bad for him. (CR, Oct. 1967, p. 29.)

2:1-25 The Joseph Smith Translation makes several significant changes in this chapter. Perhaps its most important contribution is that "all things" were created "spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth" (v. 5); . . . "for in heaven created I them" (v. 6).

Another contribution from the Joseph Smith Translation is that when God commanded Adam and Eve not to partake of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, he added: "Nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but remember that I forbid it." (Gen. 2:21.)

2:1 Joseph Fielding Smith has observed concerning this verse:

It is reasonable to believe that in the beginning, before the earth was prepared, the Lord would have all things organized from the beginning to the end of time. . . . [Quoted Gen. 2:1.] This is equivalent to the Lord's saying that everything was in preparation to be placed on the earth in its due course when mankind should be placed upon it. (AGQ 5:182.)

2:2-3 Laws concerning the Sabbath have been on the earth since the very beginning, as is clarified by Spencer W. Kimball.

Moses came down from the quaking, smoking Mount Sinai and brought to the wandering children of Israel the Ten Commandments. This was not the origin of these specific laws, for Adam and his posterity knew the gospel and had been commanded to live them. This spectacular experience was neither the beginning nor the end. The laws of God were premortal. They were part of the test for mortals spoken of in the council in heaven.

The law of the Sabbath, as with other laws, antedated earth life and has been reiterated through the dispensations to that of the Fulness of Times. It distinguished the early Israelites from pagans. (The Ten Commandments Today, p. 54.)

2:4-8 Joseph Fielding Smith has contributed the following commentaries on the spiritual and physical creations of the earth:

There is no account of the creation of man or other forms of life when they were created as spirits. There is just the simple statement that they were so created before the physical creation. The statements in Moses 3:5 and Genesis 2:5 are interpolations thrown into the account of the physical creation, explaining that all things were first created in the spirit existence in heaven before they were placed upon this earth. (DS 1:75-76.)

While it is true that all things were created spiritually, or as spirits, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth, this creation, we are informed, was in heaven. This applies to animals of all descriptions and also to plant life, before there was flesh upon the earth, or in the water, or in the air. The account of the creation of the earth as given in Genesis, and the Book of Moses, and as given in the temple, is the creation of the physical earth, and of physical animals and plants. I think the temple account, which was given by revelation, is the clearest of all of these. These physical creations were made out of the natural elements. (DS 1:75.)

2:7 Concerning this "creation" of man, the Pearl of Great Price indicates: "And man [Adam] became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also." (Moses 3:7.) Although the exact details of the birth of Adam are not given, it is clear (1) he did not evolve from lower animals (he was the "first flesh" upon the earth), and (2) there were no pre-Adamic men (Adam was the "first man also").

It is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and that the original human being was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The word of the Lord declares that Adam was "the first man of all men" [Moses 1:34], and we are therefore in duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race. (First Presidency, IE, Nov. 1909, p. 80.)

2:7 Concerning the process of becoming "a living soul," Joseph Smith has stated:

The 7th verse of 2nd chapter of Genesis ought to read—God breathed into Adam his spirit [i.e. Adam's spirit] or breath of life. (HC 5:392-93.)

We say that God himself is a self-existent being. . . . God made a tabernacle and put a spirit into it, and it became a living soul. [Referred to the old Bible.] How does it read in the Hebrew? It does not say in the Hebrew that God created the spirit of man. It says, "God made man out of the earth, and put into him Adam's spirit, and so became a living body." (JD 6:6.)

The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal; and earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary state, from eternity. (HC 3:387.)

Joseph Fielding Smith also taught that life and matter are eternal:

The scriptures plainly and repeatedly affirm that God is the Creator of the earth and the heavens and all things that in them are. In the sense so expressed the Creator is an Organizer. God created the earth as an organized sphere; but He certainly did not create, in the sense of bringing into primal existence, the ultimate elements of the materials of which the earth consists, for "the elements are eternal."

So also life is eternal, and not created; but life, or the vital force, may be infused into organized matter, though the details of the process have not been revealed unto man. (First Presidency, MFP 5:26.)

2:8-14 The exact location of the Garden of Eden has been a matter of dispute by biblical scholars. The problem is complicated by (1) the occurrence of the flood (which would probably have obliterated evidences of the Garden of Eden), (2) the reasonable inference that Noah and his ark did not land at the exact spot from which it had started, and (3) the fact that the continents did not have their present relationship to each other until after the earth was divided in the days of Peleg, who lived after Noah.

Latter-day Saint leaders have offered the following commentaries on the location of the Garden of Eden:

In the beginning, after this earth was prepared for man, the Lord commenced his work upon what is now called the American continent, where the Garden of Eden was made. In the days of Noah, in the days of the floating of the ark, he took the people to another part of the earth; the earth was divided, and there he set up his kingdom. (Brigham Young, JD 8:195.)

There were not an Eastern and a Western Hemisphere at the time of Adam. (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 4:21.)

It is an error to say that the Bible states that the Garden of Eden was on the Eastern Hemisphere. The fact is that there is no place that can be definitely pointed out where the Garden of Eden was. There have been great changes on the face of the earth since the days of Adam. The Latter-day Saints would not know if the Lord had not revealed it to them. Such knowledge is beyond the skill of mortal man to discover without the revelation from the Lord. (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 4:19.)

Joseph, the Prophet, told me that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri. When Adam was driven out he went to the place we now call Adam-ondi-Ahman, Daviess County, Missouri. There he built an altar and offered sacrifices. (Quoted in WW, p. 481.)

You have been both to Jerusalem and Zion, and seen both, I have not seen either, for I have never been in Jackson County, now it is a pleasant thing to think of and to know where the Garden of Eden was. Did you ever think of it? I do not think many do, for in Jackson County was the garden of Eden. Joseph has declared this, and I am as much bound to believe that as to believe that Joseph was a prophet of God. (Brigham Young, JH, Mar. 15, 1857, p. 1.)

2:15 Spencer W. Kimball has observed concerning this verse:

It seems this landlord-tenant relationship is fair—the Lord, the owner, furnishes the land, the air, the water, the sunshine, and all the elements to make it fruitful. The tenant gives his labor. (CR, Apr. 1968, p. 75.)

2:17 There was no death of any kind in the Garden of Eden, as is explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

When Adam and Eve were placed in the Garden of Eden, there was no death. It was by the violation of a commandment that brought mortality and death upon them. (CR, Apr. 1956, p. 125.)

The disobedience of Adam and Eve to God's commandment resulted in spiritual death, and the later consequence of that disobedience was the introduction of physical death (also called temporal death), as explained in these commentaries:

When Adam, our first parent, partook of the forbidden fruit, transgressed the law of God, and became subject unto Satan, he was banished from the presence of God, and was thrust out into outer spiritual darkness. This was the first death. Yet living, he was dead—dead to God, dead to light and truth, dead spiritually; cast out from the presence of God; communication between the Father and the son was cut off. He was as absolutely thrust out from the presence of God as was Satan and the hosts that followed him. That was spiritual death. But the Lord said that he would not suffer Adam nor his posterity to come to the temporal death until they should have the means by which they might be redeemed from the first death, which is spiritual. Therefore angels were sent unto Adam, who taught him the gospel, and revealed to him the principle by which he could be redeemed from the first death, . . . and was thus given a chance to be redeemed from the spiritual death before he should die the temporal death. (Joseph F. Smith, GD, pp. 432-33.)

Spiritual death is defined as a state of spiritual alienation from God—the eternal separation from the Supreme Being; condemnation to everlasting punishment is also called the second death. In other words, the second or spiritual death, which is the final judgment passed upon the wicked, is the same as the first death, banishment from the presence of the Lord. (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2:217.)

Because of Adam's transgression, a spiritual death—banishment from the presence of the Lord—as well as the temporal death, were pronounced upon him. The spiritual death came at the time of the fall and banishment; and the seeds of the temporal death were also sown at that same time; that is, a physical change came over Adam and Eve, who became mortal, and were thus subject to the ills of the flesh which resulted in their gradual decline to old age and finally the separation of the spirit from the body.

Before this temporal death took place the Lord, by his own voice and the visitation and ministration of angels, taught Adam the principles of the gospel and administered unto him the saving ordinances, through which he was again restored to the favor of the Lord and to his presence. Also, through the atonement, not only Adam, but all his posterity were redeemed from the temporal effects of the fall, and shall come forth in the resurrection to receive immortality. (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:111-12.)

2:18-24 The first marriage on this earth (of Adam and Eve) was obviously meant to be eternal because there was no death of any kind on the earth at that time. Also, the marriage was performed by God, who is eternal and whose power can seal on earth as it can seal in heaven. (Matt. 16:19; see also heading for Gen. 2.)

Because marriage was intended to be eternal and marriage partners have been commanded "to multiply," the power of procreation (power to beget children) is also eternal if the marriage has been performed by the power of God.

The first marriage on record appertaining to this earth, was solemnized by the Almighty. The first couple married were immortal beings—Adam and Eve, our first parents—before they had partaken of the forbidden fruit, and became subject to the penalty of death. Marriage, as then understood, could not have been what it is now popularly supposed to be by the so-called Christian world. Then the marriage vow was made, and the ceremony was performed by immortal or celestial beings, with no reference to death or to a time when that sacred and holy union should cease. (Joseph F. Smith, MS 36:312.)

When Eve was given to Adam, it was not "until death doth you part," but it was a perpetual union.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "marriage is an institution of heaven, instituted in the garden of Eden, and that it should be solemnized by the authority of the everlasting priesthood." Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, "they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory." [TPJS, pp. 300-301.] (Joseph Fielding Smith, RT, pp. 242-43.)

Before there was any mortal death, the Lord declared: . . . "It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him." [Gen. 2:18.]

Therefore Eve was given to Adam, and it is clear from this scripture that the intention was that marriage between the man and his wife was to endure forever, for death had not at that time come upon the earth. (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 4:144-45.)

2:19 The word in the Hebrew translated as "Adam" means "man." In his pre-earthly existence the man Adam was known as Michael, which is said to have meant "Who is as God." (D&C 27:11; 128:21; "Adam," BD, p. 604.)

2:24 The basic meaning of "cleave" has been given by Spencer W. Kimball:

To cleave is to adhere closely, to cling; and the Lord gave as the purpose for their cleaving, the peopling of the earth, the replenishing of the earth, the subduing of the earth, the dominion over the earth. There was high purpose in the creation and in the proper associations of husband and wife, but intimacies could never be defended outside of marriage. (BYUSY, Jan. 1965, p. 15.)

3:1-24 The Joseph Smith Translation changes in this chapter are so numerous and significant that the versions should be compared verse by verse. If a Joseph Smith Translation is not readily available, Moses chapter 4 might be used.

The important contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation chapter 3 include the following:

These are exactly the type of omissions the devil would want in the scriptures if he could have any influence over them or their preservation.

Concerning the importance of free agency in this life, David O. McKay has stated:

Next to the bestowal of life itself, the right to direct that life is God's greatest gift to man. Among the immediate obligations and duties resting upon members of the Church today, and one of the most urgent and pressing for attention and action of all liberty-loving people is the preservation of individual liberty. Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give. It is inherent in the spirit of man. It is a divine gift to every normal being. Whether born in abject poverty or shackled at birth by inherited riches, everyone has this most precious of all life's endowments—the gift of free agency; man's inherited and inalienable right.

Free agency is the impelling source of the soul's progress. It is the purpose of the Lord that man become like him. In order for man to achieve this it was necessary for the Creator first to make him free. (CR, Apr. 1950, p. 32.)

3:16 Spencer W. Kimball has provided some thoughts on the term "rule over thee":

And unto the woman the voice of the Lord was saying, "In sorrow [or pain or distress or waiting] thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee" (Gen. 3:16)—or, I like the term "preside over thee." (BYUSY, Sept. 1974, p. 237.)

3:16-19 See "Fall of Adam" in the Bible Dictionary, p. 670. The "fall" of Adam and Eve is one of the most misunderstood events that has been recorded in the scriptures. Most Christians have been taught that the fall was an evil, unnecessary act, and Adam and Eve became eternally damned because of their actions. This same fallacious reasoning says that every child born on the earth "inherits," and thus in a sense is responsible for, the fall of Adam and Eve. This error is followed by the teaching that everyone must be baptized in order to have the responsibility for the fall removed from them.

An analysis of the status of Adam and Eve before and after the fall may help to clarify this matter.

A correct concept of the fall of Adam is necessary to an understanding of the basic claims of Christianity. The churches of the world, however, have largely lost sight of the essential differences in the status of Adam and Eve before and after the fall. The general conditions of Adam and Eve before the fall are listed on the left side of the chart which follows; the corresponding general conditions of Adam and Eve after the fall are listed on the right side of the chart.

Status of Adam and Eve Status of Adam and Eve

before the fall after the fall

God. ence of God—that is, they suf-

fered a spiritual death.

they were not subject to physical to physical death).

death. (2 Nephi 2:22.)

—that is, they did not know the

difference between good and

evil. (2 Nephi 2:23.)

dren." (2 Nephi 2:23.)

Thus, . . . two major conclusions [can be reached] from these teachings: (1) the fall was necessary in order for "men to be"—that is, in order for Adam and Eve to have children. (2) A major purpose of man's existence is for him to have "joy." True joy was not possible for Adam and Eve before the fall.

These truths are stated clearly . . . in 2 Nephi 2:22-23: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen . . . and they (Adam and Eve) would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." (Italics added.) (CBM, pp. 126-27.)

3:23-24 Read the material under "Fall of Adam" on page 670 of the Bible Dictionary.

4:1-26 The Joseph Smith Translation adds a complete chapter (4) of thirteen verses between chapters 3 and 4 of the King James Version. The major contents of these inspired additional verses are:

Chapter 5 of the Joseph Smith Translation corresponds roughly to chapter 4 of the King James version. Again, the Joseph Smith Translation makes several very significant changes or additions, including the following:

A careful analysis of the changes and additions in the Joseph Smith Translation reveals that these deletions are exactly the type of information Satan would want to have deleted from the scriptural account: (1) the knowledge that he is the devil and that he seeks to have all men become evil; (2) the knowledge that the gospel has been on the earth from the beginning, made efficacious through the foreordaining of Jesus Christ as the Savior and Redeemer; and (3) the realization that the Holy Ghost is available to any person who is worthy and seeks after his guidance.

4:3-5 The Joseph Smith Translation provides additional vital information on the sacrifices offered by Cain and Abel. (Gen. 5:1-8.) The Prophet Joseph Smith has provided the following commentary:

By faith in this atonement or plan of redemption, Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground, and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the Only Begotten to atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption; and without the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not purchased in that way, nor the power of atonement instituted after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. But Abel offered an acceptable sacrifice, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God Himself testifying of his gifts. Certainly, the shedding of the blood of a beast could be beneficial to no man, except it was done in imitation, or as a type, or explanation of what was to be offered through the gift of God Himself; and this performance done with an eye looking forward in faith on the power of that great Sacrifice for a remission of sins. (TPJS, p. 58.)

4:7 The laws underlying the statement "if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door" have been explained by Spencer W. Kimball:

Should there be readers who think of the Lord as an angry, cruel God who brings vengeance on people for not complying with his laws, let them think again. He organized a plan which was natural—a cause-and-effect program. It is inconceivable that God would desire to punish or to see his children in suffering or pain or distress. He is a God of peace and tranquility. He offers joy and growth and happiness and peace. . . .

But however he tries, a man cannot escape the consequences of sin. They follow as the night follows the day. Sometimes the penalties are delayed in coming, but they are as sure as life itself. Remorse and agony come. Even ignorance of the law does not prevent, though it may mitigate, the punishment. (MF, pp. 140-41.)

4:9-13 Cain brought this punishment upon himself because of disobedience to divine law, as explained by Spencer W. Kimball:

After looking down at the crumpled body at his feet, and especially after the torments of hell began to persecute him and the ghost of his brother began to follow him, Cain must have wished that he would give Abel's life back. The Lord did not curse Cain; it was Cain who, breaking eternal law, cursed himself. (BYUSY, Jan. 1965, p. 14.)

5:1-32 The Joseph Smith Translation adds over one hundred verses of new material for the time period covered by chapter 5 of the King James Version. Most of these verses are concerned with the life and translation of Enoch and should be inserted between verses 21 and 22 of the King James Version. This new section provides a wealth of information on the way God works with his prophets, on the purposes of life on the earth, on the necessity of the basic ordinances such as baptism and receiving the Holy Ghost, and on how a people can prepare themselves to be translated to a higher plane (terrestrial instead of telestial) of existence. The new verses also provide new insights into the personality and characteristics of God and, on the opposite end, new information on the devil and some of the nefarious methods he employs to deceive men. The role of the pre-earthly Jesus Christ (Jehovah) is also clarified.

If possible, Genesis 6:26-7:81 of the Joseph Smith Translation should be carefully analyzed; these verses are similar to Moses 6:26-8:1 in the Pearl of Great Price.

Other significant additions in chapter 6 of the Joseph Smith Translation are:

5:18-24 Joseph Fielding Smith has written concerning Enoch:

Very little is known by the world concerning the great prophet Enoch, who is mentioned in the Bible only in Genesis 4 and 5 of the Old Testament and Luke 3:37, Hebrews 11:5, and Jude 1:14 of the New Testament. However, the writers of both the Old Testament and New Testament indicate that Enoch was so righteous that he was translated (transfigured).

Modern scriptures and revelations provide much additional information on this great man, including some of his writings. His life and teachings are of particular importance to Latter-day Saints, because Enoch was able to prepare a people who became so righteous they were actually taken off the telestial earth so they could live a terrestrial order. In a some-what similar manner, a people must be prepared in these latter days to be worthy to live at least a terrestrial order so they will be able to live with Jesus Christ when he comes on the earth to rule in power and great glory. (CHMR 1:81.)

5:21-27 This Methuselah is mentioned in the Old Testament only in this chapter of Genesis, but is referred to several times in other scriptures. (See D&C 107:50-53; Moses 6:25; 8:2-7.) He is generally considered to have lived longer on the earth (without translation) than any other man—969 years.

Doctrine and Covenants 107:50 indicates "Methuselah was one hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam." Doctrine and Covenants 107:53 mentions that the high priest Methuselah was present when Adam called his righteous posterity "into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman."

The Joseph Smith Translation mentions specifically that Methuselah was left on the earth at the time of the translation of Enoch and his city "that the covenants of the Lord might be fulfilled which he made to Enoch; for he truly covenanted with Enoch, that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins." (Gen. 7:79.)

5:24 Joseph Smith has provided the following additional information on the translation of Enoch:

"And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah 300 years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the days of Enoch were 365 years; and Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him." (Gen. 5th chap., 22nd ver.) Now this Enoch God reserved unto Himself, that he should not die at that time, and appointed unto him a ministry unto terrestrial bodies, of whom there has been but little revealed. . . . He is a ministering angel, to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation, and appeared unto Jude as Abel did unto Paul; therefore Jude spoke of him (14, 15 verses). And Enoch, the seventh from Adam, revealed these sayings: "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of His Saints."

Paul was also acquainted with this character, and received instructions from him. "By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God; but without faith, it is impossible to please Him, for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that he is a revealer to those who diligently seek him." [Hebrews 11:5.]

Now the doctrine of translation is a power which belongs to this Priesthood. There are many things which belong to the powers of the Priesthood and the keys thereof, that have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world; they are hid from the wise and prudent to be revealed in the last times.

Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead. "Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection." (See Heb. 11th chap., part of the 35th verse.)

Now it was evident that there was a better resurrection, or else God would not have revealed it unto Paul. Wherein then, can it be said a better resurrection. This distinction is made between the doctrine of the actual resurrection and translation: translation obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body, but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory. (HC 4:209-10.)

5:29 In the pre-earthly existence Noah was known as Gabriel, and after he was born on the earth, proved faithful to the Lord, and survived the flood, he was placed "next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God . . . and was the father of all living in this day, and to him was given the dominion." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 157.)

6:2 The "sons of God" were offspring of people who believed in God, while the "daughters of men" were offspring of people who believed in following the ways of the world. The significance of these terms is explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

Because the daughters of Noah married the sons of men contrary to the teachings of the Lord, his anger was kindled, and this offense was one cause that brought to pass the universal flood. You will see that the condition appears reversed in the Book of Moses. It was the daughters of the sons of God who were marrying the sons of men, which was displeasing unto the Lord. The fact was, as we see it revealed, that the daughters who had been born, evidently under the covenant, and were the daughters of the sons of God, that is to say of those who held the priesthood, were transgressing the commandment of the Lord and were marrying out of the Church. Thus they were cutting themselves off from the blessings of the priesthood contrary to the teachings of Noah and the will of God.

The Lord has revealed to us in this dispensation that those who obey his will, will be called the sons of God. (AGQ 1:136-37.)

6:6 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And it repented Noah, and his heart was pained, that the Lord had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart." (Gen. 8:13.)

6:7 The last clause of the King James Version has been revised in the Joseph Smith Translation: "For it repenteth Noah that I have created them, and that I have made them; and he hath called upon me, for they have sought his life." (Gen. 8:15.)

6:14 This is the only reference in the Bible to "gopher wood." Scholars have speculated that it was a species of cypress or cedar.

7:11 John Taylor has provided the following commentary on how the earth was covered with water at the time of the flood:

How they could manage to get enough water out of the seas, and out of the oceans, and out of the rivers, and out of the clouds, to cover the tops of these mountains and fifteen cubits above, and let that spread all over the earth? I would like to know by what known law the immersion of the globe could be accomplished. It is explained here in a few words: "The windows of heaven were opened"—that is, the waters that exist throughout the space surrounding the earth from whence come these clouds from which the rain descends. That was one cause. Another cause was "the fountains of the great deep were broken up"—that is something beyond the oceans, something outside of the seas, some reservoirs of which we have no knowledge, were made to contribute to this event, and the waters were let loose by the hand and by the power of God; for God said He would bring a flood upon the earth and He brought it, but He had to let loose the fountains of the great deep, and pour out the waters from there, and when the flood commenced to subside, we are told "that the fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained, and the waters returned from off the earth." Where did they go to? From whence they came. [The Bible] simply tells us that "all the high hills that were under the whole heaven were covered. Fifteen cubits upwards did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered." That is, the earth was immersed. It was a period of baptism. (JD 26:74-75.)

7:19-20 The complete immersion of the earth at the time of the flood was the "baptism of the earth by water" as taught by several modern prophets, including Brigham Young and John A. Widtsoe:

The earth . . . has been baptized with water, and will, in the future be baptized with fire and the Holy Ghost, to be prepared to go back into the celestial presence of God. (Brigham Young, DBY, p. 393.)

Latter-day Saints . . . look upon the flood as a baptism of the earth, symbolizing a cleansing of the impurities of the past, and the beginning of a new life. This has been repeatedly taught by the leaders of the Church. The deluge was an immersion of the earth in water. (John A. Widtsoe, ER 1:111.)

8:4 According to Joseph Fielding Smith the "mountains of Ararat" could be a considerable distance from the area where Noah lived before the flood:

Without any question a considerable distance separated the point where the Ark commenced the journey and where it landed. There can be no question to contradict the fact that during the flood great changes were made on the face of the earth. The land surface was in the process of division into continents. The rivers mentioned in Genesis were rivers that existed in the garden of Eden long before the land was divided into continents and islands. (AGQ 2:94.)

8:20-22 The Joseph Smith Translation makes significant changes in these verses. (See Gen. 9:4-6, Bible Appendix, p. 797.)

9:4-7 The Joseph Smith Translation makes significant changes in these verses. (See Gen. 9:10-14, Bible Appendix, p. 797.)

9:16-7 The Joseph Smith Translation contributes to an understanding of "the bow." (See Gen. 9:21-25, Bible Appendix, p. 797.)

Joseph Smith has added the following commentary:

The Lord hath set the bow in the cloud for a sign that while it shall be seen, seed time and harvest, summer and winter shall not fail; but when it shall disappear, woe to that generation, for behold the end cometh quickly. (TPJS, p. 305.)

10:5 This verse contains the first reference in the Bible to the word gentile. The basic meaning of the Hebrew word (goyim) frequently translated as "gentile" is "nations" or "peoples." However, in time gentile came to mean "stranger" or "foreigner." Thus, to a member of a particular group, a gentile is any person who does not belong to that group. To a Hebrew (a descendant of Abraham), a gentile is a person who is not a Hebrew. To an Israelite (a descendant of Jacob or Israel), a gentile is a person who is not an Israelite. To a Jew (a descendant of Judah, a citizen of the kingdom of Judah, or a descendant of such a citizen), a gentile is a non-Jew.

The word Hebrew is first used in the Bible in Genesis 14, the word Israel in Genesis 32, and the word Jews in 2 Kings 16. Most of the Bible was written after these terms were in rather common usage. The word gentile, then, refers either to non-Hebrew, non-Israelite, or non-Jew, depending on the time and the situation of the usage.

10:25 Joseph Fielding Smith has contributed a commentary on the dividing of the earth's land masses:

The dividing of the earth was not an act of division by the inhabitants of the earth by tribes and peoples, but a breaking asunder of the continents, thus dividing the land surface and creating the Eastern Hemisphere and Western Hemisphere. By looking at a wall map of the world, you will discover how the land surface along the northern and southern coast of the American Hemisphere and Europe and Africa has the appearance of having been together at one time. Of course, there have been many changes on the earth's surface since the beginning. We are informed by revelation that the time will come when this condition will be changed and that the land surface of the earth will come back as it was in the beginning and all be in one place. (AGQ 5:73-74.)

The notion prevails quite generally that the dividing of the earth in the days of Peleg was a division politically among the people, but from this word of the Lord we gain the idea that the earth itself was divided and that when Christ comes it will again be brought back to the same conditions physically as prevailed before this division took place. The sea is to be driven back into the north. The land is to be brought back as it was originally and the lands of Zion (America) and Jerusalem (Palestine and all the land pertaining unto it) will be restored to their own place as they were in the beginning. (CHMR 1:264.)

11:6 The Joseph Smith Translation equivalent verse reads: "And the Lord said, Behold, the people are the same, and they all have the same language; and this tower they begin to build, and now, nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined, except I, the Lord confound their language." (Gen. 11:5. Italics added.)

11:9 After "because," the Joseph Smith Translation adds the clause "the Lord was displeased with their works." (Gen. 11:6.)

12:1-3 Some of the ways in which Abraham and his descendants have blessed "all the families of the earth" have been listed by Joseph Fielding Smith:

When the Lord called Abraham out of Ur, the land of his fathers, he made certain covenants with him because of his faithfulness. One promise was that through him and his seed after him all nations of the earth should be blessed. [Gen. 12:1-3.] This blessing is accomplished in several ways.

Orson F. Whitney has provided the following background on Abraham:

Abraham was a dweller in Ur of the Chaldees, a city of Mesopotamia, which means, "between the rivers." The rivers in question were the Tigris and the Euphrates. God said to Abraham: [Quoted Gen. 12:1-3.] The land referred to was Canaan, now Palestine. Abraham, in order to reach that land, had to pass over the river, Euphrates. Hence he was called by the Canaanites a "hebrew," which signifies, "one from beyond the river."

What was the purpose of Abraham's call? Why was he taken out of his own country and from his father's house and promised that he should become a great nation? It was because Mesopotamia was steeped in the sin of idolatry, and the time had arrived for the founding of the lineage through which the Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior, would come into the world. Abraham was required to separate himself from his idolatrous surroundings, that he might establish such a lineage. The strict laws given to Israel, Abraham's descendants, had as their object the preservation in purity of the lineage of our Lord, the "Lamb without spot or blemish." (MS 86:641-42.)

12:3 John Taylor has provided the following insights on how the seed of Abraham has blessed "all families of the earth."

We go to the promise made to Abraham, which was that in him and in his seed all the families of the earth should be blessed. Moses, as I have said was of his seed, and he was the deliverer of the whole of that nation. And who were the prophets that existed among ancient Israel? They were descendants of Abraham; and to them came the word of God and the light of revelation. Who was Jesus? After the flesh of the seed of Abraham. Who were his Twelve Apostles? Of the seed of Abraham. Who were the people that came to this continent—Lehi and his family, about 600 years B.C.? Of the seed of Abraham. Who were the Apostles they had among them that spread forth among the millions that then lived upon this continent? Of the seed of Abraham. Who was Joseph Smith? Of the seed of Abraham. (JD 20:224.)

12:15 The phrase "and commended her before Pharaoh" is changed in the Joseph Smith Translation to "and commanded her to be brought before Pharaoh."

13:15 The term "for ever" suggests that much of this blessing will be realized in the future, as explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

This expression "forever" in some texts has reference to this mortal existence, but in the case of this promise to Abraham, it had no such meaning, and when the Lord said he would multiply him and make his seed as numerous "as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore," that also was a promise extending beyond the bounds of mortality and time, for his blessing of increase was to extend forever. (CHMR 1:216.)

14:13 After the word "Hebrew," the Joseph Smith Translation adds "the man of God."

14:18 Notice the impact of the additional words in the Joseph Smith Translation: "And he break bread and blest it; and he blest the wine, he being the priest of the most high God. And he gave to Abram." (Gen. 14:17-18.) Evidently the prophets had the sacrament before the time of Jesus Christ upon the earth.

The Joseph Smith Translation adds several very significant verses at the end of this chapter, providing information on the man Melchizedek and on the priesthood be held. Also, these additional verses indicate "Abram paid" tithes unto Melchizedek. (See Gen. 14:25-40, Bible Appendix, pp. 791-98.)

14:20 This is the first mention of tithes in the Old Testament, although the principle of sacrifice (and perhaps specifically of tithing) had been on earth since the very beginning. Brigham Young has declared: "The Lord instituted tithing, it was practiced in the days of Abraham, and Enoch and Adam." (JD 15:163.)

Joseph Smith left the following account of the beginning of tithing in this dispensation:

On the evening of the 29th of November, I united in prayer with Brother Oliver for the continuance of blessings. After giving thanks for the relief which the Lord had lately sent us . . . we agreed to enter into the following covenant with the Lord, viz:

That if the Lord will prosper us in our business and open the way before us that we may obtain means to pay our debts, that we be not troubled nor brought into disrepute before the world, nor His people; after that, of all that He shall give unto us, we will give a tenth to be bestowed upon the poor in His Church, or as He shall command; and that we will be faithful over that which he has entrusted to our care, that we may obtain much; and that our children after us shall remember to observe this sacred and holy covenant; and that our children, and our children's children, may know of the same, we have subscribed our names with our own hands. (TPJS, p. 70.)

Joseph F. Smith indicated tithing is a test of faith:

By this principle (tithing) the loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is against it. By this principle it shall be seen whose hearts are set on doing the will of God and keeping his commandments, thereby sanctifying the land of Zion unto God, and who are opposed to this principle and have cut themselves off from the blessings of Zion. There is a great deal of importance connected with this principle, for by it it shall be known whether we are faithful or unfaithful. In this respect it is as essential as faith in God, as repentance of sin, as baptism for the remission of sin, or as the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. (GD, p. 225.)

According to Spencer W. Kimball, all true believers in the Bible should pay tithing:

Does not the law of tithing apply to all the children of men, regardless of church or creed? All who believe the Bible really must believe that this is a law of God.

There echo again and again the words of the Master: "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." The Lord will bless all those who love and live this law. (FPM, p. 290.)

14:21-23 Spencer W. Kimball has commented on the integrity of Abraham in this instance:

The king of Sodom knew nothing about Abraham's covenant with the Lord; Abraham could have made himself rich by receiving of the king's generosity. But he had made an oath which he would not violate. Oh, that all of God's children could be so true! (E, June 1975, p. 6.)

15:5-6 The Joseph Smith Translation adds several significant verses, indicating Abram "looked forth and saw the days of the Son of Man." (See Gen. 15:9-12, Bible Appendix, p. 798.)

15:16 The term "iniquity . . . is not yet full" is explained by John Taylor:

There were times when the iniquity of these people was not yet full. In Abraham's day the Lord told that Patriarch that he should go to his fathers in peace, but in the fourth generation his posterity should "come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full:" by the days of Moses they appear to have filled the cup of their iniquity, for he enjoined upon the Israelites, "thou shalt utterly destroy them, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee." . . . Thus men and nations are adjudged by the Almighty, according to the infinite and eternal laws and principles which exist in the heavens, and with a reference to eternal duration and not according to the finite, erratic and limited ideas of men. (JD 26:36.)

16:10 The word "I" is replaced with the words "the Lord" in the Joseph Smith Translation. (Gen. 16:11.)

16:13 The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies this verse: "And she called the name of the angel of the Lord. And he spake unto her, saying, Knowest thou that God seest thee? And she said, I know that God seest me, for I have also here looked after him." (Gen. 16:14-16.)

17:1 The significance of the Lord's commandment to Abraham "be thou perfect" is explained by Lorenzo Snow:

We learn that the Lord appeared to Abraham and made him very great promises, and that before he was prepared to receive them a certain requirement was made of him, that he should become perfect before the Lord. And the same requirement was made by the Savior of his disciples, that they should become perfect, even as he and his Father in heaven were perfect. . . .

When the Lord made this requirement of Abraham, He gave him the means by which he could become qualified to obey that law and come up fully to the requirement. He had the privilege of the Holy Spirit, as we are told the Gospel was preached to Abraham, and through that Gospel he could obtain that divine aid which would enable him to understand the things of God, and without it no man could arrive at a state of perfection before the Lord. (JD 20:187-88.)

The formula for Abraham's becoming perfect has been given by the Lord: "Abraham received all things, whatsoever he received, by revelation and commandment . . . Abraham . . . did none other things than that which [he was] commanded" therefore he has "entered into [his] exaltation." (D&C 132:29, 37.)

17:3-4 See Joseph Smith Translation Genesis 17:3-7 on page 798 of the Bible Appendix for information concerning baptism, which was taught to the Hebrews.

17:3-7 Concerning the covenant God made with Abraham, see the commentary for Genesis 12:1-3 and Genesis 12:3.

17:7-14 The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that circumcision is "a covenant with" God that men may know forever "that children are not accountable before [the Lord] until they are eight years old." (See Gen. 17:11-12, Bible Appendix, p. 798.)

The ordinance of circumcision was thus connected at least symbolically with the ordinance of baptism; however, Joseph Smith taught: "Circumcision is not baptism, neither was baptism instituted in the place of circumcision." (TPJS, p. 314.)

Joseph Smith also taught:

The covenant of circumcision made with Abraham, and practiced steadily up to the departing of Israel out of Egypt, was abandoned in the wilderness, forty years—and renewed by Joshua after he passed over Jordan, and encamped at Gilgal, where he made sharp knives and circumcised the whole male portion of the church. (TPJS, p. 264.)

18:14 The second clause has been enlarged and clarified in the Joseph Smith Translation: "At the time appointed, behold, I will return unto thee from my journey, which the Lord hath sent me; and according to the time of life thou mayest know that Sarah shall have a son."

18:18 The fact that God knew beforehand that "Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation" has been explained by Brigham Young and Willard Richards:

This includes the general principle of election, i.e. that God chose, elected, or ordained Jesus Christ, His Son, to be the creator, governor, savior, and judge of the world; and Abraham to be the father of the faithful, on account of His foreknowledge of their obedience to His will and commandments, which agrees with the saying in 2 Tim. 2:21, "If a man therefore purge himself from these [i.e. iniquities], he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work."

Thus it appears that God has chosen or elected certain individuals to certain blessings, or to the performance of certain works. (HC 4:258.)

18:20-33 Spencer W. Kimball has provided the following commentary on these verses:

Abraham knew that the cities of the plains—Sodom and Gomorrah and other places—were wicked cities, housing wicked, godless people, saying with Cain, "Who is the Lord that I should know him?" (Moses 5:16.) He was aware that destruction of those cities was imminent; but in his compassion for his fellowman, he begged and pleaded with the Lord, "Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city," will you spare the others of the city? (See Gen. 18:24.) That pleading being granted, came Abraham again and prayed that the cities would be saved if 45 were found, or 40 or 30 or 20 or down to ten, but apparently there could not be found even ten, in those vicious cities, who were righteous. (See Gen. 18:24-32.)

The evil continued. The sin was too well entrenched. They had laughed and joked about a destruction. The transgressions for which Sodom had apparently been renowned continued on. In fact, the people wanted to take advantage of the pure angel men they had seen come into the city. The vicious men pressed and would have broken down the doors to get to them. (See Gen. 19:4-11.)

Everything was done that could be done by Abraham to save the city, but it had become so depraved and wanton that to save it was impossible. (CR, Apr. 1975, p. 161.)

19:4-5 One of the most grievous sins of Sodom and Gomorrah was homosexuality. Spencer W. Kimball has forcefully condemned this practice:

We hear more and more each day about the sins of adultery, homosexuality, and lesbianism. Homosexuality is an ugly sin, but because of its prevalence, the need to warn the uninitiated, and the desire to help those who may already be involved with it, it must be brought into the open.

It is the sin of the ages. It was present in Israel's wandering as well as after and before. It was tolerated by the Greeks. It was prevalent in decaying Rome. The ancient cities of Sodom and Gomorrah are symbols of wretched wickedness more especially related to this perversion, as the incident of Lot's visitors indicates.

There is today a strong clamor to make such practices legal by passing legislation. Some would also legislate to legalize prostitution. They have legalized abortion, seeking to remove from this heinous crime the stigma of sin. . . .

"But let us emphasize that right and wrong, righteousness and sin, are not dependent upon man's interpretations, conventions and attitudes. Social acceptance does not change the status of an act, making wrong into right. If all the people in the world were to accept homosexuality, . . . the practice would still be a deep, dark sin." (CR, Oct. 1977, pp. 6-7.)

19:9-11 The Joseph Smith Translation additions to these verses indicate that (1) Lot did not offer his daughters to the wicked men of Sodom and (2) the evil men "could not find" the door after they were stricken with blindness. (See Gen. 19:9-15, Bible Appendix, p. 798.)

19:31 According to the Joseph Smith Translation, the firstborn daughter "dealt wickedly" and said unto the younger: "Our father has become old, and we have not a man on the earth to come in unto us, to live with us after the manner of all that live on the earth." (Italics added.)

20:7 This is the first of hundreds of times the word prophet is used in the Bible. Spencer W. Kimball has written concerning a prophet:

To be a prophet of the Lord, one does not need to "be everything to all men." He does not need to be youthful and athletic, an industrialist, a financier, or an agriculturist; he does not need to be a musician, a poet, an entertainer, a banker, a physician, a college president, a military general, or a scientist.

He does not need to be a linguist and speak French and Japanese, German and Spanish, but he must understand the divine language and be able to receive messages from heaven.

He need not be an orator, for God can make his own. The Lord can present his divine messages through weak men made strong. He substituted a strong voice for the quiet, timid one of Moses, and he gave to the young man Enoch power that made men tremble in his presence, for Enoch walked with God as Moses walked with God.

The Lord said: ". . . whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.)

What the world needs is a prophet-leader who gives example—clean, full of faith, godlike in his attributes with an untarnished name, a beloved husband, a true father.

A prophet needs to be more than a priest or a minister or an elder. His voice becomes the voice of God to reveal new programs, new truths, new solutions. I make no claim of personal infallibility for him, but he does need to be recognized of God, to be an authoritative person. He is no pretender, as numerous persons are who presumptuously assume position without appointment and authority. He must speak like his Lord: "as one having authority, and not as the scribes." (Matthew 7:29.)

He must be bold enough to speak truth even against popular clamor for lessening restrictions. He must be certain of his divine appointment, of his celestial ordination, and of his authority to call to service, to ordain, to pass keys that fit eternal locks. (FPM, pp. 318-19.)

20:16 The clause "he is to thee a covering of the eyes" reads in the Joseph Smith Translation "he shall give unto thee a covering of the eyes." (Italics added.)

21:1-2 The miracle of aged Sarah giving birth has drawn comments from both New Testament and modern prophets:

Paul said again:

"Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised.

"Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable." (Hebrews 11:11-12.)

So absurd it was to be told that children could be born of centenarians that even Sarah doubted at first. But the faith of a noble pair prevailed, and the miracle son was born to father multitudes of nations. (Spencer W. Kimball, FPM, p. 6.)

21:21 The clause "his mother took him a wife" has been changed to "he took him a wife," in the Joseph Smith Translation.

22:2 Many students of the Bible consider the supreme test of Abraham to be when the Lord commanded Abraham to offer his son Isaac. Concerning this event, Spencer W. Kimball has written:

Exceeding faith was shown by Abraham when the superhuman test was applied to him. His young "child of promise," destined to be the father of empires, must now be offered upon the sacrificial altar. It was God's command, but it seemed so contradictory! How could his son, Isaac, be the father of an uncountable posterity if in his youth his mortal life was to be terminated? Why should he, Abraham, be called upon to do this revolting deed? It was irreconcilable, impossible! And yet he believed God. His undaunted faith carried him with breaking heart toward the land of Moriah with this young son who little suspected the agonies through which his father must have been passing. . . .

Father Abraham and Mother Sarah knew—knew the promise would be fulfilled. How—they did not know and did not demand to know. Isaac positively would live to be the father of a numerous posterity. They knew he would, even though he might need to die. They knew he could still be raised from the dead to fulfil the promise, and faith here preceded the miracle. (CR, Oct. 1952, pp. 48-49.)

The Lord has commented on his command to Abraham in these words:

"Abraham was commanded to offer his son Isaac; nevertheless, it was written: Thou shalt not kill. Abraham, however, did not refuse, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness." (D&C 132:36.)

22:6-14 Spencer W. Kimball has reviewed the critical part of Abraham's test in these words:

The place was reached, the altar built, the fire kindled, and the lad now surely knowing, but trusting and believing, was upon the altar. The father's raised hand was stopped in mid-air by a commanding voice:

". . . Lay not thine hand upon the lad. . . ."

And as the near perfect prophet found the ram in the thicket and offered it upon the altar, he heard the voice of God again speaking:

"And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice." (Gen. 22:18.] . . .

Father Abraham and Mother Sarah knew—knew the promise would be fulfilled. How—they did not know and did not demand to know. (CR, Oct. 1952, pp. 48-49.)

22:6 Abraham, not Isaac, carried the wood, according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

22:16 The words "thine only son" are changed to "thine only Isaac" in the Joseph Smith Translation. Ishmael was also a son of Abraham.

24:28 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And the damsel ran to the house, and told her mother these things." (Italics added.)

25:23 Brigham Young and Willard Richards have explained that the Lord knew beforehand that the elder would serve the younger.

And the Lord said unto her, (Rebecca, Gen. xxv: 23) "The elder shall serve the younger." And why? Because that Isaac, the father of Esau and Jacob, the husband of Rebecca, and the son of promise to Abraham, was the heir; and as Esau was the elder son of his father Isaac, he had a legal claim to the heirship; but through unbelief, hardness of heart, and hunger, he sold his birthright to his younger brother Jacob (Gen. xxv: 33); and God knowing beforehand that he [Esau] would do this of his own free will and choice . . . said to his mother, "The elder shall serve the younger;" for as the elder son Esau, has sold his birthright, and by that means lost all claim to the blessings promised to Abraham; those blessings and promises must have failed, if they had not descended with the purchased birthright unto the younger son, Jacob, for there was no other heir in Abraham's family; and if those blessings had failed, the purposes of God according to election must have failed in relation to the posterity of Israel, and the oath of Jehovah would have been broken, which could not be though heaven and earth were to pass away. (HC 4:261-62.)

28:22 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And the place of this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall be the place of God's house." (Italics added.)

29:21 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And Jacob said unto Laban, Give unto me my wife, that I may go and take her, for my days of serving thee are fulfilled." (Italics added.)

32:28 This is the first time the word Israel appears in the Bible. James E. Talmage commented concerning this title and name:

Israel—The combined name and title, Israel, in the original sense of the word, expressed the thought of one who had succeeded in his supplication before the Lord: "soldier of God," "one who contends with God," "a prince of God," are among the common English equivalents. The name first appears in sacred writ as a title conferred upon Jacob, when the latter prevailed in his determination to secure a blessing from his heavenly visitor in the wilderness, receiving the promise: [Quoted Gen. 32:28; 35:9-10.]

But the name-title thus bestowed under conditions of solemn dignity acquired a wider application, and came to represent the posterity of Abraham, through Isaac and Jacob [1 Sam. 25:1; Isa. 48:1; Rom. 9:4; 11:1], with each of whom the Lord had covenanted that through his descendants should all nations of the earth be blessed. The name of the individual patriarch thus grew into the designation of a people, including the twelve tribes, who delighted in the title Israelites, or children of Israel. (AF, p. 314.)

See Part I 2.

37:2 Joseph Fielding Smith taught that Joseph, the son of Jacob, must have received the priesthood before he was seventeen years old.

There is ample evidence that boys were called and ordained [to the priesthood] in ancient times. In antediluvian times, when the lives of men were greatly prolonged, some were called to act at comparatively tender years. Enoch was but twenty-five when he was ordained by Adam; Lamech was but thirty-two; and Noah received the priesthood when he was but ten years of age. How old Joseph, son of Israel, was when he received the priesthood is not recorded; but it must have been when he was very young. He was sold by his brethren when he was only seventeen, and he must have had the priesthood before that time, for he exercised it in the land of Egypt. (AGQ 2:9.)

38:8-9 The Joseph Smith Translation records the command as follows: "Go and marry thy brother's wife, and raise up seed unto thy brother." Although Onan married his brother's wife "he would not lie with her, lest he should raise up seed unto his brother." (Italics added.)

39:7-9 Joseph's faithfulness in the face of this temptation has been extolled by Harold B. Lee:

Oh, the majesty of Joseph sold into Egypt, who shamed the beautiful but apparently unloved wife of Potiphar, when she would have tempted him to a serious sin, and he said, "My master trusts me, and thou art his wife. How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?" (See Gen. 39:8.) He, too, felt his great responsibility in being a true witness of the divine truths which he professed to believe. (CR, Apr. 1951, p. 34.)

39:7-20 The situation of Potiphar's wife is discussed in this insightful commentary by Spencer W. Kimball.

The case of Potiphar's wife is an example of the creeping tentacles of sin. Even though this scheming woman did not succeed in defiling Joseph, her sin was most grievous. The intent was there and the desire and the lust and the coveting. She had "already committed adultery with him in her heart and mind . . ." as she "cast her eyes upon Joseph day by day." This woman's transgression did not begin when she ripped the clothes from the body of this fleeing stalwart. Her perfidy had been born and nurtured in her mind and heart in the "day by day" of wanting him, teasing him, desiring him, lusting for him, and coveting him. Her sin was a progressive thing. So, for all the numerous people, who, like this seductive woman, carry in their hearts and minds designs or desires or covetings, deep sin lieth already at their doors.

"For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he: . . ." (Prov. 23:7.) Nothing justifies evil. Two wrongs do not make one right. Spouses are sometimes inconsiderate, unkind, and difficult, and they must share the blame for broken homes, but this never justifies the other spouse's covetousness and unfaithfulness and infidelity. (IE, Dec. 1962, p. 929.)

42:23 Ezra Taft Benson has indicated this verse means that Joseph's descendants "would be sorely persecuted." (See Part I 233-34, 245-48.)

48:5-6 The six extra verses of the Joseph Smith Translation provide an additional blessing of Jacob for Joseph. Also, they make clear that Ephraim and Manasseh did not replace Reuben and Simeon, but were to be considered as sons of Jacob just as Reuben and Simeon were also sons. (See Gen. 48:5-11, Bible Appendix, pp. 798-99.)

48:10 The King James text indicates Jacob "could not see"; the Joseph Smith Translation states Jacob "could not see well." (Italics added.)

48:13-19 The significance of Jacob's placing his right hand upon the head of Ephraim while pronouncing the blessing has been explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

The performing of ordinances with the right hand in preference to the left is a well-established custom universally and is not confined to the Church. In various governments where oaths are administered, the candidate for office is asked to raise his right hand. There are occasions when he is sworn to give truthful testimony by placing his right hand on a copy of the Bible. This custom has come down from the beginning, and from many scriptural passages we gather that it has always received divine sanction. When Abraham sent his servant to his kindred to find a wife for Isaac, he had the servant place his right hand under Abraham's thigh and swear to him that he would accomplish this mission. . . . (AGQ 1:154-55.)

There are numerous passages in the scriptures referring to the right hand, indicating that it is a symbol of righteousness and was used in the making of covenants. . . . (AGQ 1:154-55, 57. See Isa. 41:10; Ps. 110:1.)

It is the custom to extend the right hand in token of fellowship. The right hand is called the dexter, and the left, the sinister; dexter means right and sinister means left. Dexter, or right, means favorable or propitious. Sinister is associated with evil, rather than good. Sinister means perverse.

We take the sacrament with the right hand. We sustain the authorities with the right hand. We make acknowledgment with the right hand raised. (DS 3:108.)

49:10 B. H. Roberts has provided the following commentary on this verse:

This passage by the Jews, in ancient times, who believed in the coming of the Messiah at all, was allowed to have reference to the coming of their Messiah, and as in some way fixing the time and circumstances of his coming.

It is evident that by "Judah" is meant, not the person, but the tribe, and by "Sceptre" and "lawgiver" are obviously intended the legislative and ruling power. In the course of time this commenced in David, and for centuries afterwards was continued in his descendants. Whatever variety the form of government assumed the law and polity were the same. . . .

The Jewish Targums paraphrase the passage thus: "The Sceptre shall not depart from Judah until the King Messiah comes, to whom it belongeth."

This prediction of Genesis 49:10, all the older Jewish commentators, referred to as Messiah. Ben Uzzel, whose Commentaries are among the most ancient Targums, renders the passage: "Until the time when the King Messiah shall come." The Targum of Onkelos speaks of it to the same effect, and the Targum of Jerusalem paraphrases it thus: "Kings shall not cease, from the House of Judah, nor doctors that teach the law from his children until that the King, Messiah, do come, whose the kingdom is: and all nations of the earth shall be subject unto him."

For modern Jewish commentators, these admissions represent tremendous consequences. If the integrity of the prophecy be regarded, then, since the Sceptre—symbol of the legislative and ruling power—has departed from Judah, the Messiah must have come, and long since come, for Judah has not held legislative authority, nor the Sceptre of power for two thousand years! The last trace of legislative power in the Sanhedrin, and all administrative authority departed from Judah with the coming of Jesus, the Christ, and with the destruction of the temple and Jerusalem under the Romans, 70 A.D. (Rasha the Jew, pp. 40-41.)

See Part I 179-80.

49:22-26 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints maintains that some of the descendants of Joseph who was sold into Egypt were led by the Lord about 600 B.C. to the lands now known as the Americas. Their descendants became much of the native stock of the later Mayan, Incan, and Aztec civilizations. The first 1,000 years of the history of these Josephites is recorded in the Book of Mormon.

Joseph Fielding Smith has stated that the preservation of the peoples in the Americas was a result of Jacob's promises to Joseph that he would be "a fruitful bough . . . whose branches run over the wall."

Most of those who are receiving the gospel are of the tribe of Ephraim. The Lamanites, as we learn from the Book of Mormon, are descendants of both Ephraim and Manasseh. The record obtained by Lehi when he sent his sons back to Jerusalem declared that he was a descendant of Manasseh. We have been informed by revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith that the daughters of Ishmael who married the sons of Lehi were descendants of Ephraim. Therefore the prophecy of Jacob upon the head of Joseph was fulfilled. (AGQ 5:70.)

See Part I 233-34.

50:24-26 The Joseph Smith Translation adds twelve very significant verses to the account in the King James Version. (See Gen. 50:24-38, Bible Appendix, pp. 799-800.)

The following important concepts are discussed in these additional verses:

The following commentaries substantiate the claim that Joseph Smith, Jr., was the "choice seer" of the last days as revealed to Joseph who was sold into Egypt.

It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that [Joseph Smith] should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. . . . He was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation. (Brigham Young, JD 7:289-90.)

God called [Joseph Smith] to occupy the position that he did . . . thousands of years ago before this world was formed. The Prophets prophesied about his coming, that a man should arise whose name should be Joseph, and that his father's name should be Joseph, and also that he should be a descendant of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt. (John Taylor, JD 26:106.)
