Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

EXODUS

See "Exodus, Book of," in the Bible Dictionary, page 668.

1:5 The "seventy souls . . . that came out of the loins of Jacob" and went into Egypt obviously did not include the wives of the sons, grandsons, and so on. Genesis 46:8-27 included a listing of "threescore and ten" (70) with the notation "besides Jacob's sons' wives." Also Moses recorded that Jacob took into Egypt "his daughters, and his sons' daughters" (Gen. 46:7), yet only two women are mentioned by name as possibly being among the group (Dinah and Serah), and one of them (Dinah) is not included in the thirty-three who are descendants of Leah even though Genesis 34:25 indicates that Leah was Dinah's mother.

Most Bible scholars estimate that the number of Israelites who migrated into Egypt totaled several hundred. Jacob was 130 years old at the time (Gen. 47:9), his sons would have been at least 60 years of age, and many of his grandsons were mature men with children of their own.

1:8-14 The exact length of the enslavement of the Israelites is not given in this part of the Old Testament although Exodus 12:40 indicates "the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years."

Evidently this figure includes Jacob's coming down into Egypt, and some scholars believe this reckoning must have started from Joseph's arrival in Egypt or even from Abraham's visit there.

Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on this question.

How long the slavery had lasted is difficult to know. Paul (in Galatians 3:17) accepts a Septuagint statement in Exodus 12:40 that there were 430 years from the time of Abraham's reception of the promise until the giving of the Mosaic Law. This would leave some 215 years for Israel in Egypt, and since the clan lived there in peace for some 71 years of Joseph's life after Jacob and the family all came in, there would remain some 144 years, some part of which would have been under the Pharaohs of Joseph's time and the remainder under the Pharaohs "who knew not Joseph." Though the date of the overthrow of the Hyksos is fairly well established (1540 BC), it is not known for sure which of the following Pharaohs was the Pharaoh of the Exodus. The phrase "land of Rameses" used (anachronistically?) in Genesis 47:11 can hardly mean that Israel entered in the days of Pharaoh Rameses; but still the name of the treasure cities "Pithom and Raamses" (Exodus 1:11) is sometimes taken as evidence that the Israelites' slave labor was used in construction work which took place during the administration of Rameses II. Obviously, the internal evidences are insufficient, and conclusive external evidences are yet needed. So far, the circumstantial evidence pointing to confirmation of the general historical truthfulness of Exodus is becoming impressive. (IOT 1:72-73.)

1:8 The "new king" (Pharaoh) who "knew not Joseph" also "dealt subtilly" with the Israelites in Egypt according to the writer of Acts. (See Acts 7:18-19.) The idiomatic expression "knew not Joseph" obviously does not mean the Pharaoh was not acquainted with the Israelites; rather it indicates he was opposed to the Israelites and sought to do evil toward them.

2:10 The name Moses was already well known in the Egyptian court. Although scholars do not always agree as to the exact dating of Moses in Egypt, several Pharaohs had already borne names with the root Moses—e.g. Ramose (or Rameses) and Thutmose (or Thothmes).

In his writings, Josephus refers to a legend among the Egyptians, dating far earlier than Moses, that a leader by that particular name would someday come to great power in Egypt. The legend might well account for the frequency of names containing a form of Moses.

The Book of Mormon indicates that at least from the time of Joseph, a group of Israelites might have known the exact name of the great deliverer who was to lead them from bondage. The Lord told Joseph, "Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt." (2 Ne. 3:10.)

The name Moses seems to be especially appropriate for the child drawn from the ark of bulrushes in the river by Pharaoh's daughter who claimed him as a son; it derives from a Hebrew word meaning "to draw out" of the water and from an Egyptian root "to beget a child."

2:11 The word Hebrew (which earlier meant "descendant of Abraham") is frequently used to refer to the Israelites during this period of biblical history. (See Part I 2.) Israelites are Hebrews, of course, but not all Hebrews are Israelites.

After the Lord tells Moses, "Israel is my son, even my first-born" (Ex. 4:22), the terms Israel, children of Israel, and Israelites are often used to designate the descendants of Jacob.

2:11-15 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the killing of the Egyptian taskmaster by Moses:

His hour of decision came when Moses "went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens" and smote a taskmaster who was smiting one of them. The same verb is used to tell what both the taskmaster and Moses did: "Smote" and "slew" in King James English are both translated from Hebrew nakhah, meaning "to beat down"; it is the ward used in describing the action taken by soldiers in combat against each other. It would be correct to say that Moses slew a man who was slaying another, or took a life in saving a life. His looking "this way and that" before doing so, simply indicates that he was aware that the Egyptians would not condone his defense of a slave. It is doubtless from this action, and from his attempt to settle strife between two Hebrews the following day who rejected and rebuffed him, that Stephen says Moses "supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood not" (Acts 7:25). Naturally he had to flee from Egypt and find refuge elsewhere from that time on. (IOT 1:74.)

2:18 The father-in-law of Moses is given two different names within a few verses: "Reuel" in Exodus 2:18 and "Jethro" as in Exodus 3:1. It is not unusual for Semites to have more than one name, as evidenced in Abraham (Abram) and Israel (Jacob). However, some scholars want to apply other names to the father-in-law of Moses, including Raguel (Num. 10:29) and Hobab (Judg. 4:11). A careful reading and comparison of the wording and punctuation of Numbers 10:29 and Judges 4:11 indicates that Raguel was the father of Hobab, and that Hobab (not Raguel) might be the only additional name for the father-in-law of Moses. If Moses had only one father-in-law, this still leaves at least three different names to refer to one man.

A possible solution to this difficulty is that Moses had several "wives and concubines" and thus might have had several different fathers-in-law. (See D&C 132:38.) This revealed fact still does not rule out the possibility that Reuel and Jethro are different names for the same man.

The Bible indicates Moses had at least one other wife in addition to Zipporah: "And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman." (Num. 12:1.)

No further information is given in the Bible concerning the names of this Ethiopian wife or her father. Furthermore, the fact she was from Ethiopia does not necessarily indicate her lineage. Many Semites had undoubtedly settled in Ethiopia during early migrations into northern Africa.

2:22 Two possible meanings have been given to the name Gershom, from the Hebrew ger (a sojourner) and sham (there) or from the verb garash (to expel). Either derivation suggests that Moses was thinking of his kindred back in Egypt when he named his firstborn son. A later son of Moses and Zipporah is named Eliezer (God is help). (See Ex. 18:4.)

3:1 "Midian" was the name of one of the sons of Abraham and Keturah. (Gen. 25:2.) In Exodus 2:15, "Midian" refers to a land. Most scholars have assumed (1) that the Midianites were descendants of Midian the son of Abraham and (2) that the land where the Midianites lived was given the same name. If these suppositions are true, Jethro, "the priest of Midian" and father-in-law of Moses to whom he gave the "holy priesthood" (D&C 84:6), would have been a descendant of Abraham, and thus both a Semite and a Hebrew.

3:5 Some of the most holy places on earth today are the temples (houses of the Lord), where the presence of the Lord can be felt by many. Here, also, the counsel is to remove shoes worn in the world "for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground."

3:12 The mountain where Moses encountered the burning bush was given the name "Horeb" in Exodus 3:1. In verse 12, the Lord indicated that the children of Israel should be given the opportunity to "serve God upon this mountain." In Exodus 19:11 the name "mount Sinai" is given to the place where the Lord spoke to Moses and was heard by the Israelites. Thus, many biblical scholars believe Horeb and Sinai are the same mountain. It may be that Horeb refers to the mountain range whereas Sinai is the name of a particular mountain or peak within that range.

3:14 The Lord has identified himself on several occasions by the sacred title I AM. To the Jews, Jesus said: "Before Abraham was, I am" (John 8:58), which, according to a modern apostle was the same as saying "Before Abraham was I Jehovah." (DNTC 1:464.) To Joseph Smith, the Lord declared: "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins" (D&C 29:1); "Hearken and listen to the voice of him who is from all eternity to all eternity, the Great I AM, even Jesus Christ." (D&C 39:1; see also 38:1.)

Ellis Rasmussen has written the following explanation of the relationship of I AM to Jehovah:

On the identity of Him who calls Himself "I AM," study the implications in Exodus 6:3, John 8:58, I Corinthians 10:1-4, and then turn to the direct statements identifying the God of Moses with Jesus the Savior in 3 Nephi, on the relationship of the Son to the Father in the creation of the earth.

In Hebrew, it is evident that the name Jehovah is composed from the verb which in its active form means "He is" and in its causative form means "He causes to be" (i.e., "He creates"). It is reasonable that He would call Himself "I AM," while we call Him "HE WHO IS." This is one possible interpretation of Jehovah. (Remember that our common translation substitutes the word LORD in capital letters wherever the four-letter sacred name JHVH (i.e., Jehovah) appears in Hebrew. It appears only as the four consonants JHVH in Hebrew because that ancient language was written without vowels. (IOT 1:75.)

3:21-22 The Hebrew word translated "borrow" means "to ask." Evidently the women of the Israelites were to ask the Egyptian women for their jewels, perhaps in payment for favors or work given previously. The King James word "spoil" is the translation of a Hebrew root meaning "empty out." The sentence in Hebrew has no connotation of stealing or of borrowing for temporary use only.

4:10-12 The Lord created the heavens and the earth and all things which are in them, including the physical body of man. Thus the Lord can strengthen or alter them according to his divine purposes. Moses evidently needed to be reminded of these things before going back to face Pharaoh and the Egyptians.

4:13-17 This is the beginning of the call of Aaron to priesthood responsibility, which call spans several books. (See especially Ex. 7:2; Lev. 8; Num. 3.) Aaron was called directly of God through His prophet, and as the writer of Hebrews declared, "No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.)

4:16 The prophet is a spokesman for God, and sometimes the Lord provides a spokesman for the prophet also. In the dispensation of the fulness of times, the Lord provided Sidney Rigdon as a spokesman for the Prophet Joseph Smith. (See D&C 100:9.)

4:21 The expression "I [the Lord] will harden his [Pharaoh's] heart" should have been translated "Pharaoh will harden his heart against me [the Lord]," according to the Joseph Smith Translation. (See also Ex. 7:3, 13; 9:12; 10:1, 20, 27; 11:10.) Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

The Lord does not harden the hearts of men, they harden their own hearts. In the scriptures where it says the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, it is a mistranslation in every case. In the corrected verses of the Inspired Version the Lord said to Moses:

"And Pharaoh will harden his heart, as I said unto thee; and thou shalt multiply my signs, and my wonders, in the land of Egypt." (AGQ 3:136.)

4:24-27 The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that the Lord's displeasure with Moses on this occasion was because Moses failed to circumcise his son as was required of the covenant people. (See Gen. 17:10-14, 23-27, and 34:15 for background information on circumcision.) Because of his failure to meet this requirement, "Moses was ashamed, and hid his face from the Lord, and said, I have sinned before the Lord." (Ex. 4:26; see also 4:24-25.)

6:2-3 The God who spoke unto Moses is Jehovah (of the Old Testament) or Jesus Christ (as he is known in the New Testament). Many biblical scholars and their commentaries have claimed the Lord was not known unto the Hebrews and Israelites by his name Jehovah because of the statement "by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them." The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies this important point: "I am the Lord God Almighty; the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?"

The change from a declarative statement to an interrogative alters the entire meaning of the verse, and is fully consistent with the word order and with the Hebrew custom of indicating questions only by raising the voice at the end of the statement.

Joseph Fielding Smith indicated that the God who has worked with man since the fall is Jehovah, or Jesus Christ:

All revelation since the fall has come through Jesus Christ, who is the Jehovah of the Old Testament. In all of the scriptures, where God is mentioned and where he has appeared, it was Jehovah who talked with Abraham, with Noah, Enoch, Moses and all the prophets. He is the God of Israel, the Holy One of Israel; the one who led that nation out of Egyptian bondage, and who gave and fulfilled the Law of Moses. [1 Ne. 19:10; 3 Ne. 11:10, 14; 15:2-9.] The Father has never dealt with man directly and personally since the fall, and he has never appeared except to introduce and bear record of the Son. (DS 1:27.)

6:8 The clause "I am the Lord" should read "I the Lord will do it," according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

7:3 See commentary for Exodus 4:21.

7:11 Some readers have wondered about the source of the power which enabled the "wise men and the sorcerers" and the magicians of Egypt to duplicate some of the feats of Moses and Aaron. Concerning these powers, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

All down through the ages and in almost all countries, men have exercised great occult and mystical powers, even to the healing of the sick and the performing of miracles. Soothsayers, magicians, and astrologers were found in the courts of ancient kings. They had certain powers by which they divined and solved the monarch's problems, dreams, etc. One of the most striking examples of this is recorded in Exodus, where Pharaoh called "the wise men and the sorcerers" who duplicated some of the miracles the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron to perform. When Aaron threw down his rod, it became a serpent. The Egyptian magicians threw down their rods, and they also became serpents. . . . Beyond this point the magicians of Egypt could not go. The magicians failed in the days of Joseph to interpret the dream of Pharaoh because it was a dream from the Lord, but Joseph, because he held the priesthood, interpreted it.

. . . It should be remembered that Satan has great knowledge and thereby can exercise authority and to some extent control the elements, when some greater power does not intervene. (AGQ 1:176-78.)

8:25-27 The request of Moses that the children of Israel be allowed to go "into the wilderness" to offer their sacrifice so they would not be stoned by the Egyptians was certainly understandable and reasonable. The sacrifices of the Israelites frequently required the killing of animals, and cattle (cows and bulls) were sacred to the Egyptians!

9:16 The words "cause" and "in" are italicized, indicating that their equivalents are not found in the Hebrew. Notice the difference in meaning when these words are deleted: ". . . for this ______ have I raised thee up, for to shew ______ thee my power."

9:17 This verse contains the continuation of the words which Moses should say to Pharaoh. The Joseph Smith Translation makes this clear: "Therefore speak unto Pharaoh the thing which I command thee, who as yet exalteth himself that he will not let them go."

10:1 See the commentary for Exodus 4:21.

11:8 The statement "And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger" seems to indicate that Moses was angry. However, the Joseph Smith Translation puts this sentence in the context of verse 10, which changes the entire meaning: "And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh, and they went out from Pharaoh, and he was in great anger."

The clause "And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger" should be deleted from verse 8, according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

12:8-20 The unleavened bread is listed here as a reminder of the haste of the Israelites in leaving Egypt. Jewish tradition holds that the unleavened bread is also a symbol of purity, but this claim is not found in the scriptures.

12:11-27 The meaning and purpose of the Passover has been explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

The term Passover is from the Hebrew word pesach (Greek pascha), to pass by, and from the incident of the angel passing by the homes where the sign of the blood of the lamb was found, the lamb slain and eaten at the feast of the Passover is known as the Paschal lamb. This lamb had to be a male of the first year, and without spot or blemish, which was the requirement in all sacrifices, and not a bone was to be broken. The reason for this is that the sacrifice was typical of the great sacrifice which should be made by Jesus Christ. In commemoration of this passing by of the angel of the Lord and the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, the Lord required that this feast should be observed annually in Israel. Moreover, this month (the month of Ahib [Abib], later called Nisan) was to commence their year.

The ceremonies connected with this annual feast were to continue for seven days, beginning on the fourteenth and concluding on the twenty-first day of the month. During that time only unleavened bread should be eaten. (Real Ex. 12; Deut. 16:1-8; and Ezra 6:18-22.) (CHMR 1:130.)

See Part I 40.

12:12 The Egyptians had many gods whom they worshipped—gods supposedly inhabiting the heavens, the earth, and the regions beneath the earth. The various plagues brought upon the Egyptians were judgments against one or another of these various gods who controlled the waters, and so on. For example, the plague of darkness (Ex. 10:21-23) was a type of judgment against the most prominent of the Egyptian deities, the sun god Ra.

12:16 See Part I 32.

12:17, 24 The statement of the Lord that the children of Israel should observe an ordinance "for ever" to remind them of their deliverance should not be interpreted to mean they were to observe the Passover feast forever. Much of the symbolism of the "ordinance of the passover" (v. 43) was a foreshadowing of the coming of Jesus Christ, who would deliver people from their sins. Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

The Feast of the Passover was fulfilled in that form in the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. The Passover was a law given to Israel which was to continue until Christ, and was to remind the children of Israel of the coming of Christ who would become the sacrificial Lamb. After he was crucified the law was changed by the Savior himself, and from that time forth the law of the sacrament was instituted. We now observe the law of the sacrament instead of the Passover because the Passover was consummated in full by the death of Jesus Christ. It was a custom looking forward to the coming of Christ and his crucifixion and the lamb symbolized his death. (AGQ 5:153-54.)

12:27 See Part I 40.

12:33 The statement "We be all dead men" obviously means the Egyptians felt they all would soon be dead if the plagues continued. The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies the meaning: "And the Egyptians . . . said, We have found our first-born all dead; therefore get ye out of the land lest we die also."

12:35-36 The Hebrew indicates that the Israelites asked for (not borrowed) the jewels and raiment, and the Egyptians "let them have" (not lent) such things as they required. It should be remembered that the Lord earlier had commanded Moses to have the Israelites follow this procedure in order that they would not "go empty" out of Egypt. (See the commentary for Ex. 3:21-22.)

12:51 The word translated "armies" here and in verse 17 can also be rendered "hosts." The meaning is that the people were numerous and does not necessarily indicate they were armed with weapons.

13:9 The Bible Dictionary defines a phylactery as a small strip "of parchment inscribed with texts . . . and enclosed in leather cases." The basis for using phylacteries comes from this verse and from the following scriptures: Exodus 13:1-16; Deuteronomy 6:4-9; 11:13-21. The phylactery might be worn on the forehead and also on the left arm near the heart. See Part I 37.

13:15 See Part I 40.

14:13-31 The Old Testament miracle of the parting of the sea is verified in the New Testament (Acts 7:36), the Book of Mormon (1 Ne. 4:2; 17:26; Mosiah 7:19; Alma 36:28; Hel. 8:11), and the Doctrine and Covenants (8:3). Believers in the scriptural accounts, which also teach that God created the seas in the beginning, should have no difficulty accepting the literalness of the miracle. Unfortunately, some biblical scholars have tried to explain away the miracle by pointing out that the "sea of reeds" is the meaning of the Hebrew translation rather than the Red Sea, or by claiming that the Israelites invented the story in order to appear mighty in the eyes of their enemies. However, Spencer W. Kimball reaffirmed the literalness of the miracle:

No hope on earth for their liberation! What could save them now? The gloating armed forces of Egypt knew that Israel was trapped. Israel knew it only too well. But Moses, their inspired leader with a supreme faith, knew that God would not have called them on this exodus only to have them destroyed. He knew God would provide the escape. He may not at this moment have known just how, but he trusted. . . .

The mighty warriors pressed on. Hope must have long since died in the breasts of the timid Israelitish souls who knew not faith. Deserts and wilderness and the sea—the uncrossable sea! No boats, no rafts, nor time to construct them! Hopelessness, fear, despair must have gripped their hearts, and then the miracle came. It was born of the faith of their indomitable leader. A cloud hid them from the view of their enemies. A strong east wind blew all the night; the waters were parted; the bed of the sea was dry; and Israel crossed to another world and saw the returning sea envelop and destroy their pursuers. Israel was safe. Faith had been rewarded, and Moses was vindicated. The impossible had happened. An almost superhuman faith had given birth to an unaccountable and mysterious miracle that was to be the theme of the sermons and warnings of Israel and their prophets for centuries. (CR, Oct. 1952, p. 49.)

16:16, 36 "An omer is the tenth part of an ephah" (dry measurement), which is equal to a bath (liquid measurement), which is about 31.3 liters or 8 1/4 U.S. gallons. Thus, an omer would be about 3.13 liters or according to Dummelow's Commentary, "an omer is a little more than 7 pints. Ten omers make an ephah, which is, roughly, equal to a bushel." (See v. 36.)

16:23 This verse is combined with Exodus 35:3 to form the basis that no fire is to be lit on the Sabbath day. Thus in many orthodox Jewish homes all of the food to be eaten on the Sabbath is cooked previously. Some of the ultra-orthodox also interpret this injunction to apply to electric lights (the electricity might be generated from turbines requiring fire) and the driving of automobiles (which operate on the principle of internal combustion, which requires a spark). Thus in the Mea Shearim section of modern Jerusalem, no vehicular traffic is allowed on the Sabbath. See Part I 33.

16:26 See Part I 32.

16:29 This verse forms the basis of the "Sabbath day's journey" which became the custom among Jewish people. The Bible Dictionary entry indicates "the rabbis, by means of a forced and unnatural interpretation of Ex. 16:29, fixed this at 2,000 cubits, being the distance between the Ark and the people during the march in the wilderness (Josh. 3:4), and also according to tradition, the distance between the tabernacle and the furthest part of the camp." A Sabbath day's journey is thus about 3,000 feet, or 1,000 yards. See Part I 34.

17:9-12 The present Bible does not identify further the man named Hur, who assisted Aaron in supporting the hands of Moses. He is mentioned also in connection with Moses and Aaron in Exodus 24:14, when Moses went on top of the mount and left Aaron and Hur with the people. Because of the intimate association of Hur with Moses and Aaron, Jewish tradition holds that Hur was the husband of Miriam and thus brother-in-law of Moses and Aaron.

Harold B. Lee has likened the role of Aaron and Hur to the responsibility of Church members today:

Here sits today on this stand the man as President of this Church who holds in his hand the rod of the Lord; he is sitting upon the mount, and as long as his hands are upheld by obedience to his direction and his counsel, Israel will prevail against her enemies. But whenever we come to a time when we allow his hands to fall, and we as the Priesthood of the living God fail to uphold his hands, just in that day we may expect our enemies to come upon us and to destroy us. (CR, Apr. 1943, p. 129.)

When Harold B. Lee became a counselor in the First Presidency, he compared the responsibility of the counselors to the modern prophet with the help of Aaron and Hur to Moses:

I think that is the role that President Tanner and I have to fulfill. The hands of President Smith may grow weary. They may tend to droop at times because of his heavy responsibilities; but as we uphold his hands, and as we lead under his direction, by his side, the gates of hell will not prevail against you and against Israel. Your safety and ours depends upon whether or not we follow the ones whom the Lord has placed to preside over his church. He knows whom he wants to preside over his church, and he will make no mistake. The Lord doesn't do things by accident. He has never done anything accidentally. And I think the scientists and all the philosophers in the world have never discovered or learned anything that God didn't already know. His revelations are more powerful, more meaningful, and have more substance than all the secular learning in the world.

Let's keep our eye on the President of the Church and uphold his hands as President Tanner and I will continue to do. (CR, Oct. 1970, p. 153.)

18:11 The Hebrew which has been translated "for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them" more literally reads "in the manner in which they were proved against them."

19:11, 24 Although the Lord instructed Moses to have the people prepare themselves to come into his presence (v. 11), three days later he counseled Moses, "Let not the priests and the people . . . come up unto the Lord" (v. 24). Evidently the people failed to prepare themselves adequately to see God, although they were privileged to hear his voice, as is made clear in Deuteronomy 4:10-12, 33-36; 5:22-26.

20:1-26 For background information on all of the Ten Commandments see The Ten Commandments Today published by Deseret Book Company in 1955.

20:3 The Hebrew background and possible meanings of the phrase "before me" have been listed by Ellis Rasmussen:

The phrase "before me" in the familiar translation "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" is not from the commonly used Hebrew phrase lephanai, but 'al-panai, which is somewhat more definite and distinct, and is used in the sense of "in front of"—either to the exclusion of another as in Deuteronomy 21:16, or in preference; in addition to, as in Job 16:14, ("calamity upon calamity.") It means "in front of" in a dozen other places in the Old Testament. But whereas this prepositional phrase can be used to mean any of several things, the context is clear as explained above: the worshipper of the Lord is not to make or to adopt any other object to worship. (IOT 1:84.)

Many people who feel they are religious might still be guilty of worshipping "other gods" as explained by Spencer W. Kimball:

Yet today we worship the gods of wood and stone and metal. Not always are they in the form of a golden calf, but equally real as objects of protection and worship. They are houses, lands, bank accounts, leisure. They are boats, cars, and luxuries. They are bombs and ships and armaments. We bow down to the god of mammon, the god of luxuries, the god of dissipation. (CR, Oct. 1961, p. 33.)

20:4 The commandment prohibiting the making of graven images should not be interpreted to mean a person could not make statues, figures, images, motifs, and so on, if these objects were not for the purpose of worship. In fact, the Lord later gives instructions concerning the construction of certain symbolic forms which were to be placed in the Ark of the Covenant (Ex. 25:18-22), embroidered upon the "holy garments" of Aaron (Ex. 26:33-34), used to adorn the tabernacle (Ex. 26:1), or placed in the temple (2 Chr. 3:10-13).

The commandment to worship the Lord was given to Adam and Eve soon after they were cast out of the Garden of Eden (Moses 5:1) and is repeated here as part of the Ten Commandments. Joseph Fielding Smith has explained the almost universal breaking of this commandment:

Idolatry goes back to the earliest period of human history. We know that the inhabitants of the earth were destroyed in the flood for their iniquity. When the Lord made a new start, the teachings of Noah and his sons were soon forgotten by the vast majority of mankind. The worship of idols was soon introduced and became so prevalent that the Lord called Abraham and made covenants with him and his children after him, and Israel became a chosen people. The Lord endeavored to keep them clean and righteous, and therefore cleansed the land of its iniquity including idolatry to make room for Israel. However, not all of the nations with this iniquitous practice were eliminated from the promised land, and they became a plague and a temptation to Israel. . . .

In this wonderful age, which we call an age of remarkable enlightenment, idolatry prevails; not only among those we are in the habit of calling heathens, but in every civilized country on the globe. (AGQ 3:121.)

20:5 The Hebrew word translated here as "jealous" could also be translated "zealous." The basic meaning of the Hebrew root is "possessing sensitive and deep feelings." (See also commentary for Ex. 34:14.)

20:7 Several ways in which people violate the commandment "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain" are explained in these statements by President Spencer W. Kimball:

Paul called it filthy communication. In this category of sin could also be foolish talking, profanity, taking the name of the Lord in vain, lewd talking. . . .

As regards profanity or taking the name of the Lord in vain, the names of Deity should be used only in prayer or in dignified address or speech, and certainly never in needless or careless utterance. To use the usual swear words is bad enough—they brand one as crude and careless—but to use profanely any of the names of our Lord is absolutely inexcusable. Should one ever slip in this way he should repent in "sackcloth and ashes," the same as if he had committed any one of the other serious sins. Closely linked to this cursing is being ungodly, irreverent, profane, idolatrous or blasphemous, denying the Holy Ghost, "speaking evil of dignities."

In the category of taking the name of the Lord in vain, we might include the use by unauthorized persons of the name of Deity in performing ordinances. In modern scripture the Lord warned:

"Wherefore, let all men beware how they take my name in their lips—

"For behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authority." (D&C 63:61-62.)

Presumptuous and blasphemous are they who purport to baptize, bless, marry, or perform other sacraments in the name of the Lord while in fact lacking his specific authorization. And no one can obtain God's authority from reading the Bible or from just a desire to serve the Lord, no matter how pure his motives. (MF, pp. 54-55.)

When we go to places of entertainment and mingle among people, we are shocked at the blasphemy that seems to be acceptable among them. . . . Except in prayers and proper sermons, we must not use the name of the Lord. Blasphemy used to be a crime punishable by heavy fines. Profanity is the effort of a feeble brain to express itself forcibly. (CR, Oct. 1974, p. 7.)

20:8-11 President Spencer W. Kimball has given important advice on the commandment to "remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy":

Remember the Lord said: "Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt not do any work." You note here the command is two-fold; it is definite that you shall labor the six days—no place here for the idler or for loitering on the job or for absenteeism. And equally strong is the command that on the Sabbath "thou shalt not do any work." Even in modern times the command has come again through a modern prophet:

"And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart." (D&C 59:13.)

It is not enough to refrain from doing the things which would keep the day from being kept holy, but there are some very definite things that we should do to honor the Sabbath. We are required to go to the house of prayer, we are to offer up our sacraments unto the Most High; we are to fast and pray at the proper times; and we are to stand in holy places; we are to rest and to worship.

By resting is not meant the indolent lounging about the home all day or puttering around in the garden, but a consistent attendance at meetings for the worship of the Lord, drinking at the fountain of knowledge and instruction, enjoying the family and finding uplift in music and song. One good but mistaken man I knew claimed that he could get much more out of a good book on Sunday than he could get in attending a sacrament meeting, saying that the sermons were hardly up to his standards.

But I say we do not go to Sabbath meetings to be entertained or amused; we go there to worship the Lord. It is an individual responsibility, and regardless of what is said from the pulpit, if one wishes to worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, he may do so by attending his meetings, partaking of the sacrament, and contemplating the beauties of the Gospel. If the sacrament meeting is a failure to you, you are the one that has failed. No one can worship for you, you must do your own serving of the Lord. (CR, Apr. 1944, p. 145.)

20:13 The word translated "kill" means "murder" in the Hebrew. George Albert Smith has explained the seriousness of this sin:

Many people in the world do not seem to realize what a terrible crime it is to take human life. When they become angry, for justifiable reasons as they think, they do not hesitate to destroy human life. Sometimes a life is taken in order that money or property may be seized. And yet there is no crime that a human being can commit that will so far alienate him from the blessings of eternal life in the celestial kingdom as murder. No other crime is equal to it. (CR, Oct. 1932, p. 24.)

Joseph F. Smith has taught that only God, the giver of life, can revoke the commandment "Thou shalt not kill."

It is irrevocable unless He revokes it; you and I can't revoke it; we must not transgress it; it is binding upon us. We should not take away the life we cannot restore or give back. It is an eternal, unchangeable law. (CR, Oct. 1912, p. 10.)

20:14 The sin of adultery is one of the most serious on God's list of sins.

This doesn't take much explanation. . . .

All of our children learn from their childhood that they should not commit adultery, which means every kind of adulterous relation. It includes sexual contacts with people who are not husband and wife. . . .

This covers the entire field of sex problems. We train our youth that they should never give their lives to others. They should keep their lives clean and free from immorality until they come to the marriage altar. When they go to the temple, they should be able to greet their new companion, their new spouse, in cleanliness and worthiness.

We teach our married people that the husband and the wife must continue to keep unspotted and free from every kind of immorality and unfaithfulness. The married spouse promises to keep free from unfaithfulness and to keep himself or herself for that spouse and no one else. Men and women are subject to Church courts and to severe penalties of excommunication and to disfellowshipment if they break this important law. Parents are to teach their children that there must be no intimacy in courtship and no unfaithfulness in marriage. . . .

. . . Sexual sins are, next to murder, the most serious of the sins. Sexual immorality is one of the most destructive acts of life for the individual, the family, or the nation. (Spencer W. Kimball, Sao Paulo Area Conference Report, Feb. 1975, p. 4.)

20:15 Spencer W. Kimball has repeatedly warned this generation of the evils of stealing. Following are two of his statements:

We are appalled at the reported dishonesty in many communities in our land; that the loss through shoplifting and allied dishonest tricks runs into billions of dollars in this country alone.

The Lord told Adam's posterity and carved it into the stone plates, "Thou shalt not steal." (Exod. 20:15.) All parents should train their children against this deadly thing which can destroy their characters. Honesty is socially and culturally right. Liars and cheaters are both dishonest and alien to our culture. Dishonesty of all kinds is most reprehensible. "Thou shalt not steal."

We call upon all the . . . members of this church to be honest, full of integrity, pay for what they get, and take only that which they have properly paid for. We must teach our children honor and integrity. (CR, Apr. 1975, p. 6.)

Can anyone truthfully claim that he did not know stealing was wrong? Possessiveness seems to be a basic impulse in humans, but while a child may want other children's toys, he soon comes to know that they are not his. Small thefts grow into larger ones unless the desire is curbed. Parents who "cover up" for their children, excuse them and pay for their mis-appropriations, miss an important opportunity to teach a lesson and thereby do untold damage to their offspring. If the child is required to return the coin or the pencil or the fruit with an appropriate apology, it is likely that his tendencies to steal will be curbed. But if he is lionized and made a little hero, if his misappropriation is made a joke, he is likely to continue in ever-increasing thefts. Most burglars and hold-up men would not have become so if they had been disciplined early. . . .

This urge to take another's property is exhibited in many forms—theft, bribery, driving hard bargains, evasion of income taxes, extortion, covetousness, greedy court actions, misrepresentations which seek to take something for nothing, and so on. Anyone who practices any such form of dishonesty needs to repent, develop a clear conscience, and be free from fetters, chains, worries, and fears. (MF, pp. 50-51.)

20:16 Spencer W. Kimball has listed many warnings in regard to the commandment "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor."

The sin of false witness is committed in many ways. Guilty ones are gossipers and bearers of tales, whisperers, those destitute of truth, liars, quarrelers, deceitful persons. Sometimes these weaknesses are thought of as minor, yet they break hearts, destroy reputations and wreck lives. To such offenders, Paul said: [Quoted Eph. 4:31-32.] . . .

Of course, no one sees himself in this category. It is always the other person who gossips, invents tales, slanders, and is double-tongued. But are not we all guilty to some degree and do not all of us need introspection, self-analysis and then repentance? . . .

With the false witness can be classed the flatterer, the insincere, the liar, the gossip. Of such Isaiah wrote: "Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!" (2 Ne. 15:20.) Such things the Lord hates. [Quoted Prov. 6:16-19.] . . .

Lies and gossip which harm reputations are scattered about by the four winds like the seeds of a ripe dandelion held aloft by a child. Neither the seeds nor the gossip can ever be gathered in. The degree and extent of the harm done by the gossip is inestimable. (MF, pp. 52-54.)

20:17 The first part of the commandment "Thou shalt not covet" is closely associated with the commandment "Thou shalt not commit adultery" as explained by Spencer W. Kimball:

There are those who look with longing eyes, who want and desire and crave these [adulterous] romantic associations. To so desire to possess, to inordinately want and yearn for such, is to covet, and the Lord in powerful terms condemns it: "And again I command thee that thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife; nor seek thy neighbor's life." (D&C 19:25.)

How powerful!

The seventh and tenth commandments are interwoven into one great command that is awesome in its warning.

To covet that which belongs to another is sin, and that sin begins when hearts begin to entertain a romantic interest in anyone else.

There are many tragedies affecting spouses, children, and loved ones. Even though these "affairs" begin near-innocently, like an octopus the tentacles move gradually to strangle. (FPM, pp. 144-45.)

20:23 The word "with" should read "unto," according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

21:2 See the commentary for Deuteronomy 15:1-6 and Part I 35.

21:20-21 These verses should read as follows, according to the Joseph Smith Translation:

"And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall surely be put to death.

"Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, and recover, he shall not be put to death, for he is his servant."

22:26 The term "by that the sun goeth down" can be translated "by sundown."

23:11 See the commentary for Deuteronomy 15:1-6 and Part I 35.

23:16 The Feast of Pentecost was kept fifty days after the Feast of the Passover. (Lev. 23:16.) This feast is known by several other titles: "the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours" (Ex. 23:16) and "the feast of weeks" (Deut. 16:10). For further information on this feast, see "Feasts" in the Bible Dictionary (pp. 672-74) and Part I 42.

23:19 The commandment "Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk" warns the Israelites not to participate in the practice of fertility cults of boiling (seething) baby goats (kids) in the cholesterol milk of the mother goat. This practice had evidently been adopted by fertility cultists in the false belief such food would make them more desirous of sensual pleasures.

Throughout the ages, the religious leaders of orthodox Judaism have interpreted this commandment to mean that meat products and dairy products are not to be eaten together. Among orthodox Jews even today the belief is so strong that often different plates, eating utensils, and table coverings are used for meat products than for dairy products, and different pans are used for their cleansing. Sometimes different refrigerators (and in the case of some public eating places, different kitchens!) are required.

In modern Israel, a public eating place must abide by the restrictions associated with the separation of meat products and dairy products in order to be classified as "kosher" ("proper," from kashrut) to the Jews.

See Part I 19-23.

23:24 The word translated as "quite" means "surely," so the phrase could read "surely break down" their images.

23:27 The word "fear" could have been translated as "terror."

24:1, 9-11 John Taylor taught that Aaron and the seventy elders of Israel who saw God on this occasion must have held the Melchizedek Priesthood:

By what power did Aaron see God? May we not suppose it was by the power of the Melchizedek Priesthood? . . . It, the Melchizedek, holds the keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. [D&C 84.] Moses had these keys; but Aaron also saw God, as well as the seventy Elders of Israel, and the people saw his glory and heard his voice. [Ex. 20:22; Deut. 4:36.]

It would seem that Aaron and the seventy Elders of Israel then had the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the Aaronic was about being combined with it, as we have them now. Moses held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and presided over the whole. Aaron was then in possession of the Melchizedek Priesthood; but another or lesser Priesthood was about to be conferred upon him, which was done soon after. (IP, p. 5.)

The seventy elders of Israel who were given the high honor of seeing God on this occasion (together with Moses, Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu) were evidently in their physical bodies during the manifestation, for the record declares "they saw God, and did eat and drink." (Ex. 24:11.) Other mortal men have seen God while in their physical bodies—e.g., Stephen (Acts 7:55-56) and the brother of Jared (Ether 3:20). Others have beheld Him while they were in the spirit—e.g., John the Revelator (Rev. 1:10) and Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon (D&C 76:11). Those mortals who have been privileged to see God while in their bodies must also have been quickened by the Spirit, because the Lord has declared "No man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God." (D&C 67:11.)

25:5 Most scholars feel the shittim tree was a species of acacia. This tree grows to a diameter of three to four feet, and its wood is close-grained, very hard, and orange-brown in color, making it ideal for cabinet work.

25:31-37 The candlestick or lampstand described here forms the basis of the menorah (seven-branched candelabrum) that became so prominent in Jewish art. See Part I 39.

27:20 Pure olive oil has been recommended by God for several ordinances and holy purposes. The oil from the olive does not become rancid as do oils derived from animal fat; thus olive oil can be preserved for many years, even in hot climates.

Joseph Fielding Smith has extolled some of the virtues of olive oil:

The olive tree and its golden oil were among the greatest treasures of Israel. . . .

No other kind of oil will do in anointing. It is very apparent that the oil from animal flesh would never do, and there is no other kind of oil that is held so sacredly and is more suited to the anointing than the oil of olive; moreover, the Lord has placed his stamp of approval on it. (AGQ 1:152-53.)

28:1, 40-43 The purpose of the selection of Aaron and his sons to function in a special relationship to the other tribes of Israel has been explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

After the children of Israel came out of Egypt and while they were sojourning in the wilderness, Moses received a commandment from the Lord to take Aaron and his sons and ordain them and consecrate them as priests for the people. (Ex. 28.) At that time the males of the entire tribe of Levi were chosen to be the priests instead of the first-born of all the tribes, and Aaron and his sons were given the presidency over the Priesthood thus conferred. Since that time it has been known as the Priesthood of Aaron, including the Levitical Priesthood. The males of the tribe of Levi from one month upwards at the time they were called, numbered 22,000 souls, and they were to be invested with authority from that time forth in Israel. It should be remembered that the Melchizedek Priesthood was withdrawn from the people when Moses was taken away, so that the Aaronic Priesthood remained with the carnal law, or the law of Moses, until the coming of Jesus Christ. In the calling of Aaron and his sons, the Lord made it known that this presiding authority over this Priesthood should be handed down from father to son. This was true also of the Levitical, which is a division of the Aaronic. All who were of the tribe of Levi were entitled to be priests and to officiate in some capacity in this authority. (CHMR 1:63.)

28:30 The Urim and Thummim mentioned here are not the same stones which were used by the Prophet Joseph Smith in translating the Book of Mormon. The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that the Urim and Thummim delivered to him were "given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face." (D&C 17:1; see also Ether 3:23, 28.)

Concerning the Urim and Thummim, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

The history concerning the Urim and Thummim, or "Interpreters" as they are called in the Book of Mormon, is not very clear. Abraham had the Urim and Thummim by which he received revelations of the heavenly bodies, as he has recorded in the Book of Abraham. [Abraham 3:1-4.] What became of these after his death we do not know. Aaron also had the Urim and Thummim, and these were, evidently from the reading of the Bible, handed down among the priests of Aaron from generation to generation. [Exodus 28:30; Leviticus 8:8; Numbers 27:21; Deuteronomy 33:8; 1 Samuel 28:6; Ezra 2:63; Nehemiah 7:65.] The Lord gave to the brother of Jared the Urim and Thummim which he brought with him to this continent. These were separate and distinct from the Urim and Thummim had by Abraham and in Israel in the days of Aaron. (AGQ 1:159.)

30:13 The value of a shekel varied during different periods of history. By the end of the second century B.C.E. it was the equivalent in weight of 218 grains (15.126 grams).

32:12, 14 The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that the people, not the Lord, are in need of repentance. (See Gen. 32:14, Bible Appendix, p. 800.)

32:21-24 When Moses retold this account later, he mentioned that he had to pray to the Lord to spare Aaron's life on this occasion. (See Deut. 9:20.)

32:25 The Hebrew word translated as "naked" can mean "bare," "uncovered" but also means "unruly," "broken loose." It is obvious the Israelites became unruly and riotous under Aaron's brief leadership, and if they also unclothed or bared themselves this would only add to their shame.

32:35 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And the Lord plagued the people, because they worshipped the calf, which Aaron made."

33:14 Joseph F. Smith has provided the following explanation of the meaning of "God's rest":

The ancient prophets speak of "entering into God's rest"; what does it mean? To my mind, it means entering into the knowledge and love of God, having faith in his purpose and in his plan, to such an extent that we know we are right, and that we are not hunting for something else, we are not disturbed by every wind of doctrine, or by the cunning and craftiness of men who lie in wait to deceive. We know of the doctrine that it is of God, and we do not ask any questions of anybody about it; they are welcome to their opinions, to their ideas and to their vagaries. The man who has reached that degree of faith in God that all doubt and fear have been cast from him, he has entered into "God's rest," and he need not fear the vagaries of men, nor their cunning and craftiness, by which they seek to deceive and mislead him from the truth. I pray that we may all enter into God's rest—rest from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest from the religious turmoil of the world; from the cry that is going forth, here and there—lo, here is Christ; lo, there is Christ; lo, he is in the desert, come ye out to meet him. The man who has found God's rest will not be disturbed by these vagaries of men, for the Lord has told him, and does tell us: Go not out to seek them: Go not out to hunt them; for when Christ shall come, he will come with the army of heaven with him in the clouds of glory, and all eyes shall see him. We do not need to be hunting for Christ here or Christ there, or prophets here and prophets there. (GD, p. 58.)

33:15 John Taylor has applied a meaning to the words of Moses: "If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence."

We can only obtain correct knowledge in relation to any of these things from the Almighty. We cannot know how to govern ourselves only by a portion of the wisdom that dwells in the bosom of God; if we do not possess that wisdom we may dispair of ever accomplishing any thing in relation to building up his kingdom. I feel as Moses did when the Lord said "for I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a stiff necked people, lest I consume thee in the way." "And he (Moses) said unto him, if thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence." So say I, if the Lord does not dictate us we can do nothing of ourselves, we cannot accomplish the purposes of God or build up his kingdom on the earth. (JD 10:280.)

33:20 The Joseph Smith Translation explains that "no sinful man" can see the face of God and live, but the experience of Moses in these chapters makes it clear that righteous men can see and have seen God. (See Ex. 33:20, Bible Appendix, p. 800.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has provided the following explanation of possible errors in the Bible:

You quote from Exodus 33:20, "And he said, thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live." Yet in the same chapter, Verse 11, it reads thus: "And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend."

It is to be hoped that you are aware that the Bible has come down to us through many translations and that it has been copied many times; moreover that there is no original manuscript of any of the books of the Bible. The scribes in the beginning and through the years had to write every word by hand. Moreover, the original manuscripts were not written as we write today with separate words but in uncials, that is to say, the words ran together in this fashion sothatitbecameverydifficultto discover the correct meaning, and errors crept in.

No Bible student today believes that the Bible has come down to us in its perfect and original appearance in the manuscripts. Scribes left out words and phrases, just as we do at times in typing, missing one whole line and thus changing the meaning. Moreover, the scribes added or interpreted according to their own opinions at times. These things are quite generally understood. Therefore we find errors and contradictions in the Bible. (AGQ 2:161-62.)

33:22-23 Moses did not see the face of God on this occasion, but he saw God's face at other times as indicated in the Joseph Smith Translation (Ex. 33:23) and Moses 1:2. Concerning the experiences of Moses with the Lord, Ellis Rasmussen has written:

Encouraged, and having already spoken face-to-face with the Lord "as a man speaketh with his friend," (verse 11), Moses requested the supreme privilege, saying to the Lord: "Show me thy glory!" It was denied him, with a brief reminder, "No man shall see me and live." Moses should not have made such a request, as he had once before received the plain explanation: "No man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth." He had, on that occasion, observed that "now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." (Moses 1:5, 11.) This, then, was the reason no man has seen God: Man, meaning mortal, normal, natural man, must be "transfigured" or otherwise specially prepared through the Priesthood of God to be able to behold Him in His glory. (See D&C 84:19-24.) However, a certain privilege was accorded Moses at the time here under consideration (Exodus 33:21-23), and in "the natural man" he was allowed to see the Lord's departure. (IOT 1:94.)

34:1-2 Unfortunately these two verses in the King James Version do not provide a full account of the second "tables of stone" provided to Moses by the Lord. The Joseph Smith Translation provides the additional important information:

(See Ex. 34:1-2, Bible Appendix, p. 800.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has explained some of the results of these changes in the laws to the children of Israel:

If Israel had remained faithful, they would have had all the blessings and privileges of the Melchizedek Priesthood, but instead they were confined to the scope of the blessings of the Aaronic Priesthood and also became subject to the measures of the Law of Moses, which contained many temporal laws, some of which were severe and drastic in their nature. [Mosiah 13:27-31.] This condition continued until the resurrection of Jesus Christ, when this carnal law was fulfilled and was replaced by the fulness of the gospel. [Gal. 3:19-24; 3 Ne. 9:15-22; 12:18; 15:1-10.] The Aaronic Priesthood did not lose the right to the ministering of angels in the days of restoration when Jesus Christ came to fulfil the law, and this power continues in the Church today, which is fully attested in the words of John. (DS 3:84.)

34:4 The statement that "he [Moses, according to the Joseph Smith Translation] hewed two tables of stone like unto the first" should not be interpreted to mean the written message on the second tablets was identical to that recorded on the stones which Moses broke. Evidently the second tables of stone were "like unto the first" in the sense they were both hewed out of stone and the writing of the Lord appeared on both.

The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that the contents of the second tablets differed greatly from the contents of the first. (See Ex. 34:1-2, Bible Appendix, p. 800.)

34:7 Something has been left out at the end of this verse and the italicized word "generation" has been added in an attempt to complete the thought. When the statement was first given by the Lord in Exodus 20:5, the concluding portion read "generation of them that hate me."

Joseph F. Smith has explained the justice of this law as stated in its complete form:

Infidels will say to you: "How unjust, how unmerciful, how un-Godlike it is to visit the iniquities of the parents upon the children to the third and fourth generations of them that hate God." How do you see it? This way; and it is strictly in accordance with God's law. The infidel will impart infidelity to his children if he can. The whoremonger will not raise a pure, righteous posterity. He will impart seeds of disease and misery, if not of death and destruction, upon his offspring, which will continue upon his children and descend to his children's children to the third and fourth generation. It is perfectly natural that the children should inherit from their fathers, and if they sow the seeds of corruption, crime and loathsome disease, their children will reap the fruits thereof. Not in accordance with God's wishes for His wish is that men will not sin and therefore will not transmit the consequences of their sin to their children, but that they will keep His commandments, and be free from sin and from entailing the effects of sin upon their offspring; but inasmuch as men will not hearken unto the Lord, but will become a law unto themselves, and will commit sin they will justly reap the consequences of their own iniquity, and will naturally impart its fruits to their children to the third and fourth generation. The laws of nature are the laws of God, who is just; it is not God that inflicts these penalties, they are the effects of disobedience to His law. The results of men's own acts follow them. (CR, Oct. 1912, p. 9.)

34:14 The first word translated "Jealous" in this verse should really be "Jehovah" according to the Joseph Smith Translation. The second word translated "jealous" here is from a Hebrew word (qanah) with a Semitic root meaning "to become very red" through an emotional response. As indicated in the commentary for Exodus 20:5, the word could have been translated "zealous." The basic idea is that God is not casual or nonchalant about us and our response to his teachings; as a loving and concerned parent, he is quickly and deeply responsive to our actions and attitudes.

34:21 See Part I 32.

34:26 See the commentary for Exodus 23:19 and Part I 23.

34:28 The fact that Moses did not drink water nor eat during his forty days and nights on the mount has prompted some to ask whether or not abstaining from water is part of a proper fast. The following statement provides thoughts on this matter:

The question has been asked as to whether or not it is expected that a person, when fasting, shall abstain from drinking water. In answer thereto, the following statement is made with the approval of the First Presidency:

When fasting, members of the Church are advised to abstain from two meals each Fast Day and to contribute as a donation the amount saved thereby for the support of the worthy poor; also by prayer in connection with fasting to develop spiritual power. No direct instruction is given in the Doctrine and Covenants regarding abstaining from water while fasting. In the Bible there are three references in connection with fasting and abstaining from water. These are: Exodus 34:28 and Deuteronomy 9:9-18, where it states that Moses "did neither eat bread nor drink water"; and Esther 4:16, where Esther asked the Jews to fast for her and to "neither eat nor drink."

The spirit of fasting is the main thing to encourage. Too much stress should not be laid on technical details, but the self denial of food, striving for spiritual strength and donating for the benefit of the poor should constantly be in mind." (Heber J. Grant, Anthony W. Ivins, MFP 5:307-8.)

34:29-30 The consonants in the Hebrew word for shone (KRN) are the same as those for horned. When Jerome translated the Vulgate (a translation from the Hebrew into the Latin), he carried across from the Hebrew the verb qaran the idea that the face of Moses was horned when he came off the mount. Thus Michelangelo included horns on this famous statue of Moses.

Other scriptural accounts indicate that spokesmen for God can indeed radiate light. Acts 2:3 indicates that "cloven tongues like as of fire . . . sat upon each of them [the apostles]." Mosiah 13:5 states that when the prophet Abinadi testified before king Noah "the Spirit of the Lord was upon him; and his face shone with exceeding luster, even as Moses' did while in the mount of Sinai, while speaking with the Lord." In this instance the Book of Mormon once again proves to be an inspired commentary and witness for the Bible.

34:35 The final word, "him," should read "the Lord" according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

35:2 See Part I 32.

35:3 See Part I 33.

35:5 Inasmuch as there are other types of offerings unto the Lord, including the offering of animal sacrifices on altars, the word translated "offering" here might also be read as "contribution."

35:25 Brigham Young applied the teachings of this verse to the people of his day:

If, instead of our wives and daughters passing their hours in idleness, folding their hands, and rocking themselves in their easy chairs, they would spin a little wool, and a little cotton from our Dixie, or that grown in their own gardens and fields, and make some good warm clothing for the men and boys, and some linsey frocks for the women and girls, they could with propriety be called wise women in Israel. (JD 9:190.)

38:21 The term "service of the Levites" refers to some of the functions of the descendants of Levi under the direction of the descendants of Aaron. John Taylor has provided the following explanation of some of these functions:

There were in the days of Moses a tribe of the children of Israel set apart to officiate in some of the lesser duties of the Aaronic priesthood, and their office was called the Levitical priesthood.

Aaron and his sons held the Aaronic priesthood, and the Levites were given unto them to minister unto them to keep his charge, the charge of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle, keep the instruments of the tabernacle, and the charge of the children of Israel. . . . They seemed to have been an appendage to the Aaronic priesthood to assist in the service of the tabernacle and other duties. Aaron and his male descendants were selected for the priesthood, the other Levites as assistants, or an appendage.

From the above it would seem—

First.—That the Levites were selected in the place of the firstborn whom the Lord called his own.

Second.—That they were given to Aaron to assist him in the minor or lesser duties of the priesthood; but that Aaron and his sons officiated in the leading offices of the priesthood, and not the Levites.

Third.—That there was a tithing paid to them by the whole house of Israel for their sustenance.

Fourth.—That they paid a tithe of this to Aaron.

Fifth.—That on assuming the higher duties of the priesthood of Aaron, the judgments of God overtook them.

Sixth.—That their priesthood was only an appendage to the Aaronic priesthood, and not that priesthood itself as held by Aaron and his sons. (GK, p. 158.)

40:34-38 The glory of the Lord so filled the tabernacle in ancient Israel that even Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation.

The glory of the Lord also filled the first house of the Lord (Kirtland Temple) built in this dispensation, as recorded by Joseph Smith:

Brother George A. Smith arose and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed at eleven p.m. (HC 2:428.)
