Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

LEVITICUS

See "Leviticus" in the Bible Dictionary, page 724.

2:1 The term "meat offering" in the King James Version would be more understandable today if translated "meal offering." The Hebrew word used is minhah, meaning "a gift."

2:2-3 Joseph Smith has commented on these verses:

It is a very prevalent opinion that the sacrifices which were offered were entirely consumed. This was not the case; . . . you will observe that the priests took a part as a memorial and offered it up before the Lord, while the remainder was kept for the maintenance of the priests; so that the offerings and sacrifices are not all consumed upon the altar—but the blood is sprinkled, and the fat and certain other portions are consumed. (HC 4:211.)

5:5 The Lord here counsels that the sinner should confess his sin. Spencer W. Kimball has provided the following suggestions concerning the confession of sin.

The confession of sin is an important element in repentance. Many offenders have seemed to feel that a few prayers to the Lord were sufficient and they have thus justified themselves in hiding their sins. . . . [Quoted Prov. 28:13; D&C 58:43.] . . .

Especially grave errors such as sexual sins shall be confessed to the bishop as well as to the Lord. There are two remissions that one might wish to have; first, the forgiveness from the Lord, and second, the forgiveness of the Lord's church through its leaders. (FPM, pp. 181-82.)

In regard to the confession of lesser sins, Brigham Young has counseled:

If you have committed a sin that no other person on the earth knows of, and which harms no other one, you have done a wrong and sinned against your God, but keep that within your own bosom, and seek to God and confess there, and get pardon for your sin.

If children have sinned against their parents, or husbands against their wives, or wives against their husbands, let them confess their faults one to another and forgive each other, and there let the confession stop; and then let them ask pardon from their God. Confess your sins to whoever you have sinned against, and let it stop there. If you have committed a sin against the community, confess to them. If you have sinned in your family, confess there. Confess your sins, iniquities, and follies, where that confession belongs. (JD 4:79.)

5:6 The word translated "trespass" in the King James Version usually comes from a Hebrew word meaning "guilt" or another word meaning "unfaithful" or "treacherous." In contrast, the English word sin is usually the translation of a Hebrew word meaning "miss the mark or way," "go wrong."

Some Bible translations consistently use the term guilt offering in lieu of the King James trespass offering.

8:33 The term "be at an end" means "are fulfilled."

10:1-11 It is not clear exactly what caused the death of Nadab and Abihu. Some biblical scholars have suggested that the insertion at this point (vs. 8-11) of instructions against strong drink might indicate that intoxication might have been involved.

10:1 The Lord has consistently counseled against the use of liquor and strong drinks as indicated in the following biblical references: Leviticus 10:9; Numbers 6:3; Judges 13:4, 14; Proverbs 20:1; 23:21; Ecclesiastes 10:17; Isaiah 5:22; 1 Corinthians 6:10; Galatians 5:21; Ephesians 5:18; 1 Timothy 3:3.

In our own time the Lord has said: "Inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good . . . strong drinks are not for the belly." (D&C 89:5, 7.)

Spencer W. Kimball has made the following observations concerning the drinking of alcoholic beverages:

Drinking curses all whom it touches—the seller and the buyer and the consumer. It brings deprivation and sorrow to numerous innocent ones. It is associated with graft, immorality, gambling, fraud, gangsterism, and most other vices. In its wake come wasted money, deprived families, deteriorated bodies, reduced minds, numerous accidents. It has everything against it, nothing for it, yet states sell it and receive revenue from it, and it has become an accepted "normal" part of modern life.

Using this tool of Satan is especially a sin to all Latter-day Saints who know the law of the Word of Wisdom. Given as a Word of Wisdom and not by commandment in 1833, it was declared a commandment in 1851 by a prophet of God. It should be considered in that light and, if violated, repented of as with other sins of major seriousness. The poison, bad enough itself, is secondary to the disobedience of the commands of God. (MF, pp. 55-56.)

10:13 The term "thy due" might have been translated "thy portion."

10:20 The idea of the Hebrew term translated here as "content" is that "it was good in his eyes."

11:1-8 See Part I 19. These verses form the basis of the belief of Jewish people that only the flesh of certain animals should be considered "clean" and consumed. Pork products are not consumed by orthodox Jews because the pig does not "chew the cud" although its foot is parted.

11:8 See Part I 30. Also, see the commentaries for Leviticus 21:11 and Deuteronomy 21:22-23.

11:9-10 See Part I 20. According to Jewish belief and custom, living things from the sea which do not have scales are not to be consumed. Thus, such items as snails, clams, and shrimp would be prohibited.

11:13-21 See Part I 22. The blood must be drained from the meat, before the meat can be consumed, according to the beliefs of orthodox Jews today. These verses form the basis of that belief, together with the scriptures which indicate that blood and blood products are not to be consumed. (See also the commentary for Lev. 17:10-16.)

12-13 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the use of the word leprosy in these chapters:

These chapters concern a variety of diseases of the skin; any blemishes, mildew, and mould in cloth or clothing; and even the scaling or crumbling of mortar between the stones of a house, all called by the English word "leprosy." The Hebrew word used denotes a "stroke" or "being stricken." We still use some expressions like that for certain ills or misfortunes.

Note that some forms of such "leprosy" could be cleansed and the person who had it in some cases could become "clean" and acceptable in society again. Such ills as psoriasis may well have been involved. Leprosy proper ("Hansen's Disease") certainly was sometimes involved, and for it there was no cure unless by a miracle.

It is possible that these chapters give us a sample of information provided by revelation which would have helped prevent epidemics of disease from which otherwise they would have had no protection. (IOT 1:103.)

12:1-8 The requirement of a "sin offering" by a woman upon the birth of her child should not be interpreted that childbearing itself was a sin. The cleansing or purification procedures may have had something to do with the health and general welfare of the mother. Also it is possible the offering contained some symbolism referring back to the fall of man and woman or anticipating the atonement from the fall.

Verse 8 indicates if the parents are too poor to provide a lamb for the offering they could bring two turtledoves (or pigeons) instead. It is interesting to note that when Mary the mother of Jesus Christ came to Jerusalem for her "purification according to the law of Moses" she offered two young pigeons. (Luke 2:22-24.)

12:3 This verse should read "And in the eighth day, the man child shall be circumcised," according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

12:6-8 Joseph Fielding Smith has referred to the dove as an "emblem of purity" as used in sacrifice:

The dove as an emblem of purity was offered in sacrifice in ancient Israel, and perhaps before, by which means certain sins were cleansed. Chief among these was the purifying of mothers after the birth of their children. (AGQ 2:78.)

16:26 The word scapegoat in modern usage means "a person or thing bearing the blame for others." In the Bible the term is usually understood to refer to "a goat upon whose head are symbolically placed the sins of the people after which he is sent into the wilderness." The Hebrew word azazel translated as "scape" has to do with demons or the adversary of the Righteous One.

16:29-34 The day of atonement (Yom Kippur) is still observed by Jews throughout the world, although animal sacrifice has not been part of the observance since the destruction of the temple in A.D. 70.

The Lord indicated that the day of atonement should be "in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month" according to the calendar then in use. Changes in the Jewish calendar have placed Yom Kippur near Rosh Hashanah (literally "head of the year") or New Year's Day, which usually occurs in September or October. See Part I 41.

17:10-16 The ritual use of blood at the altar was in sprinkling the worshipper after the sacrifice; evidently this symbolism referred to the atonement which should be made in the future, requiring the shedding of blood.

In these verses, the Lord specifically forbade the eating or drinking of blood; this advice is still good today. Many diseases and ailments can be transmitted through eating or drinking blood.

Orthodox Jews are so careful in the observance of prohibitions concerning blood they will only eat the flesh of clean animals killed in such a way that as much blood as possible is withdrawn from the meat.

Some other religious groups, including Jehovah's Witnesses, interpret the prohibition to include the placing of the blood of one person into the body of another in any manner whatsoever; such groups do not believe in, nor subscribe to, blood transfusions.

"Jehovah's Witnesses see no difference between being fed blood through the mouth or nose or intravenously . . . The Witnesses would risk 'temporary' death rather than accept a blood transfusion and incur God's disapproval." (Religions of America, ed. Leo Rosten, p. 101.)

See also Part I 21-22.

17:11 Joseph Fielding Smith has explained why it is necessary for blood to be shed in order for a remission of sins to be accomplished:

Here is a clear statement that the remission of sins cannot come except by the shedding of blood. In ancient times sacrifices were made by the shedding of the blood of clean animals. This shedding of blood was twofold in its application. It pointed forward to the great sacrifice that was to be made by our Redeemer, and it also became a purifying agency which helped to remind Israel of sin and how to overcome them.

Since it was by the creation of blood that mortality came, it is by the sacrifice of blood that the redemption from death was accomplished, and all creatures freed from Satan's grasp. In no other way could the sacrifice for redemption of the world from death be accomplished. Blood being the agent of mortality, it had to be returned to Satan and to death, whence it came. . . .

No doubt Satan felt that he had accomplished his purpose in bringing death, and therefore the entire posterity of Adam would become subject unto him. The Beloved Son of God was chosen before the foundation of the world to redeem mankind. It had to be a redemption by the shedding of blood; also it had to be by a God, who had power over death, one who could lay down his body by the shedding of his blood, and then take his body up again by the inherent power which was in him. Jesus obtained his blood from his mother Mary; he obtained his power over death from his Father. Therefore he could and did voluntarily surrender himself to his enemies who crucified him by the shedding of his blood. When he arose from the tomb, he was free from blood, and his body had become subject to eternal law henceforth and forever. (AGQ 3:102-4.)

19:1-37 The terms "I am the Lord" or "I am the Lord your God" appear at least sixteen times in this one chapter. The phrase not only indicates that the teachings come directly from God (rather than fashioned from the philosophies of man) but also places a "seal of approval" on these admonitions.

19:3 The Hebrew word yareh translated here as "fear" also means "revere." In fact, this same Hebrew word is translated as "reverence" in verse 30 of this chapter. To "fear" mother, father, and God is to revere them or to stand in awe or reverence of them; the word in this context does not mean you should dread them, nor feel great anxiety or apprehension when near them.

19:16 The counsel not to "go up and down as a talebearer" applies also in this day, as indicated by Joseph F. Smith:

The "Mormon" creed: "Mind your own business," is a good motto for young people to adopt who wish to succeed, and who wish to make the best use of their time and lives. And when I say young people, it includes as well aged and middle aged men and women.

Let it be remembered that nothing is quite so contemptible as idle gossip. . . .

It is so very much better for a person to strive to develop himself by observing all the good points he can find in others, than to strangle the growth of his better self by cherishing a fault-finding, sullen, and intermeddling spirit. The scriptures support this thought. The great Psalmist says in substance in the fifteenth psalm: "He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbor, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbor, shall abide in the tabernacle of the Lord, and never be moved." To abide in the tabernacle of the Lord is to enjoy his Holy Spirit. Now, he that taketh up a reproach against his neighbor is in great danger of losing the Spirit of the Lord. . . .

The meddler, the gossip, the fault-finder . . . soon ruin their own capacity for observing the better side of human nature; and, not finding it in others, search in vain for its influence in their own souls. (GD, pp. 111-13.)

19:17-18 Many persons wrongfully assume that the commandment "love thy neighbour as thyself" comes only from the New Testament, but here it appears in the Old Testament, and it is also in the writings of many other religious groups. Verse 34 expounds the principle of loving the stranger "as thyself."

The Lord also counsels not to "hate thy brother in thine heart." In other words, do not cherish or harbor hate, even when righteous rebuke is necessary.

19:26 See the commentary for Leviticus 17:10-16 and Part I 21.

19:27 See Part I 24, 25. Certain groups within orthodox Judaism today have interpreted this and similar verses to mean that the razor should not touch the face; thus, such believers grow beards. One of the vows of the Nazarite is that "there shall no razor come upon" the head. (See Num. 6:5; Judg. 13:5; 16:17; 1 Sam. 1:11.)

The statement "Ye shall not round the corners of your head" has been interpreted by some Jewish groups to mean that the hair in front of the earlobes should not be cut. Such believers thus grow ringlets or ear locks. Other scriptures used to substantiate this belief are Leviticus 21:5 and Ezekiel 44:20.

19:34 Latter-day Saints have also been counseled by Joseph F. Smith to treat the stranger "as one born among you":

I sometimes hear the Latter-day Saints instructed about the way they should treat strangers; they are told to extend to all men due respect and kindness. You would not be a Latter-day Saint if you did not; you would not manifest the Spirit of the Gospel did you not show them due kindness, and respect; but remember, at the same time, that you do not compromise yourselves. In trying to be kind and courteous to others, we sometimes place ourselves in their power, and as sure as we do, bad men will take advantage of it. (JD 11:313.)

21:1-4 See Part I 30.

21:5 See Part I 24, 25.

21:11 The first clause of this verse reads in the Joseph Smith Translation: "Neither shall he go in to touch any dead body." (Italics added.) See Part I 30.

21:13-15 The Lord's instruction that a priest should "take a wife" was later taught by Paul to include elders and bishops. (Titus 1:5-7.) Evidently the Lord has never required celibacy as a prerequisite to receiving the priesthood.

22:4-7 See commentary for Leviticus 21:11 and Part I 30.

22:9 The Joseph Smith Translation adds a "not" at a critical point in this verse: "They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for it, and die; therefore, if they profane not mine ordinances, I the Lord will sanctify them." (Italics added.)

23:1-44 The major feasts and sacred seasons discussed in this chapter are the Sabbath (v. 6), Passover and Unleavened Bread (vs. 5-14), Feast of Weeks or Pentecost (vs. 15-22), Feast of Trumpets (vs. 23-25), the Day of Atonement or Yom Kippur (vs. 26-32), and Feast of Booths or Tabernacles (vs. 33-43).

For further information on the Jewish feasts, see "Feasts" in the Bible Dictionary, pp. 672-74. Also, see Part I 40-45.

23:7-8, 21 See Part I 32.

23:10-14 See Part I 40.

23:16 See Part I 42.

23:26-32 The Jewish people observe their Sabbath from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday. Verse 32 forms the basis of that belief. See also Part I 31.

23:34 See commentary for 1 Kings 8:54-66 and Part I 43.

25:8-16, 23-55 The word jubile (jubilee) appears only twenty-two times in the Bible, and twenty-one of those usages occur in Leviticus chapters 25 and 27. The word is defined or explained in 25:8-11—it is a sabbath of sabbatical years plus one (that is 7 x 7 plus one), or fifty years. See Part I 36.

25:20-22 See commentary for Deuteronomy 15:1-6 and Part I 35.

26:3-46 Spencer W. Kimball has offered several observations on these verses:

The Lord uses the weather sometimes to discipline his people for the violation of his laws. He said to the children of Israel: [Quoted Lev. 26:3-6.]

With the great worry and suffering in the East and threats of drouth here in the West and elsewhere, we asked the people to join in a solemn prayer circle for moisture where needed. Quite immediately our prayers were answered, and we were grateful beyond expression. We are still in need and hope that the Lord may see fit to answer our continued prayers in this matter.

From all around the world we have received letters indicating a general response to the suggestion. From Brisbane, Australia, comes this:

"We received your cable inviting the Saints in Brisbane to join you and the world in a day of fasting and prayer. We share your love and concern for all of our Heavenly Father's children. . . ."

Perhaps the day has come when we should take stock of ourselves and see if we are worthy to ask or if we have been breaking the commandments, making ourselves unworthy of receiving the blessings.

The Lord gave strict commandments: "Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the Lord." (Lev. 19:30.)

Innumerous times we have quoted this, asking our people not to profane the Sabbath; and yet we see numerous cars lined up at merchandise stores on the Sabbath day, and places of amusement crowded, and we wonder.

Numerous times have we quoted: [Ex. 20:8-11.]

But today numerous of the people of this land spend the Sabbath working, devoting the day to the beaches, to entertainment, to shows, to their weekly purchases. The Lord makes definite promises. He says:

"Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit." (Lev. 26:4.)

God does what he promises, and many of us continue to defile the Sabbath day. He then continues:

"And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely." (Lev. 26:5.)

Those promises are dependable. The Lord says further: [Quoted Lev. 26:12-17, 19-20.]

The Lord goes further and says:

"I will . . . destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your high ways shall be desolate." (Lev. 26:22.)

Can you think how the highways could be made desolate? When fuel and power are limited, when there is none to use, when men will walk instead of ride?

Have you ever thought, my good folks, that the matter of peace is in the hands of the Lord who says:

"And I will bring a sword upon you. . ." (Lev. 26:25.)

Would that be difficult? Do you read the papers? Are you acquainted with the hatreds in the world? What guarantee have you for permanent peace?

". . . and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy." (Lev. 26:25.)

Are there enemies who could and would afflict us? Have you thought of that?

"And I will make your cities waste," he says, "and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation. . . .

"Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

"As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest [when it could] in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it." (Lev. 26:31, 34-35.)

Those are difficult and very serious situations, but they are possible.

And the Lord concludes:

"These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the Lord made between him and the children of Israel in Mount Sinai by the hand of Moses." (Lev. 26:46.)

This applies to you and me. (E, May 1977, pp. 4-5.)

26:3, 6, 13 The price of peace is righteousness, according to Spencer W. Kimball:

Peace is obtainable, but what is the price of peace? Let the Lord himself answer: [Quoted Lev. 26:3-12.]

In a word, then, the foundation for peace is righteousness.

The efforts of peace conferences, and the prayers of suffering humanity, may bring an armistice of uncertain length, but peace with totality and permanence can come only when men repent and turn to the Lord. (CR, Oct. 1945, pp. 121-22.)

26:4-46 Spencer W. Kimball has reviewed the promises of the Lord as revealed in this significant chapter:

Will we ever turn wholly to God? Fear envelops the world which could be at ease and peace. In God is protection, safety, peace. He has said, "I will fight your battles." But his commitment is on condition of our faithfulness. He promised to the children of Israel:

"I will give you rain in due season,"

The land shall yield her increase and trees their fruit.

Granaries and barns will bulge in seed time and harvest.

Ye shall eat your bread in abundance.

Ye shall dwell in your land safely and none shall make you afraid.

Neither shall the sword go through your land.

And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight: . . . (See Leviticus 26:4-6, 8.)

But if you fail to serve me:

The land will be barren, (perhaps radioactive or dry from drought.)

The trees will be without fruit and the fields without verdure.

There will be rationing and a scarcity of food and hunger sore.

No traffic will jam your desolate highways.

Famine will stalk rudely through your doors and the ogre cannibalism will rob you of your children and your remaining virtues.

There will be pestilence uncontrollable.

Your dead bodies will be piled upon the materialistic things you sought so hard to accumulate and save.

I will give no protection against enemies.

They that hate you shall reign over you.

There will be faintness of heart "and the sound of a shaken leaf" shall chase you into flight and you will fall when none pursueth.

Your power—your supremacy—your price in superiority—will be broken.

Your heaven shall be as iron and your earth as brass. Heaven will not hear your pleadings nor earth bring forth her harvest.

Your strength will be spent in vain as you plow and plant and cultivate.

Your cities will be shambles, your churches in ruins.

Your enemies will be astonished at the barrenness, sterility, desolation of the land they had been told was so choice, so beautiful, so fruitful.

Then shall the land enjoy her Sabbaths under compulsion.

And ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.

And your people will be scattered among the nations as slaves and bondsmen. You will pay tribute and bondage and fetters shall bind you. (See Ibid., 26:14-43.)

What a bleak prediction! Yet "These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the Lord made between him and the children of Israel in Mt. Sinai by the hand of Moses." (Ibid., 26:46.) The Israelites failed to heed the warning. They ignored the prophets. They suffered the fulfillment of every dire prophecy.

Do we twentieth century people have reason to think that we can be immune from the same tragic consequences when we ignore the same divine laws? (CR, Oct. 1961, pp. 32-33.)

27:16-25 See the commentary for Leviticus 25:8-16, 23-55 and Part I 36.
