Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

NUMBERS

See "Numbers" in the Bible Dictionary, page 739.

1:20-36 The number of men listed here as twenty years old and over total 603,550, excluding the Levites who were exempt from going to war. (This was a military census to determine the number of possible soldiers.) When children and women are added, the total number probably exceeded three million. Some biblical scholars feel this number is much too large and was purposely inflated by later historians. Other scholars claim the figure is possible and likely accurate in view of the numbers who originally went into Egypt (see Gen. 46:26-27 and the commentary) and the length of time spent there.

The descendants of Judah were most numerous, followed closely by the descendants of Joseph, consisting of the combined totals of Manasseh and Ephraim.

3:5-51 Joseph Fielding Smith has explained some of the functions of the sons of Levi as outlined in this chapter:

It was the duty of the Levites to take care of [the tabernacle] and keep it in order. They took it apart, carried it and all that pertained to it from place to place as they journeyed in the wilderness, and then set it up again when a new camp was made.

These responsibilities . . . were divided among the descendants of the three sons of Levi, son of Jacob. They were Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. The sons of Gershon had charge of [quoted Num. 3:25-26.] . . .

In a general way the duties and responsibilities of the tabernacle, and of the preparations for sacrifices, were assigned to the descendants of the three sons of Levi. Wagons and oxen were provided for the Gershonites and the Merarites, but the sons of Kohath, "Because the service of the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their shoulders" their burdens—they had no wagons. [Num. 7:3-9.] Not only were the Levites appointed to take care of the tabernacle and all that pertained to it, but other similar duties were assigned to them. They could offer sacrifice, although it was Aaron's place and that of his sons to hold the keys of this ministry. . . .

According to this assignment and the instructions given to Moses, the priests (i.e. sons of Aaron) and Levites officiated from the day of their appointment to the days of the coming of Jesus Christ. (DS 3:113-14.)

3:12, 39-51 The Lord appointed the male descendants of Levi to perform religious services in place of the firstborn sons of the other tribes of Israel. When the actual census of the Levites and the first-born sons was completed, it was noted that there was an excess of 273 firstborn sons (22,273 as compared with 22,000). The Lord provided that these could be redeemed through a payment of 1,365 shekels, which is equivalent to 5 shekels per firstborn son.

3:40-45 Joseph Fielding Smith has offered the following commentary on these verses:

When the Lord took Moses and the Higher Priesthood out of Israel, he established the Aaronic Priesthood with Israel. And the Lord took the males of the tribe of Levi to be the priests to minister for the people. And the Lord said to Moses: [Quoted Num. 3:40-41; 44-45.] From that time forth until the coming of our Lord, the Melchizedek Priesthood, which includes the Patriarchal Priesthood, was taken from the tribes of Israel, the one exception being that the prophets received that Priesthood, but always by special ordination. It was not given generally among the tribes as it is today. (CHMR 2:472.)

4:3, 47 The principle contained in the counsel of the Lord that a man should be thirty years of age before beginning his ministry has been followed in other dispensations as indicated by Joseph Fielding Smith:

It is true that the Lord revealed to Moses that the priests of Aaron and Levi were to be men thirty years of age. This custom was followed in Israel down to the days of Paul. Therefore, it was in keeping with the law that Paul instructed Timothy that a deacon should have a wife, for a man thirty years of age holding the priesthood should be married. It was in harmony with this law given to Moses, that John the Baptist waited until he was thirty years of age before entering the ministry, and the same is true of the ministry of our Savior. (AGQ 2:10.)

6:1-21 A Nazarite (meaning "separate" or "set apart") could be either male or female and could devote all or part of his or her life to the Lord. Samson, Samuel, and John the Baptist were Nazarites, and Paul evidently took some of their vows on occasion. (See Acts 18:18.)

Jesus Christ was not a Nazarite. Rather, he was known as a Nazarene, which term had reference to his boyhood hometown, Nazareth.

8:1-5 See commentary for Exodus 25:31-37 and Part I 39.

9:6-8 Moses sets the example for obtaining answers to religious questions: Ask the Lord. The Lord provides the answer for his prophet as he has promised he would do for all who ask in faith. (See James 1:5-6.)

10:29-36 Hobab, the father-in-law of Moses, accompanied the Israelites to the promised land and, as is evident from later scriptures, they (as Kenites) obtained an inheritance there. (As examples, see Judg. 1:16; 4:11; 1 Sam. 15:6; 2 Kgs. 10:15; 1 Chr. 2:55.)

The Druze people of the Near East claim to be descendants of the father-in-law of Moses and have largely kept themselves separate from the people among whom they live. Some scholars have speculated that the Druze might be descendants of Hobab.

11:29 Brigham Young taught that anyone who is worthy and willing to receive the Spirit of God may be filled with the spirit of prophecy and thus might be called a prophet.

I am like Moses when a messenger came to him saying, "The people are prophesying in their tents." Said Moses, Well, what of that? I would to God that the Lord's people were all prophets! I would to God that they all had revelation! When they receive revelation from heaven the story is told, they know for themselves.

Now, my friends, . . . how do you know anything? Can you be deceived by the eye? You can; you have proved this; you all know that there are men who can deceive the sight of the eye, no matter how closely you observe their movements. Can you be deceived in hearing? Yes; you may hear sounds but not understand their import or whence they come. Can you be deceived by the touch of the finger? You can. The nervous system will not detect everything. What will? The revelations of the Lord Jesus Christ, the spirit of truth will detect everything, and enable all who possess it to understand truth from error, light from darkness, the things of God from the things not of God. It is the only thing that will enable us to understand the Gospel of the Son of God, the will of God, and how we can be saved. Follow it, and it will lead to God, the fountain of light, where the gate will be open, and the mind will be enlightened so that we shall see, know and understand things as they are. (JD 13:336.)

13:16 The name Oshea means "save"; Jehoshua (or Joshua) means "Jehovah is salvation." The name Jesus is derived from this same Hebrew root.

15:38-39 J. R. Dummelow offers the following commentary on the "fringes in the borders of their garments."

The original form of these is uncertain. Judging from later times, they would be, not ornamental festoons running along the edge of the garment, but tassels attached to each of its four corners by a thread of blue. A religious importance was attached to the wearing of these tassels. They were a visible reminder to the Jews of their obligation to keep the commandments of Jehovah (v. 39). . . . The Jews attached an ever-increasing importance to these symbolical ornaments of dress: cp. Matt. 14:36; 9:20; 23:5. The modern survival is the Jewish tallith, or prayer-cloth, consisting of a strip of cloth with fringes on its border, which is thrown over the shoulders during the service in the synagogue. (OVBC, p. 108.)

Many orthodox Jewish men today continue to wear fringes in the border of some of their garments to remind them of certain teachings of the Lord. See also Deuteronomy 22:12 and Part I 26.

The proximity of the statement concerning the "fringes in the borders of their garments" and the statement "that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them" suggests a connection between the two. Some Rabbis have pointed out that the numerical value of the letters in the Hebrew word for fringe (zizith) is exactly 600. The Rabbis have also identified 613 commandments in the Law. Thus the tassel or fringe was made up of eight threads with five knots for a total of 13 additions, bringing the grand total to 613 which equals the total number of commandments. "In this way each tassel represented the 613 commandments, and the wearing of it was said to be of equal merit with the keeping of the whole law. This is a good example of Rabbinical interpretation and of external scrupulosity." (Dummelow, OVBC, p. 109.)

16:10 The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that Korah (who rightfully held the Aaronic Priesthood as the son of Levi) sought the high priesthood (the Melchizedek Priesthood) held by Moses. Perhaps this was part of the basis of the accusation of the "princes of the assembly" against Moses and Aaron—ye lift "up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord" (v. 3).

16:22 God is the "God of the spirits of all flesh" in the sense that he is the father of all of us, as explained by John Taylor:

We are told in the sacred record of truth that [God] is the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh—of all flesh that has lived, that now lives or that will live; and it is proper that we should have just conceptions of our relationship to him, to each other, to the world wherein we live, to those who have existed before us, or to those who shall come after us, that as wise, intelligent beings, under the inspiration of the Almighty, we may be able to conduct our steps so that our pathway in life may be such as to secure the approval of a good conscience and of God, angels and good men; and that whilst we live upon the earth we may fulfil in an honorable manner the measure of our creation, and, obeying our Creator, feel that he is indeed what the Scriptures represent him to be . . . "the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh." (JD 14:357.)

19:1-22 Bible scholars have speculated much concerning the various symbolisms of the sacrifice of the "red heifer." Some have wondered if the Lord did not choose red (color of blood) and heifer (female, connoting fertility) to emphasize life, inasmuch as the offering was associated with those who touched the dead.

20:2-12 As great as Moses was (and he was one of the greatest prophets of Israel), he still had his weaknesses. One of these was revealed when he failed to circumcise his son. (See Ex. 4:24-26, especially the Joseph Smith Translation, Bible Appendix, p. 800.) Another was at the water of Meribah where he took the honor unto himself and failed to sanctify the Lord "in the eyes of the children of Israel." Because of this act, Moses was not permitted to lead the children of Israel across the Jordan River into the promised land. (See also Deut. 31:2; 32:51-52.)

Concerning this episode, Spencer W. Kimball has observed:

It seems the Lord calls the weak to serve in high places. Moses was such an one. Though trained in royal courts, he still had limitations and was conscious of them. . . .

Even Moses, like many of us, seemed to let his humility cloak wear thin and threadbare. The wanderers had come to the desert of Zin. . . .

But Moses, undoubtedly annoyed to the limit of human endurance, forgot himself and said to them . . . [Quoted Num. 20:10.]

The Lord was displeased with Moses in assuming to perform the miracle. I can imagine the Lord saying something like this "Who, did you say? Who made the water? Who made the rock? Moses! Who brought the water from the rock?" And He did say . . . [Quoted Num. 20:12.]

"Moses, that was a sad day. You did such a great work in moving Israel from Egypt. You were so patient, generally, with their whims and antagonisms. Oh, Moses, why did you let your humility deteriorate?" (BYUSY, Jan. 1963, p. 7.)

Moses, though one of the greatest . . . said to the continually complaining children of Israel crying for the fleshpots of Egypt: "Hear, now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?" (Numbers 20:10.) . . . His reprimand came suddenly and forcefully: [Quoted Num. 20:12.]

Moses had integrity in great measure, but when he had presumptuously taken credit for the Lord's miracle, for a single moment he had forgotten. (BYUSY, Feb. 1964, p. 10.)

20:7-13 Some Bible commentaries suggest that Moses was guilty of two trespasses in regard to the incident at the water of Meribah:

John Taylor has expressed a similar thought concerning this incident:

But Moses did not honor the Lord in that instance as he ought to have done. The Lord felt angry with him, and would not allow him to go into the land of Canaan because he did not sanctify the God of Israel. (JD 26:75.)

20:24 The expression that "Aaron shall be gathered unto his people" would suggest that a belief in life after death was definitely prevalent among those people at this time.

21:2-3 The question of the possible morality of any war is at least partially answered in these verses and the commentary by Joseph Fielding Smith:

Our question is, however, is there ever a time when war, or the taking up of arms is justified?

Yes, there are such times. There have been many instances when the Lord has justified the taking up of arms and has approved his people in their obedience to such action. When it becomes necessary for a righteous people to take arms against their enemies who are the aggressors, in protection of their lives and in defense of their possessions, the Lord has approved. If you will read the scriptures carefully, you will discover that the Lord commanded his chosen people to prepare for war and even to be the aggressors in the accomplishment of his purposes. Here are a few examples: [Num. 21:2-3; 31:1-3; Deut. 7:1-3.]

All through the Old Testament you will find commandments which were given to Israel to go to war. There were good reasons for this which may be discovered by reading these parts of the Bible. (AGQ 3:50-51.)

21:4-9 The miracle of healing associated with the "serpent of brass . . . put . . . upon a pole" has intrigued many generations. The symbol of the American Medical Association (serpent entwined around a pole) derived from this incident.

Jesus used the symbolism to refer to his own resurrection (John 3:14-15), and Book of Mormon prophets also likened the incident to the life-giving resurrection of Jesus Christ. (Hel. 8:14-16; 1 Ne. 17:41.) Some archaeologists who believe in the Book of Mormon have wondered if the titles for God used by early middle-American cultures (such as Quetzalcoatl, 'birdserpent') might not have originated when Jesus Christ (whose resurrection was symbolized by the serpent raised up by Moses) appeared to them by descending out of heaven like a bird.

Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary concerning the incident:

Another complaint again about manna brought punishment in the form of venomous serpents. Escape from death was provided through a little "test" of faith and obedience: Moses made a bronze serpent upon a pole and gave instructions that all who would look up at it should be saved. Another Israelite writer says later that because of the "simplicity" of the cure, the obstinate refused to comply and receive salvation. (Helaman 8:14-16; I Nephi 17:41). Jesus used its symbolism as a type or suggestion of his own being lifted upon a pole that they who would look up to Him in faith and obedience might be saved (John 3:14-15).

It is probably more than coincidental that the serpent-motif became symbolic of both the coming of death and of life in various cultures, including the Mayan and Aztec. In a sense, a pattern of relationships may exist, that as the serpent in Eden was related to the serpent on a pole, even so was the man in Eden related to the Man on a Cross. Moreoever, even as the first death brought also the capacity for reproduction of life, so also the other death (Christ's) brought about resurrection and eternal life. (See I Cor. 15:45-47; see also Hickman, Josiah—Romance of the Book of Mormon, 1. 245.) (IOT 1:119.)

22:1-8 Balaam came from Pethor, which is located far to the north of Canaan where Abraham once dwelt and is the ancestral home area of Rebekah, Leah, and Rachel.

22:21-35 God speaks through any means that serve his divine purposes. Thus a voice and words could come from a bush (as in the case of Moses) or from a donkey (as in the case of Balaam). Also, the same God who created the animal world in the first place could surely enable a donkey to see something (in this case an angel) that might not be perceived by man.

23:19 Despite the statement "God is not a man . . . neither the son of man, that he should repent," the Old Testament contains many scriptures indicating that God repented of a particular idea or act. (See as examples Gen. 6:6; Ex. 32:14; Judg. 2:18; 1 Sam. 15:35; 2 Sam. 24:16; Jonah 3:10.) Obviously the translators should have chosen a different word in those situations. The Prophet Joseph Smith suggested possible sources for errors in the Bible:

"I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." (HC 6:57.)

24:17-19 The wording and verb tense in these verses, both in the Hebrew and in the English, indicate it will be sometime in the future when the "Star out of Jacob" and the "Sceptre" that "shall rise out of Israel" shall smite Moab.

27:1-11 Moses set the example of how to obtain an answer to a serious problem—ask the Lord in faith. In another example of direct and continuing revelation, the Lord gave his answer. Recognition of the rights of girls to inherit the property of their fathers when there are no sons is extraordinary for this early period.

A later revelation (Num. 36:1-12) suggested that when such daughters married they should marry sons of the same tribe so the father's inheritance would remain within the same tribe.

27:18-23 The bestowal of authority by the laying on of hands has been a practice required by the Lord from the very beginning. (See as examples D&C 107:44; Gen. 48:17; Ex. 29:10; Lev. 16:21; Acts 6:6; Alma 6:1; JS-H 1:68 A of F 5.) Through the laying on of hands by one who already has authority, a person can be ordained and/or set apart to a new office or position or can receive the right to gifts of the Spirit. Spencer W. Kimball has noted certain steps which were followed in the calling and setting apart of Joshua:

In the call to Joshua, these steps were stressed: The need, the call, the laying on of hands with the blessing. There was the revelation as to the need since Moses could not go over Jordan and realizing it, pleaded that a shepherd be given Israel. . . .

And the blessing gave him power and authority. . . .

The setting apart is an established practice in the Church and men and women are "set apart" to special responsibility, in ecclesiastical, quorum, and auxiliary positions. All missionaries are set apart and it is remarkable how many of them speak often of the authority who officiated and of the blessings promised and their fulfilment. (CR, Oct. 1958, pp. 56-57.)

29:1-40 It is difficult for many non-Jews, who are not accustomed to celebrating the many feasts and observing the numerous offerings and laws, to see the purpose of many of these regulations. Abinadi, a Book of Mormon prophet, has given a partial answer:

"Therefore there was a law given them [the Jews], yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him.

"But . . . all these things were types of things to come." (Mosiah 13:30-31.)

31:8 The death of Balaam did not end the evil influence he had with the people. As indicated in verse 16, some of the slaughter recorded in this chapter resulted from "the counsel of Balaam" that the Midianite women should seduce the Israelite males.

The reputation of Balaam for evil was continued throughout the centuries and is even mentioned in New Testament times. (See 2 Pet. 2:15 and Rev. 2:14.)

35:1-34 Although the Levites comprise a blood tribe of Israel, they are not generally considered to be a land tribe because they did not receive a separate land inheritance for their own. Certain cities among the land inheritances of the other tribes were designated as cities for the Levites, so the Levites (who were to perform many religious services) lived among the people of all the other tribes. As indicated in this chapter, some of these cities of the Levites were also to serve as cities of refuge.
