Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

DEUTERONOMY

See "Deuteronomy" in the Bible Dictionary, page 656.

1:37 In this verse Moses places at least part of the blame for his not being able to enter the promised land upon the wickedness of the people. Numbers 20:7-13 indicates Moses and Aaron were not to enter the promised land because they took the honor unto themselves in calling forth water out of the rock at Meribah and failed to sanctify the Lord in the eyes of the children of Israel. Of course, it was the chiding and murmuring of the Israelites that provoked Moses and Aaron to exclaim, "Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of the rock?" (Num. 20:10, italics added. See also Ex. 17:7; Num. 27:14; Deut. 32:51-52; 33:8.)

2:30 The Joseph Smith Translation reads:

"But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him; for he hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that the Lord thy God might deliver him into thy hand, as he hath done this day."

3:8-17 Two of the tribes (Reuben and Gad) and one-half of another tribe (Manasseh) had received their inheritance on the east side of the river Jordan. These verses review the boundaries of the respective lands.

3:23-26 The fervent plea of Moses for the Lord to allow him to enter the promised land is answered with the rebuke not to mention the matter again. The answer was still no.

4:2 Some critics of the true Church have claimed the Book of Mormon cannot be scripture from God because the Apostle John wrote in the last chapter of Revelation, "If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book." (Rev. 22:18.) It is interesting that Moses placed a similar warning in Deuteronomy 4:2.

Brigham Young has written concerning this principle:

"But if a man should, by the gift of the Holy Ghost, in these days prophesy and write it, would it not be adding to what is already written, and is not that strictly forbidden?" This is a very popular query, and I am disposed to notice it a few moments. . . . [Quoted Deut. 4:2; Prov. 29:5-6; Rev. 22:18-19.] Where is it intimated in these passages that God would cease or had ceased to give revelation to his children? Those passages were written to guard against the mutilation of the revelations already given, which then existed in manuscript form, and very likely there existed not more than one copy when these words were written. It cannot reasonably be supposed for a moment that the Almighty has sealed his own mouth in silence by the Scriptures quoted, yet they are used in that light by modern Christians. (JD 10:323-24.)

If such quotations [Deut. 4:2; Rev. 22:18] are given with the intent to shut the heavens, and put an end to all new revelation, then the revelations given to Prophets who arose after Moses, and the revelations given to Jesus Christ and his Apostles, including John and his revelation on the Isle of Patmos, all amount to nothing, and are not worthy of our notice. This "sweeping argument," when it is examined, sweeps away rather too much; besides, John's Gospel and his epistle to his brethren were written after he wrote his revelation on the Isle of Patmos, consequently he would destroy his own system; but it sets forth the ignorance and short-sightedness of those who have not the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy. (JD 1:242-43.)

4:12, 15-16 This review of some of the events at Sinai suggests at least one reason why the Israelites were not permitted to see God on that occasion (only to hear him)—they would not be tempted to make "graven images" of him.

They were privileged to hear his voice so they would remember the experience more vividly and reverence the Lord, and also so they would teach these things to their descendants (v. 10).

4:28 LeGrand Richards has offered the following commentary on this verse:

Today, Israel does not worship gods of "wood and stone" who can "neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell," but they have turned, as has the Christian world, to the worship of a spirit god or spirit essence which is said to be everywhere present in the universe, a god that can no more "see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell," than could the gods of "wood and stone" to which Moses referred.

This is truly a departure from the worship of the true and living God, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with whom Moses communed "face to face as a man speaketh unto his friend." [Exodus 33:9-11.] (IDYK, p. 18.)

4:31 Joseph Fielding Smith indicated that fulfillment of several promises of the Lord to Abraham is still in the future:

The inheritance given to Abraham and his posterity was to be an everlasting inheritance. It was given to them for a few years while they were on good behavior and then to be rescinded when their behavior was not good. It is true, they were driven from their inheritances for their rebellion, but the promise the Lord made to Abraham holds good and whenever the prophets warned them of their dispersion through disobedience they also said that in the latter days when they were repentant they would be gathered again. Moses said: [Quoted Deut. 4:31.]

The promise of Israel's inheritance reaches into eternity when the earth is to be cleansed and made fit for the habitation of the righteous, otherwise the promise to Abraham and Israel would have failed, for, as pointed out by the martyr, Stephen, the Lord gave this land of Palestine to Abraham for him and his posterity forever, and yet in his lifetime Abraham received "not so much as to set his foot on: yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and his seed after him, when as yet he had no child." (Acts 7:5.) (RT, pp. 138-39.)

5:1-21 Moses reviewed the giving of the Ten Commandments so the people of another generation might "learn . . . keep, and do them." His statement that the covenants of the Lord with the fathers apply also to "us, who are . . . alive this day" reiterates the eternal application of these laws.

5:21 The two different Hebrew verbs translated as "desire" and "covet" in this sentence have the meanings to "take delight in" and to "yearn for," "long for," "desire."

6:4-5 These words have been quoted by generations of Jews, and are written on small parchments in the mezuzot placed on the "posts" of their houses (v. 9) and in their phylacteries placed on their foreheads and their left arms (v. 8). In the New Testament the Savior identified the words of verse 5 as the first (foremost) and great commandment (Matt. 22:37; Mark 12:30-32), and in a revelation to Joseph Smith He indicated the commandment to love and serve "the only living and true God" had been on the earth since the beginning and is one of the evidences God is "from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God." (D&C 20:17-19.)

See Part I 37-38.

6:8 See Part I 37.

6:9 This verse forms the basis of the use of mezzuzahs (Hebrew mezzuvot) by the Jews. These perform essentially the same function on doors and gateposts as phylacteries perform on the forehead and the left arm. Small strips of parchment with biblical texts are placed on the right side of the doorway or gateposts of the homes of orthodox Jews. These may be kissed by the person entering the home, or frequently the person will kiss his fingers and then touch the mezzuzah with his fingers. Some believing Jews simply touch the mezzuzah when entering, without kissing either the fingers or the mezzuzah itself. See Part I 38.

7:2-5 Many people are bothered by God's instructions in these verses because they feel the counsel is in violation of the commandment "Thou shalt not kill." (Ex. 20:13.) Joseph Smith explains this apparent contradiction:

That which is wrong under one circumstance, may be, and often is, right under another.

God said, "Thou shalt not kill;" at another time He said "Thou shalt utterly destroy." This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire. . . .

. . . He never will institute an ordinance or give a commandment to His people that is not calculated in its nature to promote that happiness which He has designed, and which will not end in the greatest amount of good and glory to those who become the recipients of his law and ordinances. (HC 5:135.)

8:5 The Lord can and does chasten his children in many ways as indicated in these quotations from the prophets of this dispensation:

Because we will not receive chastisement at the hands of the Prophets and Apostles, the Lord chastiseth us with sickness and death. Let not any man publish his own righteousness, for others can see that for him; sooner let him confess his sins, and then he will be forgiven, and he will bring forth more fruit. When a corrupt man is chastised he gets angry and will not endure it. (Joseph Smith, TPJS, pp. 194-95.)

Though our chastisements are often hard to be borne, those who bear them patiently, willingly, and submissively, will find that they yield the Gospel fruits of righteousness insomuch that they will know how to be Saints indeed.

Chastisement often comes upon the Saints of God on account of the wicked, and that also will redound to the benefit of the humble and faithful. If we receive chastisement for our sins, it will teach us to forsake our sins, and become righteous, for we receive chastisement because there is wickedness among us, and it is permitted to come to prevent our turning from the path of duty, and is always designed for our good. (Brigham Young, JD 3:54.)

It matters not what the minds and feelings of men are, the Lord is determined to raise up a people that will worship Him; and if He has to whip, and scourge, and drive us through a whole generation, He will chastise us until we are willing to submit to righteousness and truth, or until we are like clay in the hands of the potter. The chastisements we have had from time to time have been for our good, and are essential to learn wisdom, and carry us through a school of experience we never could have passed through without. (Wilford Woodruff, JD 2:198.)

In cases where the rebellious exercise repentance, that repentance may be sparked in various ways. Some men come to recognize their sins from introspection while others must be brought to their knees by outside forces. Many, having realized their transgressions, begin their repentance in secrecy. Others must be apprehended and chastised and punished before they begin their transformation. Some even need to be disciplined by forced inactivity, disfellowshipping, or even excommunication before they realize their plight and the need to transform their lives. None of us should resent being reminded of our responsibilities and being called to repent of our sins. The Lord may choose to chasten us in this way or some other, but it is all for our own good. (Spencer W. Kimball, MF, p. 44.)

9:3-5 See the commentary for Deuteronomy 7:2-5.

10:1-2 According to the Joseph Smith Translation, the word "other" should be inserted between the words "two" and "tables" in verse 1. Also, in verse 2 the following clause should be added after the word "breakest": "save the words of the everlasting covenant of the holy priesthood."

10:12 The word fear in the King James Version as used in the phrase "fear the Lord" is a classic example of a word in the scripture which does not mean the same today as in the original language. Although several different Hebrew words are translated "fear" in the King James Version, the Hebrew word which is often used to denote a relationship to God is yare, which has the basic meaning of "reverence" or "awesome respect."

Joseph Fielding Smith has reviewed some of the meanings of the word:

The Lord is merciful and kind and does not require of those who serve him that they be afraid and tremble before him. There is no delight in his heart in the "fear" of the wicked because of their sins. Most scriptural passages which tell us to "fear the Lord" have no reference to fright.

The word "fear" has more than the one meaning which we so universally use. The scriptural meaning is "to have reverential awe."

When the Lord requires that we "fear" him and keep his commandments, he means that we should pay to him that homage and reverence which we owe to our Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ. To fear the Lord is to love him. That is the sense in which the word is used. The Lord is not asking us to be afraid of him, but to draw near unto him, and the greatest of all the commandments is, that we love him. [D&C 45:39; 76:5; Acts 10:34-35; Psalms 111:10; 112:1; Prov. 1:7; Eccl. 12:13.] (DS 1:4-5.)

See the commentary for Leviticus 19:3.

10:12 The commandment "to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul" was identified as the first and great commandment by Jesus Christ when he was on the earth. (See Matt. 22:38.) In the Book of Mormon, King Benjamin taught "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) The value of giving service to our fellowmen has been explained by Spencer W. Kimball.

It is by serving that we learn how to serve. When we are engaged in the service of our fellowmen, not only do our deeds assist them, but we put our own problems in a fresher perspective. When we concern ourselves more with others, there is less time to be concerned with ourselves! In the midst of the miracle of serving, there is the promise of Jesus, that by losing ourselves, we find ourselves!

Not only do we "find" ourselves in terms of acknowledging guidance in our lives, but the more we serve our fellowmen in appropriate ways, the more substance there is to our souls. We become more significant individuals as we serve others. We become more substantive as we serve others—indeed, it is easier to "find" ourselves because there is so much more of us to find!. . .

Sometimes the solution [to a challenge] is not to change our circumstance, but to change our attitude about that circumstance and its difficulties and the opportunities for service. . . .

God does notice us, and he watches over us. But it is usually through another person that he meets our needs. Therefore, it is vital that we serve each other in the Kingdom. The people of the Church need each other's strength, support, and leadership in a community of believers as an enclave of disciples. (MIA June Conference opening address, June 21, 1974, pp. 2-3A; see also CN, June 22, 1974, p. 3.)

10:17 The idiomatic expression "God of gods" conveys the idea that God is supreme.

11:10-11 In Egypt the Israelites watered their fields from the waters of the river, but in the promised land they would need to depend upon rain from heaven for moisture for their crops.

11:18 See Part I 37.

12:16, 23-25 See the commentary for Leviticus 17:10-16 and Part I 21.

12:31 Here the Lord specifically forbids the offering of human sacrifice among his covenant people, a practice that had been adopted by some of the people of the nations surrounding Israel.

13:1-3 Whenever God works through true prophets upon the earth, the adversary attempts to deceive the people by sending forth false prophets. This was true in both Old Testament and New Testament times as well as in our own day as indicated in the following quotations by true prophets:

It is evident from the Apostles' writings, that many false spirits existed in their day, . . . and that [the Apostles] needed intelligence which God alone could impart to detect false spirits, and to prove what spirits were of God. . . .

The Egyptians were not able to discover the difference between the miracles of Moses and those of the magicians until they came to be tested together; and if Moses had not appeared in their midst, they would unquestionably have thought that the miracles of the magicians were performed through the mighty power of God, for they were great miracles that were performed by them—a supernatural agency was developed, and great power manifested. (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 202.)

If a man is called to be a Prophet, and the gift of prophecy is poured upon him, though he afterwards actually defies the power of God and turns away from the holy commandments, that man will continue in his gift and will prophecy lies.

He will make false prophecies, yet he will do it by the spirit of prophecy; he will feel that he is a prophet and can prophecy, but he does it by another spirit and power than that which was given him of the Lord. He uses the gift as much as you and I use ours. (Brigham Young, JD 3:364.)

I tell you that these men who stand up and say that Jesus is not the Christ, that he was a great teacher, but not the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father, and thus lead many to deny the power of the resurrection and the divinity of Christ, are taking upon themselves a most terrible responsibility that should cause them to fear and tremble. I could not stand it to know that I had taught an untruth that would lead people to destruction. And when these men realize what they have done and that, not only their own souls have not been saved, but they have been the means of destroying the souls of other men, leading them away from truth and righteousness, I tell you that it shall be hard with them, and their punishment shall be most severe in eternity. (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:33-34.)

13:1-11 The warning of the Lord against false prophets and their teachings and the requirement that false prophets should be put to death are consistent with the Savior's admonition that a false teacher should be feared more than a murderer. (See Matt. 10:28.)

Viewed from the perspective of eternity, it is evident why a person should fear a false teacher (who is able to influence him to commit sin and lead him away from salvation) more than a murderer (who is only able to take physical life, which will be restored in the resurrection).

13:6-10 Joseph Fielding Smith has provided the following commentary on these verses:

It is no worse to have our Eternal Father command us to go to war and to destroy the lives of the wicked in war, than it is for him to bring fire from heaven to accomplish the same purpose, as he did on the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah; or to destroy cities as he did by earthquake and fire as recorded in the Book of Mormon; or to bring upon the world a flood to cleanse the earth of its wickedness. President John Taylor has given us reasons for the Lord's accomplishment of his purposes in the following words: [Quoted Deut. 13:6-10.]

"Here, then, it is stated, that if brother, son, wife or any one, wish to lead thee from God, thou shalt destroy them; and why? Because in forsaking God, they lose sight of their eternal existence, corrupt themselves, and entail misery on their posterity. Hence it was better to destroy a few individuals, than to entail misery on many. And hence the inhabitants of the old world and of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, because it was better for them to die, and thus be deprived of their agency, which they abused, then entail so much misery on their posterity, and bring ruin upon millions of unborn persons." (John Taylor, The Government of God, p. 53.) (AGQ 3:54-55.)

14:3-8 See Part I 19.

14:9-10 See Part I 20.

14:21 See the commentary for Exodus 23:19 and Part I 22, 23.

14:22-29 The tithe (one-tenth) could be paid in kind or, if great distances or heavy weights were involved, the material could be sold and the money used to purchase other goods to pay as a tithing. The goods would be used to support the Levites (who were not given a separate land inheritance and who were to dedicate their service to the Lord) and the poor, including "the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow."

15:1-6 Every seventh year, Israelites were to forgive the debts of their fellow Israelites, but not necessarily the debts of foreigners. Also, the Israelites were promised that if they observed the commandments of the Lord, they would be so blessed they would not need to borrow money from strangers but would be able to lend money to them.

15:7-11 The prophets of this dispensation have set the example and taught the responsibility of members of the Church toward the poor, as indicated in the following statements:

The man who is hungry and destitute has as good a right to my food as any other person, and I should feel as happy in associating with him, if he had a good heart, as with those who have an abundance, or with the princes of the earth. They all are esteemed by me, not according to the wealth and position they hold, but according to the character they have. (Brigham Young, JD 3:245.)

And if there is a widow, or an orphan, or any destitute persons, or any one who has to struggle hard, look after them, and do not try to make paupers of them; but what you do for them, do it in a kind, good feeling, making them to feel and realize that you are their friends. (John Taylor, JD 21:217.)

There are some Christian people in this world who, if a man were poor or hungry, would say, let us pray for him. I would suggest a little different regiment for a person in this condition: rather take him a bag of flour and a little beef or pork, and a little sugar and butter. A few such comforts will do him more good than your prayers. And I would be ashamed to ask the Lord to do something that I would not do myself. Then go to work and help the poor yourselves first, and do all you can for them, and then call upon God to do the balance. (John Taylor, JD 19:340.)

One of the important objects of the Gospel is to benefit the poor temporally as well as spiritually; and, therefore, of all other classes of people, the poor should be the most willing to be directed and governed. The Lord has ever been mindful of his poor; to them, while in their adverse circumstances, he has granted privileges which are withheld from the rich. The fact that the poor had the Gospel preached to them was one of the evidences of Jesus being the Christ, which he himself gave to the disciples of John in answer to the question, "Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?" The poor have always been an especial charge of the servants of God, in all ages. (Lorenzo Snow, JD 18:300-31.)

15:23 See the commentary for Leviticus 17:10-16 and Part I 21.

16:10 See Part I 42.

18:15-18 The prophecy that a prophet "like unto" Moses would come forth evidently has multiple fulfillments. Earlier as well as later dispensations have had their prophets like unto Moses who talked with the Lord face to face, brought forth new scriptures, and so on, including the Prophet Joseph Smith. Although Jesus Christ was the Son of God and much more than a prophet, he was also a prophet "like unto" Moses. (See Acts 3:19-26, 1 1 Ne. 22:20-22, and JS-H 1:40.) Concerning this role of Jesus Christ, LeGrand Richards has written:

Who among all the ancient prophets could be likened unto Moses except Jesus Christ? There was a great similarity in their ministries. On this parallel, the following quotation is illuminating:

MOSES — MESSIAH: A PARALLEL

Moses: [Deut. 34:10]

Messiah: [John 6:46]

Moses: [Ex. 1:22]

Messiah: [Matt. 2]

Moses: [Ex. 14:21]

Messiah: [Matt. 8]

Moses: [Ex. 34:29-33]

Messiah: [Matt. 17:2]

Moses: [Num. 12:1-2]

Messiah: [John 7:5]

Moses: [Num. 12:3]

Messiah: [Matt. 11:29]

Moses: [Heb. 11:24,

Messiah: [Matt. 4:8-11]

Surely Jesus Christ, the Son of God, met all the requirements necessary to justify our accepting Him as the promised prophet like unto Moses. When He came He was rejected by His own, and in this respect He was also like unto Moses, for when Moses went up into the mountain to commune with the Lord, the children of Israel turned away from Moses and made a molten calf from their jewels. [IDYK, pp. 84-86.)

20:1-9 Those exempted from military service included the newly settled (builders of a new house [v. 5] and the planters of a new vineyard [v. 6]), the newly married (v. 7), and the faint-hearted (v. 8)!

21:10-14 Obviously a man should have made a captive woman his wife only if she was willing to be submissive to her husband and follow him. Perhaps this submissiveness explains the exception in such instances to the regulation forbidding marriage with peoples other than the chosen group.

21:12 Among the ultra-orthodox Jewish people today (the Hassidim), the married women continue to shave their heads. When they go out in public, such women often cover their heads with shawls or, in some instances, with wigs and shawls, bandanas, or kerchiefs. See Part I 27.

21:15 The statement "If a man have two wives" clearly indicates that polygamy (technically, polygyny) was a commonly accepted practice among the Israelites of that day.

See Part I 12-13.

21:22-23 The requirement that the body of a man put to death by hanging must be buried the same day was still in effect in the days of Jesus Christ. (See Matt. 27:57-60; Mark 15:42-47; Luke 23:50-56; and especially John 19:31-42.)

In the modern country of Israel, it is customary for the bodies of the deceased to be buried the very day (within twenty-four hours) death occurs. Memorial services for the deceased are held later.

22:5 Men and women have been created for specific purposes, and their roles should not be confused. Here the Lord counsels against the woman wearing anything "which pertaineth unto a man" and also counsels "neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are abomination unto the Lord thy God." This custom is still rigidly followed by many people today. See Part I 28.

22:12 See Part I 26.

24:16 Joseph Fielding Smith has provided the following commentary on the major principle covered in this verse:

The millions of souls who have lived on the earth at a time and place when the gospel was not here, due to the transgressions of their fathers, cannot be judged by the standards which the pure gospel proclaims. Many of the people living in the pagan world were intelligent, industrious, honest in their dealings with their fellows, but were unfortunate to be descendants of those who in earlier ages rejected the gospel which had been declared to them, and therefore their descendants were raised in idolatry. The Lord declared through his prophets that the children are not answerable for the sins of their parents. [Quoted Deut. 24:16.]

After the scattering of the people to all parts of the earth, they fell away from the teachings of Noah. Generation after generation came and passed in idolatry. Yet many of these children were otherwise intelligent. They had accepted the worship of images and false gods because of the traditions of their fathers. Among these peoples were many of the Egyptians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Persians, and peoples who had spread out all over the face of the earth. These people were not responsible for their condition. They had followed the teachings of their fathers and lived and died in their ignorance of divine truth taught to Adam, to Noah, and to Abraham. (AGQ 4:75-76.)

24:16 The accountability of man for his own actions is one of the basic principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. God provided for the free agency of man in the very beginning and will continue to bestow this gift as indicated in these statements of his prophets:

Since the day that sin entered into the world men have been held accountable for their own acts, and it has been known upon this earth from the day, at least, that Cain slew his brother Abel. And sin has presented itself in different grades; there are murder, blasphemy, lying, stealing, whoredom, and abominations of many different forms, which have followed man from generation to generation. . . . All the children of men who arrive at the years of accountability are guilty of sin, all being inclined to do evil as the sparks are to fly upwards. (Wilford Woodruff, JD 23:126.)

If there is one principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ that goes directly to the very foundation of justice and righteousness, it is that great and glorious and God-like principle that every man will have to render an account for that which he does, and every man will be rewarded for his works, whether they be good or evil. (Joseph F. Smith, GD, p. 69.)

25:3 Under the law, a man could be beaten with "forty stripes" for certain offenses. In order to make certain they kept within the law the Jews usually counted as they beat the person and ended after thirty-nine stripes. (See 2 Cor. 11:24.) At the time of Jesus Christ the beating was often performed in the synagogue upon offenders of the religious law. (See Matt. 10:17 and Acts 26:11.)

A more severe type of beating was scourging, which was frequently inflicted by a whip of different thongs into which iron or other abrasive items were inserted. In later times the Romans used the scourging to prepare the body of a malefactor for crucifixion so that the offender would not suffer too long on the cross. (See Matt. 20:19; Mark 10:34; and Luke 18:33.)

25:9, 10 John Taylor has provided the following commentary on the custom of the nearest relative to take the wife of the deceased:

There is another feature of that ancient law which I will mention. It was considered an act of injustice for the nearest relation not to take the wife of the deceased; if he refused to do it, he was obliged to go before the Elders of "Israel, and his brother's wife shall loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto the man that will not build up his brother's house; and his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him who hath his shoe loosed." If the restitution of all things is to be brought to pass, there must be a restitution of these things; everything will be put right, and in its proper place. (JD 1:232.)

28:1-68 Modern scripture teaches that every blessing is predicated upon obedience to law. (See D&C 130:20-21.) In this chapter, the Lord recounts the numerous blessings that will come to ancient Israel if they are obedient to his laws (vs. 1-14); then he warns them of the punishments that will come upon them if they are disobedient. Joseph F. Smith has indicated that the same promises and warnings apply to the people in the world today:

Now, I want to say to you without any hesitancy or fear of successful contradiction, that the words which I have read in your hearing are as applicable to you as they were to the children of Israel. You are modern Israel and they were ancient Israel. The same God spake through His servant Moses that speaks today through His servant Lorenzo Snow. Obedience to the laws of God will produce the same results today that it did anciently. To those who know the history of ancient Israel it is perhaps not necessary for me to say that these words were fulfilled upon Israel. As long as they hearkened to His word, God did prosper them; He did bless their land; He did send them the early and the latter rains; He did multiply them and strengthen them in the land; He did set them on high; He did make them His covenant people, and they became famous throughout the known world. The glory of Solomon reached to the uttermost parts of the earth. . . .

I commend to you the careful reading of the remaining portion of this chapter in Deuteronomy. Time will not permit me to read it, but I would like you to read and contemplate it at your leisure, for there you will find, as if written by eye-witnesses, history of the judgments of God that subsequently fell upon the children of Israel, with an accurate account of the downfall and disintegration of the people. They became a hiss and a byword among the nations of the earth. They were broken asunder, they were carried captive into the various nations of the earth; they served under taskmasters; from that day unto the present they have been under the curse of God through disobedience to His laws, and they will remain under that curse of disobedience so long as they fail to repent of their sins and return not unto the Lord. (CR, Oct. 1899, p. 45.)

28:1-68 Some social scientists maintain that people can be motivated more through hope of reward than through fear of punishment, while other social scientists feel the opposite. In this chapter, only fourteen verses (1-14) are used to list the blessings associated with obedience, while fifty-four verses (15-68) list the punishments and evil consequences which result from disobedience to the laws of the Lord.

In this dispensation, the Lord has stated that he delights in blessing those that hear him, but will curse those who hear him not. (D&C 41:1.) In D&C 59, the Lord emphasizes blessings and says relatively little about cursings.

28:37 When ancient Israel proved to be disobedient to the commandments of God, they were scattered among the nations of the earth where they became a "proverb, and a byword" exactly as the Lord had indicated. Modern prophets have seen in the scattering of the Jews the fulfillment of the prophecies, but they also indicate that the Jews will be gathered back to their homeland once more, again in fulfillment of prophecies:

The Jews continued, possessing the land of Palestine until after the days of Christ. Then, because of their wickedness and the fact that they had risen up against the Son of God, they too were scattered among the nations of the earth and became a hiss and a byword, and were so to remain until, the Lord says, the times of the gentiles shall be fulfilled. Now the Jews are being gathered again, because the times of the gentiles are coming to their close.

The Lord, through his prophets before Israel was completely scattered, spoke of our day. He spoke of the covenants and how in these latter times he would renew these covenants upon Israel, after Israel had been gathered. [Jer. 31:31-34; 32:36-42; Ezek. 37:24-28; Deut. 4:29-31.] (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:165-66.)

Twenty-three hundred years ago the prophet looking down through the vista of time saw this day. He saw Israel scattered among all nations. He saw them become a hiss and a byword, but added, "Nevertheless, when that day cometh, . . . that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, . . ."—note he does not say when they accept him as their Redeemer, nor necessarily declare to the world that he was the Messiah to come to their people—the prophet words it most significantly; viz., "when . . . they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers." (I Nephi 19:15.)

Brethren, isn't it a significant thing that today there is a change in the hearts of the descendants of Israel in regard to the Holy One of Israel? (David O. McKay, GSI, p. 67.)

See Part I 80-95, 105-15, 177-91, 193-97, 205-13, 223, 228-32, 239-50.

28:64-67 Many of the Jewish people were scattered among the nations of the earth as a result of their disobedience to God's commandments, just as the Lord foretold in these verses. However, the scattering has proven to be a blessing to the Gentiles as modern prophets have indicated. Also, the Lord has indicated that he will gather the Jews back home when "they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel." (1 Ne. 19:15; see also as examples Jer. 29:14; 31:10; 32:37; Isa. 54:7; Ezek. 20:41; 36:24; 37:21-28; Micah 4:6.)

How completely and thoroughly have these prophetic words [Deut. 28:25, come to pass! For although the scriptures are filled with examples of the Lord's patience with ancient Israel—how he endured their pettiness, listened to their eternal complaining, recoiled from their filthiness, groaned at their idolatries and their adulteries, and wept at their faithlessness—yet his people finally did reject him through unrighteousness and rebellion. Then, true to the words of his holy prophets, the Lord suffered them to be scattered—first one branch, then another, and another—to the four corners of the earth: "For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve." (Amos 9:9.) (Spencer W. Kimball, E, Dec. 1975, p. 2.)

When Israel entered the promised land, the Lord gave them strict commandment that they should serve him and keep his commandments. If they would obey, they were to be greatly blessed and prospered in the land the Lord had given to them. If they should reject his commandments and turn to evil, he would punish them and take them out of the land, and scatter them to all parts of the earth, where they would serve other gods, "which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and stone." [Deut. 28:64.]

All of this was to come on Israel as a punishment for their wickedness. However, the Lord never punishes his people without turning that punishment into some blessing in the end. The scattering of Israel became a blessing to the Gentile peoples among whom they were dispersed, for the Israelites mixed with the people thus bringing the Gentiles into the benefits of the blessings that had been promised to Abraham and his seed after him. (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 4:38.)

31:11-12 The importance of reading the scriptures in private and in public has been emphasized by the prophets of this dispensation. Brigham Young has suggested a way to make even ancient scriptures come alive and have special meaning:

Do you read the Scriptures, my brethren and sisters, as though you were writing them a thousand, two thousand, or five thousand years ago? Do you read them as though you stood in the place of the men who wrote them? If you do not feel thus, it is your privilege to do so, that you may be as familiar with the spirit and meaning of the written word of God as you are with your daily walk and conversation, or as you are with your workmen or with your households. You may understand what the Prophets understood and thought—what they designed and planned to bring forth to their brethren for their good. (JD 7:333.)

32:5 Any people who rebel against the commandments of God might be designated as "a perverse and crooked generation." It is evident here the word generation may refer to a state or condition as well as to a time period. Thus, the scriptures refer to an "unbelieving and stiffnecked generation" (D&C 5:8), a "crooked and perverse generation" (Deut. 32:5; D&C 33:2), this "untoward generation" (D&C 36:6), and "evil and adulterous generation" (Matt. 12:39). All of these uses of the word suggest a state or condition rather than a specific period of time.

32:8-9 Harold B. Lee and Joseph Fielding Smith have provided the following commentaries on these verses:

Now, mind you, this [Deut. 32:8] was said to the children of Israel before they had arrived in the "Promised Land," which was to be the land of their inheritance.

Then note this next verse: "For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance." (Deut. 32:9.)

It would seem very clear, then, that those born to the lineage of Jacob, who was later to be called Israel, and his posterity, who were known as the children of Israel, were born into the most illustrious lineage of any of those who came upon the earth as mortal beings.

All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth [life] was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here? (Harold B. Lee, CR, Oct. 1973, pp. 7-8.)

We learn from the word of the Lord to Moses that the Lord selected a place for the children of Israel, even before they were born, thus he indicated the number of spirits who were assigned to become the descendants of Jacob. We may well believe that the Lord also parceled out the surface of the earth for all other peoples. Some of these places were evidently designed for inhabitants who had lost interest in or touch with the plan of salvation. We may well believe that the Lord did not permit the more progressive and more worthy spirits to come to the families of the ungodly and the less progressive peoples of the earth. (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 4:11-12.)

33:2-3 The word saints means "sanctified ones" and was evidently limited to those who had entered into covenant with the Lord and vowed to keep his commandments and observe his ordinances. They all sat down at his feet and everyone received his word.

Joseph Smith taught that the saints of the latter days can also receive great blessings if they prove faithful to the promises made to them, just as the ancient saints received great blessings when they were obedient.

And though we cannot claim these promises which were made to the ancients . . . yet if we are the children of the Most High, and are called with the same calling with which they were called, and embrace the same covenant that they embraced, and are faithful to the testimony of our Lord as they were, we can approach the Father in the name of Christ as they approached Him, and for ourselves obtain the same promises. (TPJS, p. 66.)

33:5 "King in Jeshurun" means "king in righteousness" or "king of the upright."

33:6-25 No blessing is pronounced upon Simeon although blessings are provided for all the other sons of Jacob. Perhaps the descendants of Simeon had already been absorbed into the tribe of Judah because of the close proximity of their land inheritances.

It is interesting to note that in the Book of Mormon one tribe is evidently absorbed into another. Lehi and Sariah had six sons: Laman, Lemuel, Sam, Nephi, Jacob, and Joseph. All of them married and had seed, including Sam. (See 1 Ne. 16:7 and 2 Ne. 4:11.) Later the descendants of these sons are called by tribal names (Lamanites, Lemuelites, Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites) except for Sam; there are no Samites mentioned by name in the Book of Mormon. Evidently the descendants of Sam were included under the designation Nephites.

33:8-11, 13-17. The greater blessings appear to be given to Levi and Joseph. Four verses are devoted to the blessing of the descendants of Levi, who because of their priestly inheritance were to officiate at the altars and bless the people. Five verses include the blessing to the descendants of Joseph, who would be "separated" from their brethren in a fruitful land and would help to "push the people together to the ends of the earth." (For additional statements concerning the preeminence of Joseph's blessing through his sons Manasseh and Ephraim, see Gen. 48:15-20; 49:22-26; 1 Chr. 5:1 and any commentaries listed with those references; also see Part I 233-34.)

33:23 The Hebrew word translated here as "west" is really the word for sea and refers to the Sea of Galilee. Isaiah later prophesies that the people who have walked in darkness in the lands of Zebulun and Naphtali shall see "a great light"; this was interpreted by Matthew to refer to the ministry of Jesus Christ in the area of the Sea of Galilee. (Isa. 9:1-2; Matt. 4:14-16.)

34:5-6 The statements in the Bible concerning the "death" of Moses are confusing, both here and in Jude, verse 9. The Book of Mormon makes it clear that Moses was translated (see Alma 45:19) as was Elijah. (2 Kgs. 2:11; see also D&C 110:13.)

This is also made clear in Joseph Smith Translation Deuteronomy 34:6:

"For the Lord took him unto his fathers, in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor; therefore no man knoweth of his sepulcher unto this day."

Josephus claims that when Moses left the children of Israel he was accompanied by "the senate, and Eleazar . . . , and Joshua." After the senate left, Moses "was going to embrace Eleazar and Joshua" and was still talking with them when a cloud stood over him and he disappeared. (Antiquities of the Jews, p. 103.) This disappearance on the part of Moses has been compared with the disappearance of Elijah as recorded in 2 Kings 2:11.

Both Moses and Elijah appeared as translated beings on the mount of transfiguration in New Testament times (Matt. 17:3) and as resurrected beings in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836. (D&C 110:11-16.)
