Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

JOSHUA

See "Joshua, Book of" in the Bible Dictionary, page 718.

1:1-2 Moses did not die a natural death, but was "separated" from his people by being translated ("quickened by the spirit"), as was Elijah. See the commentary for Deuteronomy 34:5-6.

2:1-22 Rahab's statement "I know that the Lord hath given you the land" (v. 9) reveals her prior knowledge and faith in the Lord as well as her understanding of the futility of opposing his will. Even in New Testament times, the faith, devotion, and good works of Rahab were extolled. (See James 2:25 and Hebrews 11:31.)

Matthew 1:3-6 refers to Rahab, the mother of Boaz, the ancestor of David and thus of Jesus Christ, but it is not certain whether this is the same woman.

3:4 See Part I 34.

3:7-17 There may be some relationships and symbolism in the Lord's dividing the waters of the Red Sea as he led the Israelites out of bondage from Egypt and his dividing the waters of the Jordan River as he led the Israelites to promised freedom in the land of Canaan.

3:15-17; 4:18 A modern prophet has commented on this miracle made possible through faith:

Israel was later ready to cross into the Promised Land, the productivity and beauty of which could probably be seen from the higher hills. But how to get there? There were no bridges nor ferries across the flooding Jordan. A great prophet, Joshua, received the mind of the Lord and commanded, and another miracle was born of faith. (Spencer W. Kimball, FPM, p. 9.)

4:1-9 The Lord was the first to suggest the gathering of twelve stones from the spot where the miracle occurred. Although he may also have mentioned some purposes for this, it was Joshua who indicated "these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever" (v. 7).

It is not clear from the King James Version whether there was one memorial or two erected in honor of the parting of the Jordan. Verses 3, 8, and 20 suggest that the stones were taken from the Jordan and made into an altar at Gilgal, while verse 9 indicates Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of the Jordan. The Hebrew of verse 9 could be translated "Joshua lifted up twelve stones" (rather than "set up"); thus there may have been only one memorial.

Such memorials are obviously good visual aids in prompting interest in future generations and teaching them of the goodness of the Lord in the past. Several such memorials exist on Temple Square in Salt Lake City today, commemorating such events as the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood, the trek of the handcart companies, and the miracle of the seagulls and the crickets. As present day Latter-day Saints look on the memorial built to the seagull (believed to be the only memorial erected to honor a bird), they might well exclaim as did the ancient Israelites, "What mean . . . these stones?" (v. 6).

5:2-8, 10 Two customs previously kept by the Israelites were observed again as recorded in these verses: circumcision (vs. 2-8) and the Passover (v. 10). It may be more than coincidental that the Lord prepared the Israelites to go into the land of Canaan at the same time of the year as he had led them from Egypt, as indicated by the keeping of the Passover.

Evidently no circumcisions had been performed during the forty years in the wilderness. The reason for the possible interruption in the observance of this ordinance is not given in our present Bible.

5:12 Many readers of the Bible overlook the fact that the miracle of the manna lasted forty years! (See Ex. 16:35.) Perhaps this is because the major references to the miracle appear when it first started. (Ex. 16:1-35.)

The Book of Mormon supports its companion scripture the Bible in teaching of the miracle of the manna. (See 1 Ne. 17:28 and Mosiah 7:19.)

5:13-15 Joshua and the armies of the Israelites were not alone when they prepared for battle against Jericho; the captain of "the host of the Lord" (v. 14) was also there with drawn sword.

The statement "the place whereon thou standest" (v. 15) may have referred to (1) an event in the past that occurred there, or (2) the incident occurring to Joshua, or (3) a sacred event to occur in the future. The Savior visited in the area of Jericho several times, healing the blind and performing other miracles. (Matt. 20:29-34; Mark 10:46-52; Luke 18:35-43; 19:1-27.) It was also in the river Jordan which flows near Jericho, where he was baptized. (Matt. 3:13-16.)

6:25 Either the account of this conquest was written at a later date, or an editor might have subsequently added a postscript, as the record states Rahab "dwelleth in Israel even unto this day."

7:6-9 The lament of Joshua that it would have been better to have left the Israelites on the other side of Jordan than to bring them into Canaan to perish is reminiscent of the earlier murmuring of the Israelites in regard to the fleshpots of Egypt and possible extinction in the wilderness. On both occasions it is not the Lord that causes the difficulties, but the waywardness of the people. The Lord quickly and strongly reminds Joshua of this fact (vs. 10-11).

7:24-26 It is unclear whether only Achan was killed for his sin or all the members of his family were executed: "And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones. And they raised over him a great heap of stones." (Italics added.) Obviously Achan perished, but the next pronoun them could refer to the possessions, rather than the family, of Achan.

Deuteronomy 24:16 specifically states "neither shall the children be put to death for the [sins of the] fathers."

8:30-35 Undoubtedly Joshua followed precisely the earlier instructions of Moses (Deut. 27:11-26) in the performance of this great outdoor pageant, for the record indicates "there was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel" (v. 35).

Part of the present town of Nablus is located in the small valley between towering Ebal (the mount of cursing) and Gerizim (the mount of blessing).

Mount Gerizim subsequently became the holy mountain for the northern tribes and was still revered as such by the Samaritans at the time Jesus visited there. (John 4:3-42.) The modern Samaritans still celebrate the Passover on top of Mount Gerizim.

10:12-14 Surely the Lord who created the heavens and the earth "and all things that in them are" (3 Ne. 9:15) could cause the sun and the moon to stand still (or the earth to stand still so the heavenly bodies would appear to be stationary) as indicated here. (See Hel. 12:13-15.)

Another biblical account even has the sun reversing its direction. (See 2 Kgs. 20:8-11 and Isa. 38:7-8.)

There should be no question concerning the reality of this miracle, although we may not understand the exact manner in which it was accomplished.

The lengthening out of the day prevented the Amorites from regrouping and greatly assisted Joshua and the Israelites in their victory.

10:13 See commentary for 2 Samuel 1:18 for information on the book of Jasher.

11:20 According to the Joseph Smith Translation, the first clause should read: "For it was of the Lord to destroy them utterly, because they hardened their hearts."

11:21-22 The Anakims cut off here are the same "giants" or their descendants who frightened the fellow scouts of Joshua some forty years before. (Num. 13.) On that occasion the report was "And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight." (Num. 13:33.)

Deuteronomy 2:10-11 also refers to the Anakims as "great, and many, and tall . . . giants."

Note here that the Anakims of Gath were not conquered (v. 22). The Bible later tells a brief but dramatic story about a giant from Gath named Goliath. (See 1 Sam. 17:20-51.)

12:7-24 The listing here of thirty-one kings who reigned simultaneously in the relatively small area of Canaan (about 50 by 150 miles) indicates there was no strong central government at that time. Rather, the people were largely governed through a series of disunited city-states, probably along family (tribal) lines.

14:1-15 The tribes given geographical locations in which to settle were twelve, the same number as the sons of Israel (Jacob). However, the names or titles of the twelve "land" tribes are not identical to those of the twelve "blood" tribes. The "blood" tribes are named after the twelve sons of Jacob: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and Benjamin. The twelve "land" tribes are named after ten of the twelve sons of Jacob, leaving out Levi and Joseph and substituting for them Manasseh and Ephraim.

The Bible is clear as to why the Levites were not given a geographical inheritance—they were the priestly tribe, and had to perform religious services for all the people. (Deut. 18:1-2.)

The Bible is less clear as to why Joseph was not given a geographical inheritance in that area. Most Bible commentaries suggest that Joseph did receive a land inheritance in or near Canaan, for Joseph's two sons (Manasseh and Ephraim) received such inheritances—the only grandsons of Jacob so honored. The same commentaries usually point out that Joseph, as the eventual birthright son after Reuben's adultery (see Gen. 35:22; 49:4; 1 Chr. 5:1), was entitled to a double portion of Jacob's inheritance, which Joseph received through his two sons. Before his death, Jacob specifically said to Joseph: "I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren." (Gen. 48:22.) These commentaries still do not explain why these land inheritances were not called after the name of Joseph.

A close reading of the blessing given by Jacob to Joseph and to the sons of Joseph may provide at least a partial answer. To Joseph, Jacob said:

"Joseph is a fruitful bough . . . whose branches run over the wall . . .

"The blessings of thy father have prevailed . . . unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills . . . on the head of Joseph . . . that was separate from his brethren." (Gen. 49:22, 26.)

When "Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel," he mentioned that the land of Joseph would be blessed "for the precious things of the lasting hills . . . upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren . . . [Joseph] shall push the people together to the ends of the earth." (Deut. 33:1, 13-17.)

To Manasseh and Ephraim, Jacob said: "He [Manasseh] also shall be great: but truly his younger brother [Ephraim] shall be greater than he, and his seed [Ephraim's seed] shall become a multitude of nations." (Gen. 48:19.)

When these blessings are read in the context of the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, it is clear that the land inheritance of Joseph is to be:

Moroni, after reviewing the history of God's dealings with man as recorded on the brass plates of Laban (essentially the Old Testament), in the record of his own father (the Book of Mormon), and in the record of the Jaredites, was led to exclaim: "The Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should perish not. . . .

"Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land [North and South America]; and it shall be a land of their inheritance." (Ether 13:7-8.)

Did Moses know when he worked with Joshua in outlining the land of inheritances among the tribes of Israel that Joseph was to receive a land inheritance elsewhere? Of course he did, and Joshua knew also. Thus the land inheritances given to the descendants of Joseph in and around Canaan carried the names of the sons of Joseph (Manasseh and Ephraim), but the land inheritance of Joseph in the Americas will carry his own name and will be a land for the inheritance of his children.

14:6-15, 15:13-15 Caleb, the representative of Judah who was sent to scout the land around Arba (Hebron) some forty years before, was rewarded for his faithfulness and positive report by being given, at his request, that very area to conquer! (See Num. 13.) Since the great men (giants) of the Anakims still dwelt there, this request showed the great courage of Caleb.

20:1-9 The concept of cities of refuge to help ensure justice was earlier explained by the Lord to Moses with the instruction: "When ye be come over Jordan . . . appoint . . . cities of refuge for you." (Num. 35:10-11; see also Num. 35:6-34; Deut. 4:41-43.)

22:1-34 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on this chapter:

After Joshua had blessed the tribes located beyond Jordan and had sent them to their new homes, they built an 'altar'—not for sacrifice nor offerings but as a 'witness' or a memorial monument—so that future generations could always be taught about their relationship with the LORD, and with Israelites west of Jordan. It was to remind them of the true altar of sacrifice at Shiloh where the tabernacle was. Ironically, the tribes of the west saw it from afar and thought it to be an idolatrous altar! Concerned lest the Lord should punish not only the offenders but all Israel (as at Achor in the affair of Achan), they zealously assembled for war against the 'rebels.' Fortunately the princes and the priesthood got together, were able to communicate and clear up the intent and purpose of it all and to avert a war! (IOT 1:146.)

24:16-18 An earlier generation had covenanted to serve the Lord, and then failed to keep their promise (Ex. 32:15-35); later generations also failed to serve the Lord. However, the generation that made this promise of faithfulness evidently kept their word as indicated in Judges 2:6-10. Unfortunately the following generation (and many generations thereafter) "knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel." (Judg. 2:10.)
