Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

JUDGES

See "Judges, Book of" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 719-20.

1:8, 21 Although the children of Judah claimed to have "taken" Jerusalem (v. 8), a later entry indicated "the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem" (v. 21). Jerusalem was not completely conquered until the days of David, hundreds of years later.

1:19 The defeat of the Israelites on this occasion was probably prompted more by their fright at the sight of the iron chariots than by their lack of manpower. The Hebrew words do not say that the Israelites "could not drive them out," but "there was no driving out."

2:1-8 Evidently the message of the angel of the Lord was delivered before the death of Joshua, although for some unknown reason it was inserted here rather than in the book which bore Joshua's name.

2:6-10 See the commentary for Joshua 24:16-18.

2:18 The awkward statement "it repented the Lord because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them" is difficult to understand. A more literal translation from the Hebrew (but still somewhat difficult to understand) is: "Jehovah took pity because of their groaning from the presence of their oppressors, and of those who crushed them."

The Joseph Smith Translation renders this section of the verse as: "For the Lord hearkened because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them."

3:1 The nations were left to "prove" (test, try) Israel because the Israelites had failed to pass the first test—they had not observed several of the important commandments of the Lord, obedience to which would have enabled him to help them defeat their enemies.

3:7 The Hebrew word Ashtoreth translated here as "groves" might also be translated as "pillars" or other symbols referring to fertility cult goddesses.

3:8-11 The word translated here as "Mesopotamia" does not refer to the great plains between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. The Hebrew word involved (naharaim) means "between the rivers" as does the Greek word Mesopotamia. The King James translators erroneously capitalized the meaning of the word, thus giving the wrong impression that it refers to the place of Mesopotamia.

The name of the place where this king reigned was Aram-Naharaim, or "Aram of the two rivers" (the rivers Orontes and Khabour).

3:19 The Hebrew root translated here as "errand" means "word."

4:4 The Hebrew root of the word translated here as "judged" also carries the meaning of "governed." Those who served as judges of Israel probably did not hold regular court sessions as the title might suggest; rather they served as governors over the people.

4:4 The reference to Deborah as a prophetess does not mean she held the priesthood office or calling of a prophet. Her gift of prophecy would have been essentially the same that is available to every worthy person who has received the gift of the Holy Ghost.

The fact that a good woman was recognized as the spokesperson for the Lord is probably a good indication of the failure of priesthood members to honor their responsibilities.

5:10 Another possible translation of the verse from the Hebrew would be: "You who ride on white asses, you who sit on rich carpets, and you who travel on the way, tell of it."

6:13 The word Lord (with only the first letter capitalized) refers to the angel or messenger and is translated from the Hebrew adoni. The word LORD (with all letters capitalized) refers to Jehovah (from the Hebrew JHVH).

6:17 Gideon's request for a sign seems directed toward learning whether or not the messenger has really been sent from the Lord, rather than toward doubting the power of God. As indicated in the Book of Mormon (Alma 30:53) and the Doctrine and Covenants (129:1-9), sometimes the devil deceives people or sends forth his own angels or messengers.

8:27 The idiom "Israel went thither a whoring after it" (the ephod or, more probably, an ornament to adorn the priest's ephod) means the Israelites started to look upon it as an idol (false object of worship). Idolatry had been specifically forbidden by the Lord, and anyone guilty of it was unfaithful to the Lord just as a husband would be unfaithful to his wife by following after a woman of ill repute.

11:29-40 Jephthah may have been rash in his promise to sacrifice to the Lord the first thing that "cometh forth of the doors" of his house, but he was remembered by prophets centuries later as one who was faithful. (See Heb. 11:32-35.)

Some Bible commentaries suggest that Jephthah did not actually take the life of his daughter. Rather, they say he would not allow her to marry and so she remained a virgin all her life. As she was the only child of Jephthah, her death, whenever it occurred, would mark the end of the family of Jephthah.

A literal translation from the Hebrew of the vow in verses 30 and 31 could read as follows: "If you indeed will give the sons of Ammon into my hand, then it shall be the thing outcoming which comes out from the doors of my house to meet me when I return in peace from the sons of Ammon shall belong to Jehovah, and I will offer it a burnt offering."

Some scholars have pointed out that the last clause in such a translation, "I will offer it [the thing that comes out of the house] a burnt offering" does not necessarily mean the same as "I will offer it as a burnt offering."

12:14 The Hebrew words translated here as "nephews" literally read "sons of sons," (not "sons of brothers"). Thus "grandsons" would be a more correct translation.

14:17 The Hebrew words translated "she lay sore upon him" could also have been translated "she distressed him."

15:19 The statement "But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw" could be translated more literally from the Hebrew as "And God broke open the hollow place which is in Lehi." Although the definite meaning is unclear, the water could have come forth from the place called Lehi, which means "jawbone" (see v. 17), rather than from the jawbone itself.

16:31 The statement that Samson "judged Israel twenty years" is the only reference to such service that might have been given by him.

17:5 Teraphim are household idols. (See "Teraphim," BD, p. 784.)

17:6 The depth and extent of the apostasy in Israel during this period are manifested in the pathetic expression "in those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes."

18:7 The Hebrew meaning of the construction translated "dwelt careless" means "living at ease."

18:9 The word "still" has been translated from a Hebrew wording meaning "slack," "quiet," or "inactive."

18:15 The Hebrew translated "and saluted him" could have been translated "and asked for his peace."
