Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

RUTH

See "Ruth" in the Bible Dictionary, page 764.

1:1-4 The Moabites were Semitic people related to Abraham, the father of the Hebrews; they were descendants of Lot and one of his daughters. (See Gen. 19:30-38.)

1:14-22 The decision of Ruth to stay with Naomi, and the events that resulted from that decision, affected generations yet unborn and provided Ruth an eternal niche in history. Ruth became the grandmother of King David and an ancestress of Jesus Christ.

In LDS Church history, a somewhat similar decision faced two young widows in Nauvoo, Illinois, in the mid-1840s: Emma Hale Smith, the widow of the martyred Prophet Joseph Smith, and Mary Fielding Smith, the wife of Hyrum Smith. Emma Smith decided to stay in Nauvoo, and most of her descendants have lived their lives outside of the LDS Church. Mary Fielding Smith decided to follow the prophet Brigham Young into the Great Basin. A son (Joseph F. Smith) and a grandson (Joseph Fielding Smith) have served as presidents of the Church, and virtually all of her several hundred descendants are now members.

2:19 The clause translated "she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought, and said" could have been translated "she told her mother-in-law with whom she had worked, and said."

3-4 The Levirate marriage system provided that a brother (or near kinsman if there were no brothers) of the deceased husband could marry the young widow and, if she were still in child-bearing years, raise up seed unto the deceased husband. (See "Levirate Marriage," BD, p. 724.)

3:9 The root of the Hebrew word translated "skirt" was translated "wings" in Ruth 2:12. The essential meaning is the same as the English idiom "to take under one's wing," meaning to provide security and protection. In effect, Ruth is proposing marriage to Boaz, and one basis of her proposal is that Boaz is "a near kinsman."

4:1-10 Ellis Rasmussen has written the following commentary on these verses:

The legal proceedings were duly accomplished. Apparently the writer of the tale did not even bother to find the name of the opportunist kinsman who was only willing to do the duty of a redeemer of his dead kinsman's property until he found that the responsibility of marrying a young widow and raising up a son to the name of the dead was entailed. The first son of such a marriage would be counted the son and heir of the dead husband, and thus, though the "redeemer" paid to get the land back into the possession of the family, it would go to that heir and not increase his own estate.

The word here rendered "redeemer" we translate literally from Hebrew go'el and this is its proper translation. It is rendered merely "kinsman" in the King James English translation. The function of a go'el was to make it possible for a widow who had lost home and property to return to her former status and security and to have seed to perpetuate her family.

It is easy to see why the later prophets borrowed this word from the social laws of Israel and used it to describe the functions of Him who would become the Divine Redeemer: Think of what He does to restore us to proper status with God, and to give us future security and eternal "seed."

The socio-economic law involved is found in Deuteronomy 25:5-10. (IOT 1:157.)
