Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

1 SAMUEL

See "Samuel, Books of" in the Bible Dictionary, page 769.

1:3 Inasmuch as Elkanah went each year "to sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh," he might well have been of the tribe of Levi. Thus Samuel, if worthy, may have had a right later to perform some of the priestly functions by right of his birth, even without the special vows of his mother and his training with Eli.

Shiloh is the name of a place as well as a title referring to Jesus Christ. (See Gen. 49:10 and associated commentary.) The place Shiloh is first mentioned in Joshua 18:1; it was founded when the tabernacle and the ark of the covenant were placed there. (See Josh. 18:1 and Judg. 18:31.)

1:20 The basic root of the Hebrew name Samuel (shmu) can mean either "name" or "heard"; the root el, of course, means "God." Thus Samuel could either mean "name of God" or "heard of God." In either case, it is an appropriate name, for Hannah asked for a child "of the Lord" and the Lord heard her plea.

The meaning of the Hebrew name Hannah is "gracious," and the name remains one of the most popular names for girls in modern Israel. The English name Ann, Anne, or Anna has the same background.

2:1-10 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the song of Hannah:

Compare Hannah's song of thanksgiving and praise to God with that of Mary (Luke 1:46-55) and to that of Zachariah (Luke 1:68-79). What is the main thing about God and His ways which seems to have impressed all three? Note the usual parallelism and figurative language so characteristic of Hebrew poetry. What is the significance of calling the Lord a "rock"? (Compare such usage of the term in Deuteronomy 32:15, 18, 31 and in I Corinthians 10:1-4. The connotations seem to include the concepts of "firmness" and "security." Similar uses of the term are seen in Psalm 118:22, Matthew 21:42, etc.) Note also that He was called by Hannah "a God of knowledge"; compare that concept of him with the definition of His "glory" in Doctrine and Covenants 93:36.

The term "horn," when used figuratively, usually means "power"; note its use in both the first and the last stich of the poem.

One who was "anointed" of God was a special servant of God, such as a priest or a king. Properly appointed kings in Israel were always anointed with oil as an ordinance to convey authority. The Hebrew word for anointed, as transliterated into English, is messiah; eventually it was used in the definite form ("The Messiah") as the title for the anticipated Divine King to come. The Greek word for the same idea was Christos; in English, Christ. Does there seem to be a Messianic Hope already in Hannah's words in verse 10? (IOT 1:161.)

2:12 See "Belial" on page 620 of the Bible Dictionary.

2:25 The Hebrew term translated "would slay them" might have been translated "desired to put them to death."

3:1 The word precious has the dual meaning of "rare" and "valuable," indicating the heavens had indeed become as brass for these people in their apostasy as the Lord had foretold. (See Deut. 28:23.)

4:1-22 The depth of the apostasy of the people at this time is evident by their use of sacred objects for selfish and expedient purposes. The ark of the covenant was not intended to be used as a rallying point for the armies of Israel, and it appears the sons of Eli agreed to its use here more in superstitious hope than in real faith.

6:9-10 The Philistines evidently "loaded the dice" in the test to determine whether or not the God of Israel was involved with the troubles that had come upon them. The milk cows that were to draw the cart with the ark upon it had nursing calves, and the calves were kept at home; evidently the Philistines thought the cows would surely return home to be with their calves rather than continue on to Beth-shemesh.

6:19 Although the Hebrew words indeed indicate that 50,070 men of Beth-shemesh were smitten, the order of the words suggests that only 70 men were killed and then something else is said about 50 of them. One possible reading is "Jehovah struck seventy among the people, fifty chief men." The accounts in both the Septuagint version of the Bible and the writings of Josephus indicate only seventy men were smitten.

8:7 Whenever people fail to hearken to the true prophet of God, they fail to hearken to God himself. As the Lord has said in this dispensation, "whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.) Thus the Lord said to Samuel: "They [the rebellious people] have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me."

9:9 The parenthetical observation that the position of prophet in those days was known formerly as the position of seer might indicate (1) the meaning of the word has changed, (2) the function of the prophet has evolved [or devolved] into the function of a seer, or (3) there are somewhat different functions in the calling of a prophet as compared with the calling of a seer.

The inspired commentary of the Bible (known as the Book of Mormon) has again provided the answer.

"A seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God.

"But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come." (Mosiah 8:16-17.)

The term seer therefore designates a wider and more comprehensive function than the term prophet. In other words, a seer is always a prophet, but a prophet might not always be a seer.

The term has been explained by Orson F. Whitney:

A seer is greater than a prophet. [Mosiah 8:15.] One may be a prophet without being a seer; but a seer is essentially a prophet—if by "prophet" is meant not only a spokesman, but likewise a foreteller. Joseph Smith was both prophet and seer.

A seer is one who sees. But it is not the ordinary sight that is meant. The seeric gift is a supernatural endowment. Joseph was "like unto Moses," and Moses, who saw God face to face, explains how he saw him in these words: "Now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes; for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." [Moses 1:11.] Such is the testimony of the ancient Seer, as brought to light by the Seer of Latter-days. (SNT, p. 39.)

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today, the members of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles are sustained by the members of the Church as "prophets, seers, and revelators."

8:10-22 Samuel's woeful prophecies concerning what will happen to the Israelites under kings start to be fulfilled almost immediately after the establishment of the monarchy.

Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on Samuel's concerns:

The Lord instructed Samuel to grant them their request even if it be to their detriment. (On the dangers of this sort of exercise of free agency, see D&C 88:64-65.)

Note, by the way, that this speech of Samuel's against the institution of monarchy in Israel was used by George Washington in his rejection of the proposal that he become a king in the American colonies freed from England by the American Revolutionary War. (IOT 1:164.)

9:21 The Hebrew words translated "wherefore then speakest thou so to me" might have been translated "and why have you spoken to me according to this word?" Saul may have been asking Samuel what purpose Samuel had in telling Saul to go up to the high place.

10:17-25 Even before the Israelites returned to the promised land, the Lord foretold their eventual desire for a king, and he instructed them as to how the new king should be chosen:

"When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;

"Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose." (Deut. 17:14-15.)

Thus the king selected by the Lord would serve by divine authority. Unfortunately some later kings, in Israel and especially elsewhere, came to believe they served by divine right and that this right was automatically passed on to their descendants whether or not they were chosen by the Lord.

When the Lord, through Samuel, chose Saul to be king, an assembly of all the tribes was called where Saul could be presented and where the people could sustain the choice (v. 24). Evidently the confirming, sustaining voice of the people was an integral part of the installation of a king, as is also later indicated in the cases of David (2 Sam. 2:1-4; 2 Sam. 5:1-3) and Rehoboam. (1 Kgs. 12:1-20.)

13:1 The translated statement "Saul reigned one year" is not found in the Hebrew text. Evidently the original writer of the text intended to give the age of Saul when he first started to reign, but no age is listed. Thus the opening sentence might have been translated "Saul was ( ) years old when he began to reign."

Saul was obviously a young man when he was anointed to become king, but his actual "coronation" as king might not have occurred until many years later. The Bible later indicates that David was also anointed as a boy, but was thirty before becoming king.

13:8-16 Saul's assuming of priestly powers through the unauthorized performance of priestly duties cost him and his descendants the privilege of a hereditary monarchy (vs. 13-14).

13:19-23 The Philistines evidently held a monopoly in metal work in those days. Their blacksmiths were willing to sharpen agricultural implements for the Israelites, but would not provide them with metal weapons of war. Only Saul and Jonathan had a spear and sword; other soldiers among the Israelites evidently fought with weapons of stone and wood.

14:45 The statement "so the people rescued Jonathan" from Saul would indicate the combined will of the people was stronger than the authority of the king during this early period of the monarchy.

15:32 The Hebrew word translated "delicately" does not make much sense in this context, even with such possible alternate translations as "daintily" and "cheerfully." The original writer may have meant to convey the idea that Agag was putting on a fake front of optimism and bravado. Agag's statement "Surely the bitterness of death is past" seems to mean "Let's let bygones be bygones." Saul indicates by his subsequent savage handling of the king of the Amalekites that he is not about to be flattered by Agag.

15:35 For an explanation of the Hebrew word translated here as "repented," see the commentary for Numbers 23:19.

The Joseph Smith Translation adds a new dimension to this clause: "And the Lord rent the kingdom from Saul whom he had made king over Israel." (Italics added.)

16:7 Man may deceive his fellowmen, but he cannot deceive the Lord. It would be well if people were willing to have God select all their leaders, for he is able to look through any hypocrisy or sham and perceive real potential. "Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart."

16:14-16, 23 The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that the evil spirit was not of the Lord.

17:4-7 According to the weights and measurements assigned by most biblical scholars, Goliath would have been over nine feet tall, with a "coat of mail" (armor) weighing about 125 pounds and a spear with a head weighing about 15 pounds!

17:39 The Hebrew word translated "proved" here could have been translated as "test" or "try." It is even translated as "tempted" in Exodus 17:7 wherein the children of Israel "tempted [tried, tested, proved] the Lord."

18:18 The Hebrew that is translated "what is my life" has the essential meaning of "who are my kinfolk."

18:21 The Hebrew sentence translated "Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in the one of the twain" might also have been translated "And Saul said to David a second time, You shall be my son-in-law."

18:23 The Hebrew words translated "Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law, seeing that I am a poor man" might have been translated "Is it a light thing in your eyes to be son-in-law to the king; I am a poor man."

18:27 The word tale is older English, meaning tally or number; the idea is that David gave them "all" to the king.

19:9 The Joseph Smith Translation adds not at a critical point in the first clause of this verse: "And the evil spirit which was not of the Lord was upon Saul." (Italics added.) This reading is consistent with similar changes in 1 Samuel 16:14, 15, 16 and 18:10.

21:1-6 The shewbread was changed every sabbath day, and the old loaves were to be eaten by the priests. (See Lev. 24:9.) In this time of emergency, David persuades the priest (Nob) to allow his men to eat the "hallowed" bread, which was contrary to custom.

In New Testament times when the Savior's disciples also unlawfully partook of food on the sabbath in an emergency situation, the Pharisees accused Jesus: "Thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day" (Matt. 12:2). Jesus then taught the principle that charity overrides the ritual law by quoting the incident of David and the shewbread. (See Matt. 12:4-9; Mark 2:23-28; Luke 6:1-5.)

21:9 Evidently the sword of Goliath must have been kept as a memorial of how God can triumph over Israel's enemies.

A similar event occurs in the Book of Mormon; the sword of Laban was retained by the Nephites for hundreds of years. (See 1 Ne. 4:6-19; 2 Ne. 5:14; Jacob 1:10; W of M 1:13; Mosiah 1:16.)

27:10 The Hebrew words translated "Whither have ye made a road to day?" could have been translated "Have you not attacked today?"

28:3-20 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the visit of Saul with the witch of En-dor:

Here is the pathetic story of tragic old King Saul as he prepared for his last battle; he could get no guidance from legitimate avenues of communication with the Lord (including the use of the Urim and Thummim), and so turned to diviners, whose activities were against the law of Moses, and who had been banished by Saul himself in better times (cf. Exodus 22:18, Deuteronomy 18:10). Would you think that it was a bonafide revelation from God which he then received through the spiritualist medium? It seems more likely that the medium and her "spirit" communicants deceived Saul into thinking the dead Samuel had responded to his plea! The gloomy prediction was devastating to poor old Saul.

The medium's description of "gods ascended out of the earth" suggests she had a vision of a whole concourse of spirits in this momentous seance. If the forces of evil wished to bring about Saul's final destruction, things were well-calculated to accomplish it. The apparition recalled his rejection and his hopeless situation. (IOT 1:175.)

28:9 The following words should be added to the end of this verse, according to the Joseph Smith Translation: "Also, who hath not a familiar spirit."

28:11-15 The Joseph Smith Translation makes several changes in these verses. As an example, verse 11 reads:

"Then said the woman, The word of whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said, Bring me up the word of Samuel." (Italics added.)

31:1-6 Two accounts of the death of Saul are provided in the Bible: 1 Samuel 31:1-6 and 2 Samuel 1:1-10. In the account of 1 Samuel, Saul commits suicide by falling upon his sword. In the account of 2 Samuel, although "Saul leaned upon his spear" (v. 6) it did not cause his death; Saul then asked an Amalekite to kill him, which the Amalekite did. The Amalekite may have fabricated his story in hopes he would receive a reward from David for having killed one he viewed as David's enemy. If that was the hope of the Amalekite, it was in vain. David summarily had the Amalekite killed for destroying "the Lord's anointed."
