Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

2 SAMUEL

See "Samuel, Books of" in the Bible Dictionary, page 769.

1:18 The Hebrew wording of this statement in parentheses is incomplete. A possible translation to convey the idea is: "And he said to teach the sons of Judah (the Song of) the Bow. Behold, it is written in the book of Jasher."

No book of Jasher appears in the present Old Testament. The Bible Dictionary mentions that various collections "of the book of Jasher are available today and may be of some worth, but do not appear to be the one spoken of in the Bible." (See "Jasher," BD, p. 710.) The original book of Jasher was evidently prepared about the time of Solomon, and consisted of a collection of "national songs, and stories of deeds of valor." (Ibid.)

The missing book of Jasher is mentioned only twice in the Old Testament: 2 Samuel 1:18 and Joshua 10:13.

3:2-5 David had only two wives when he first went to Hebron to be made king (2:2), but several additional wives and concubines are listed here.

The Lord has said in modern times, "David . . . received many wives and concubines." (D&C 132:38.)

3:33 The lament of David could have been translated from the Hebrew "Abner died as the death of a fool?" In other words, his death was vain or purposeless; a great warrior such as Abner should not have been put to death through deceit.

5:7 This first biblical reference to Zion has been analyzed by Ellis Rasmussen as follows:

It [Zion] seems to have been the fortress of Jerusalem on the lower part of the hill southeast of Moriah's summit. The meaning of the word "Zion" in Hebrew has been much discussed but not yet satisfactorily analyzed. Some earlier uses of the word, however, may be seen in the Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:18-69, in the Book of Mormon, Alma 13:17-19 and also in the Inspired Revision of the Holy Scriptures by Joseph Smith, and in Genesis 14:18-39 and 24:2-10. It was used as the name of Enoch's city of the "pure in heart" (D&C 97:21). Could the name anciently have been attached also to Melchizedek's city of Salem (later Jerusalem)? In some of the references above it seems so. (IOT 1:183.)

5:7-8 David was born in Bethlehem, which after his reign as king became known as the "city of David." (See Luke 2:4.) This title was used in New Testament times by the "angel of the Lord" in announcing the birth of Jesus Christ: "For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord." (Luke 2:11.)

Jerusalem has also been called "David's city" because of his feat in capturing the city and making it his capital. The city of Jerusalem in David's time was believed to be located to the south of the present walled city of old Jerusalem.

Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following background on Jerusalem:

David wisely chose as his capital Jerusalem, a city between the northern and southern factions of Israel, but belonging to neither of them, as it was still held by the Canaanite "Jebusites." The manner of conquering the city has been much discussed because of the problematical word rendered "gutter." The word appears most likely to designate a channel or a shaft, as it is similarly used in Mishnaic Hebrew. The shaft running up perpendicularly above a water conduit cut into the rock fifty feet toward the west from Gihon, as discovered by Sir C. Warren in 1867, which would have given people inside the city walls access to water in time of siege, would have made a possible avenue for invaders to enter and open the gates of the city from within. Joab is said to have accomplished that initial entry (1 Chronicles 11:6).

Do you catch the implications of sarcasm in the Jebusites' saying David would have to overcome their "lame and blind"—as if such would have been sufficient to defend the city? David thereafter scathingly referred to all the Jebusite defenders as "the lame and the blind" (v. 8). (IOT 1:183.)

6:6-11 The dramatic incident of Uzzah's losing his life when he "put forth his hand to the ark of God" (v. 6) not only had an immediate effect on David, but has had a lingering influence on many others over the centuries. The saying "Don't steady the ark" has come to mean "Don't get involved in something in which you have no legitimate business nor authority." The Lord used the term "steady the ark of God" in a revelation to Joseph Smith November 27, 1832. (D&C 85:8.)

8:1-18 Hundreds of years before the time of David, the Lord covenanted with Abraham to give his seed a specified area. (See Gen. 13:14-17; 15:18.) Finally, in the days of David the designated lands had either been conquered or the people in the lands were paying tribute to the Israelites.

19:13 The expression "God do so to me, and more also" is a form of oath or promise wherein the speaker promises before God to do a certain thing.

In this instance, Amasa might have needed some additional assurance that David was sincere in making him military leader inasmuch as Amasa had, only shortly before, been leader of the enemy armies.

19:20 The term "house of Joseph" is used in place of the term "northern Israel" or "kingdom of Israel." Inasmuch as the word Israelites during this period of history could refer either to all the descendants of Jacob or to the citizens of the northern kingdom, sometimes the terms Joseph or Ephraim are used in order to indicate that only the citizens of the northern kingdom are meant.

20:3 Because these wives of David had been taken by his son Absalom while Absalom lived in Jerusalem, (2 Sam. 16:21-23), David could not continue in a connubial status with them.

The Lord had commanded the people through Moses: "The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy father's nakedness." (Lev. 18:8.)

20:8 "Joab's garment," worn by Amasa on this occasion, may have been a type of military uniform designating a particular rank or position. As the new leader of the armies, Amasa may have felt obliged to wear it.

21:1-14 Ellis Rasmussen has written the following commentary on the content of these verses:

This terrible episode must have been done on days of David's spiritual deterioration. The law would not have permitted sons to be put to death for the guilt of a father or a forefather. (Deuteronomy 24:16 is explicit on that; see also Numbers 35:33.) It cannot have been a revelation from the Lord that either required or approved this deed done "to avenge the Gibeonites"—some of whom Saul had slain in spite of the ancient promise of Joshua that they might live in Israel.

It is a pathetic picture to envision the innocent mother of innocent sons guarding their bodies from the birds and beasts; and it is repulsive to read that after all this was done "God was entreated for the land." This is apostate theology, comparable to that of the Canaanite-Baal religions.

The text is somewhat corrupted too, and the name Michal must be a mistake for Merab, for it was Merab who married Adriel. If it is indeed Michal, David's wife and Saul's daughter, who is meant, this is a very bitter ending to their relationships as man and wife. (IOT 1:190.)

22:1-51 This same psalm appears in the book of Psalms (number 18) without the introductory verse and with a few changes. The most significant changes in Psalm 18 occur in the verses corresponding to 2 Samuel 22:11, 12, 13, 14, 28, 29, 36, and 50.

The materials in Psalm 18 corresponding to the materials in 2 Samuel 22 usually appear in verses numbered one digit earlier; for example, Psalm 18:3 corresponds to 2 Samuel 22:4.

23:8-39 Included in this list of "the mighty men" (heroes, great ones) of David is "Uriah the Hittite" (v. 39), the same Uriah whose wife, Bath-sheba, lay with David and whose life was required by David. (See 11:2-27.)

24:1-25 Apostate theology contained in this chapter is discussed in the following commentary by Ellis Rasmussen:

The Lord is represented as having been angry with Israel and having therefore concocted a plot to get David to do something disapproved so that He would have an excuse to bring punishment! Note that 1 Chronicles 21:1 changes the statement to read that Satan moved David to take the offensive census. But in 1 Chronicles 21:17, David is represented as pointing out to the Lord the injustice of his punishing the innocent! The plague is said to have ended when the Lord repented and felt it was enough without smiting Jerusalem; nevertheless the threshing-floor of Araunah was purchased by him as a site for an altar, and an offering so that the Lord was "entreated" and the plague was stopped. This is also apostate theology, written according to the understanding of the people of the time, but out of harmony with truths as taught by the prophets. We shall see such concepts and worship practices later evaluated in the writings of Hosea and Isaiah. (IOT 1:191.)

24:16 The Joseph Smith Translation makes a significant change in this verse:

"And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord said unto him, Stay now thine hand, it is enough; for the people repented, and the Lord stayed the hand of the angel, that he destroyed not the people." (Italics added.)
