Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

1 KINGS

See "Kings, Books of" in the Bible Dictionary, page 721.

1:5-10 Adonijah evidently felt he should be the new king by right of his seniority among the sons of David. According to 2 Samuel 3:2-4, Adonijah was the fourth son of David and was preceded only by the following:

Amnon, who seduced his half-sister, Tamar, and was killed in revenge by her brother Absalom (2 Sam. 3:2; 13:1-39; 1 Chr. 3:1).

Chileab (also called Daniel in 1 Chronicles 3:1), who was not mentioned after the account of his birth (2 Sam. 3:3; 1 Chr. 3:1).

Absalom, who killed Amnon, went into exile, and led a revolt against his father during which he was killed by Joab and his men (2 Sam. 3:3; 13:1-39, 1 Chr. 3:2.)

But, as had been determined in the cases of Saul and David, the Lord—not the person—was to select the new king through His prophet.

1:50 The horns of the altar were located on each of the four corners. It was customary for people who had killed to seek refuge at the altar of the Lord from any avengers. Deliberate murderers could, even then, be taken from the altar and put to death. (See Ex. 21:14 and "Altar," BD, pp. 606-7.)

2:1-9 These final words of David contain a charge to his son Solomon, who is to be the new king. Psalm 72 contains a poetic prayer by David for "the king" Solomon.

Much of David's life was centered on warfare and the shedding of blood, from the days of Goliath to his declining years. Because of this, the Lord declared earlier that David was not to build the temple because he had shed blood. In this regard, it is of interest to note that David's final words on earth as recorded in the Bible are "with blood." (2:9.)

2:5-6 David mentions two reasons for wanting the death of Joab: (1) Joab killed Abner; (2) Joab murdered Amasa. Two other acts of Joab may also have influenced David's feelings: (1) Joab was involved in the death of Absalom (2 Sam. 18:5-15); (2) Joab was in alliance with Adonijah when Adonijah sought to become the new king. (1:7.)

2:10 Although the record states David was buried in "the city of David" (Jerusalem, not Bethlehem—see the commentary for 2 Samuel 5:7-8), he was probably buried outside the walls of the city but in the vicinity; the Israelites usually buried their dead outside the residential areas. Several sites have been honored over the centuries as the possible burial place of David.

2:13-25 Custom provided that anyone who received of the harem of the king should be heir to the throne. Whether Adonijah had this fact in mind when he requested Abishag as his wife is not known. Evidently Solomon felt Adonijah had evil purposes in making the request, for he ordered the death of Adonijah.

3:1 The Joseph Smith Translation adds an introductory clause and some other key words: "And the Lord was not pleased with Solomon, for he made affinity with Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter to wife." (Italics added.)

The Hebrew words translated "made affinity with" might have been translated "made a marriage alliance with."

3:5-15 Solomon's promise of wisdom and understanding was received from the Lord in a dream.

The statement "I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in" (v. 7) has more to do with Solomon's inexperience than his age. The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And I know not how to lead them, to go out, or come in before them, and I, thy servant, am as a little child." (3:8.)

3:12-13 The Lord's statement in verse 12 seems to indicate that Solomon is the most wise and understanding of all the people who ever lived—"there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee." However, the Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear the Lord is comparing Solomon to the kings of Israel, not to all mankind—"there was none made king over Israel like unto thee before thee." (3:12; italics added.)

Verse 13 of the King James Version substantiates the changes in the Joseph Smith Translation—"there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee." (Italics added.)

3:14 Rather than commendation of David, the Joseph Smith Translation refers to condemnation of David, with a promise to Solomon if he proves worthy:

"And if thou wilt walk in my ways to keep my statutes, and my commandments, then I will lengthen thy days, and thou shalt not walk in unrighteousness, as did thy father David." (Italics added.)

3:16-28 Ellis Rasmussen has commented concerning this well-known story:

In this best-known story illustrating Solomon's "wisdom," you may think he was simply fortunate. Ordinarily neither woman wanting a child would agree to such a shocking and unsatisfying solution as Solomon proposed. Perhaps his wisdom lay in his perceiving that the false claimant would be brazen enough to expose herself by agreeing to the dividing of the child! (IOT 1:197.)

4:5 The Hebrew words translated "principal officer, and the king's friend" really say in the Hebrew "priest, friend of the king." Whether the word priest refers to a priesthood office is not made clear, nor is the precise identity of Zabud's father. The Nathan mentioned may have been the prophet Nathan.

4:22-25 Some Bible scholars have estimated that these daily provisions would have fed at least 35,000 people. Of course the persons provided for included Solomon's numerous families, the families of court officials and servants, and perhaps the families of military personnel.

4:32 Some of the "three thousand proverbs . . . and . . . thousand and five" songs are included in the books of Proverbs and Song of Solomon. Not all of them were inspired of the Lord, of course; in fact, the Lord has revealed that the Song of Solomon was not inspired. (See the commentary for the Song of Solomon.)

6:1 The date of the beginning of the temple provides one of the few exact dates in the Old Testament, and then only in relationship to the departure of the children of Israel "out of the land of Egypt." The 480 years might be accounted for approximately as follows: Period in wilderness—40 years; period of Judges (Joshua to Samuel)—356 years; reign of Saul—40 years; reign of David—40 years; period already served by Solomon—4 years.

The major time not accounted for precisely in the Bible is the period of judges. For possible dates of some of the major events, see the chronological tables appearing under the entry "Chronology" in the Bible Dictionary, pp. 635-45.

6:2-3 If a cubit is equal to about eighteen inches, as suggested by most Bible scholars, the size of the temple would be ninety feet ("threescore cubits") in length, thirty feet ("twenty cubits") in breadth, and forty-five feet ("thirty cubits") in height. It was not large by today's standards, but was beautifully adorned and lavishly furnished.

6:7 The stone for the temple was evidently fashioned right at the quarry so there would be no sound of "hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building." This statement may indicate the sense of reverence for the sanctity of the place, and may also suggest that many of the furnishings were prefabricated.

6:23-25 The carving of the two large cherubim (each fifteen feet high, with wing spans of fifteen feet) was not in violation of the commandment against engraven idols (or "images," as translated in the King James Version). The cherubim were not to be worshipped, but were for beautification and for representation of heavenly powers. (See Rev. 4:6 and D&C 77:1-4 for the meanings of similar, but not identical, representations; see also "Cherubim," BD, p. 632.)

7:13-14 This artisan from Tyre named Hiram should not be confused with the king of Tyre of the same name.

7:23-26 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the "molten sea" (brass font) and its possible use:

The font of bronze placed on the backs of twelve oxen has been calculated to have a possible capacity of 16,000 gallons! According to II Chronicles 4:2-6, it was for the ceremonial "washing of priests." . . . Unfortunately, no record of baptisms in this basin has been found. Recall that the Book of Moses and the Inspired Translation of the Bible mention baptism from Adam's time to that of Enoch. In Genesis 17 of the Inspired Translation it is said that proper baptism had ceased among the apostate peoples at Abraham's time, but in this source no further mention of it is made. . . .

To make so much bronze work possible, no doubt the famous "King Solomon's mines" (recently rediscovered) must have been working to capacity. (IOT 1:200.)

8:62-64 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the nature of the sacrifice offered at the dedication of the temple:

The dedicatory observances concluded with another blessing upon the people by the king and a colossal program of sacrifice of seven days duration. It appears that this was the festival type of "peace offering" such as is described in Leviticus 3 and 7:11 ff., in which the Lord's portion (burned upon the altar) was certain fat portions of the inward parts, about the kidneys and liver, etc.; the priests received the right shoulder and the brisket, and the remainder was eaten in a feast by the family in whose behalf the animal was sacrificed. It hardly seems likely that the "burnt whole offering" of Leviticus 6:8 ff., or Exodus 29:38-42, or Numbers 28:3 ff., would have been involved. After the seven days' dedication feast, the other feast celebrated would likely have been the festival of Succoth at the time of the year indicated in verse 2 of this chapter. This is a joyful festival to this day throughout Judaism. (It is also called, in English, the Feast of Tabernacles.) (IOT 1:201.)

10:1 The Hebrew words translated as "hard questions" were translated in Judges 14 as "riddle."

10:1-13 The exact location of the homeland of the Queen "of Sheba" is in dispute. Some Bible scholars believe it was in Saudi Arabia; others believe it was in Africa. An Ethiopian tradition that the leaders of Ethiopia (including Haile Selassie) were descendants of a son born to Solomon and the Queen of Sheba suggests that Africa was the location of Sheba.

10:28 The Hebrew of this verse evidently means "from Kue" ("Keveh") and has erroneously been translated "linen yarn." The sentence could have been translated, "And the horses that King Solomon had were brought from Egypt and from Kue; the king's merchants received them from Kue at a price." If the Hebrew word is not intended to designate a place, it might also be translated "in droves."

11:6 The wording of the Kings James Version and the Joseph Smith Translation are virtually the same, but note how the meaning is greatly altered by changing the order of the clauses! The Joseph Smith Translation reads:

"And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, as David his father, and went not fully after the Lord."

After misinterpreting verse 4, the King James translators evidently decided to arrange the clauses in verse 6 to agree with their interpretation of verse 4.

11:6-8 Concerning the downfall of Solomon and the sins of David, Ellis Rasmussen has observed:

The fall of Solomon resulted from his system of marrying royal wives from all the countries round about—which policy may well have been for economic and political reasons as well for his "love" of "strange women"! Since he not only tolerated their religions but caused shrines and sacrificial high places to be built for them and "went after" their gods and goddesses himself, it would seem he was seeking power from every imaginable source. . . . Notice that Solomon's violation of the marriage statute (v. 2) led to his breaking the first and second of the Ten Commandments; David's breach of the tenth led to his breaking of the seventh and then the sixth commandments. (IOT 1:202-3.)

11:33, 38-39 The Joseph Smith Translation of these verses indicates:

13:18 The present rendering of verse 18 is difficult to understand. The Joseph Smith Translation not only clarifies the situation but also inserts a not in a critical place, changing the meaning: "Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water, that I may prove him; and he lied not unto him." (Italics added.)

13:26 The final word of this verse should be me (not him), according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

14:8 The King James Version extols David and condemns Jeroboam. However, the Joseph Smith Translation condemns both:

"And rent the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it thee, because he kept not my commandments. But thou hast not been as my servant David, when he followed me with all his heart only to do right in mine eyes."

15:3-11 The Joseph Smith Translation makes significant contributions to several of these verses (italics added):

Verse 3: "His [Abijam's] heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as the Lord commanded David his father."

Verse 5: "Save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite, wherein the Lord cursed him."

Verse 11: "And Asa did right in the eyes of the Lord, as he commanded David his father."

Verse 12: "And he took away the sodomites out of the land and removed all the idols that his fathers had made; and it pleased the Lord."

The statement in verse 5 that David was cursed because of his dealings with Uriah has been reinforced by the Lord in a revelation to Joseph Smith:

"And in none of these things did he [David] sin against me save in the case of Uriah and his wife; and, therefore he hath fallen from his exaltation." (D&C 132:39.)

16:23-28 Ellis Rasmussen quotes nonbiblical sources concerning the reign and influence of Omri:

And there was still division and violence and bloodshed, for part of the people chose yet another, Tibni, to be king; but the civil war that ensued established Omri. Non-Biblical sources tell more about his eleven years of reign than does the Bible. In addition to his procuring Samaria and building it into a well-fortified capital city for northern Israel, the stone inscription of Mesha, King of Moab, admits that he conquered Moab and exacted tribute all his days. And later inscriptions, such as the annals of Shalmanezer III, designated Israel as the "land of the house of Omri," and its kings were called in that text "sons of Omri" even after his dynasty had been long replaced by another ruling family. Ben Hadad of Syria said his father took certain cities from Omri and forced him to allow free trade in Samaria. (IOT 2:5-6.)

17:1 This is the first mention of the prophet Elijah ("Jehovah is God") the Tishbite in the Bible. The next three chapters and 2 Kings 1 and 2 are largely devoted to the accomplishments of this great man. It is not certain whether Tishbite refers to Elijah's genealogy or to the location of his birth, although some scholars believe it might have reference to the village of Tishbe in the land of Gilead. (For the location of Tishbe, see Map 9 of the Bible, about midpoint between the Sea of Chinnereth (Galilee) and the Salt Sea, just east of the river Jordan.)

17:1-24 The supernatural powers exhibited by Elijah in this chapter clearly demonstrate that he possessed the power of God. Joseph Fielding Smith taught that the Melchizedek Priesthood held by Elijah was also possessed by other prophets in the Old Testament:

We discover that all the ordinances which could be performed by the Aaronic Priesthood remained with Israel in the dark days of her disobedience. It was necessary, under these conditions, that there be someone with authority to perform ordinances, such as confirmation, for we know that the prophets of old had the gift of the Holy Ghost. [2 Peter 1:21.]

We read in [1] Kings, chapter 17, that power had been given to Elijah to close the heavens that there would be no rain except by his word. He had power given him to bless the widow's oil and meal and to bring down fire from heaven to consume his offering and destroy the false doctrines of the priests of Baal. The fact that Elijah had this great power and authority did not prevent other prophets from also holding some divine authority in the Melchizedek Priesthood which was essential to the faithful in the House of Israel. We should also remember the fact that in the days of the Savior's ministry this authority held by Elijah was bestowed by Elijah, and the authority held by Moses was restored by Moses to Peter, James, and John. (AGQ 4:7-8.)

17:8-16 Although most of the Israelites did not recognize Elijah as a prophet, a widow of another land (Zarephath of Zidon) was willing to follow his teachings. In New Testament times, Jesus Christ referred to this event when he was teaching the principle "No prophet is accepted in his own country":

"But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias [Greek for Elijah], when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land;

"But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow." (Luke 4:24-26.)

18:21 The Hebrew word translated "halt" has the meaning of "limping." The idea is that the people have been "vacillating," "skipping back and forth," "staggering" toward one view and then the other. Elijah challenges them to make up their minds.

The people recognized their vacillation on this occasion, and they "answered him not a word."

The stirring challenge of Elijah "if the Lord be God, follow him" is as appropriate today as when first given. John Taylor and Spencer W. Kimball have given their observations concerning this challenge:

Whichever way we decide let us carry out our decisions in good faith, and not have our sign painted on one side in white and on the other black or some other color. But let us feel as the prophet Elijah did on a certain occasion, "If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him." There was a disposition in ancient Israel to have a part of God and a part of the devil or Baal—an idolatrous god which was worshipped by them. I sometimes think that in some respects we are a good deal like them. Do we believe our religion? Yes. Do we believe in the holy priesthood and that God has restored it to the earth? Yes. Do we believe that God has established his kingdom? Yes. And do we believe that the holy priesthood is under the guidance of the Lord? O, yes; but still we would like a good deal of our own way. (John Taylor, JD 21:54-55.)

The answer to all of our problems—personal, national, and international—has been given to us many times by many prophets, ancient to modern. Why must we grovel in the earth when we could be climbing toward heaven! The path is not obscure. Perhaps it is too simple for us to see. We look to foreign programs, summit conferences, land bases. We depend on fortifications, our gods of stone; upon ships and planes and projectiles, our gods of iron—gods which have no ears, no eyes, no hearts. We pray to them for deliverance and depend upon them for protection. Like the gods of Baal, they could be "talking or pursuing or on a journey or peradventure sleeping" when they are needed most. And like Elijah, we might cry out to our world:

"How long halt ye between two opinions; if the Lord be God, follow him. . . ." (1 Kings 18:21.)

My testimony to you is, the Lord is God. He has charted the way, but we do not follow. (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, Apr. 1960, p. 85.)

18:44-46 Elijah is so confident that the Lord is about to end the drought he runs ahead of the chariot in order to get off Mount Carmel before the rains come.

The miracle of the termination of the drought is accepted as a literal fact by all faithful Latter-day Saints. The Book of Mormon contains a similar faith-promoting incident when Nephi, the son of Helaman, asked the Lord to cause a famine to stir up the people "in remembrance of the Lord their God." After the people had repented, the Lord responded to Nephi's request to send rain again upon the earth. (Hel. 11:3-18.)

Spencer W. Kimball has indicated such miracles are the result of faith: "It was by and through the faith of Elijah that the drought, which devastated Israel, prolonged for three interminable years, was finally terminated when repentance had come to Israel. . . . "The miracle of faith had again made good the promises of the Lord." (CR, Oct. 1952, p. 50.)

19:9-10 Many prophets of God have been required to endure persecution, as explained by John Taylor:

Now, why was it that men that were aiming at an exaltation among the Gods should be so persecuted and cast out by men? For instance I might mention a few of them. I might refer to Job and the kind of trials he passed through; I might talk about Abraham and the trials he was called upon to pass through; I might mention Moses and the trials he had to endure; I might bring to your minds many other prominent men of God, but I will come to Elijah, who was a man that feared God and wrought righteousness. The people had departed from the Lord and trampled under foot His precepts, etc. So much so that Elijah was obliged to flee and hide himself in a cave away from the face of man. . . .

Well, it was a critical position to be in, but it was just as critical for many others who lived in ancient times. And this spirit of murder and persecution still exists. . . .

I merely refer to these things to show that the spirit that actuated men in former times is at work today; irrespective of times, forms of government, places or circumstances. (JD 24:197.)

19:11-13 Harold B. Lee has indicated that a person must be sensitive to the Spirit of the Lord to hear the "still small voice" when it speaks:

Prophets of old learned, as all must know, how to communicate with the Lord by prayer, to talk with and then receive answers in the Lord's own way. . . .

All too often when God speaks in this still, small voice, as he did to Elijah in the cave, it may not be audible to our physical hearing because, like a faulty radio, we may be out of tune with the infinite. (CR, Oct. 1966, p. 115.)

19:19-21 The Hebrew seems to indicate that Elijah literally "threw" his mantle (coat) on Elisha.

As indicated in the actions of Elisha, and the much later calling of the apostles by Jesus, true disciples immediately forsake all else and follow the true Master. (See also Matt. 4:18-22; 8:18-22; Luke 9:59-62.)

22:1-38 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on these verses:

A difference between the ostensible religion of Ahab and the more reverent faith of Jehoshaphat may be seen in Ahab's seeking and receiving guidance from his 400 court prophets, all of whom reassured him; while Jehoshaphat stood by and made the judicious inquiry, "Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that we might inquire of him?" (Emphasis added.)

The true prophet Micaiah's sarcastic repetition of the other prophets' message, followed by the true message of doom to Ahab, is not a serious problem, but his explanation of the Lord's sending a "lying spirit," causing the other prophets to mislead him so that he would go to his doom, is strange theology. (Compare Numbers 23:19 and I Samuel 15:29; also Enos 1:6 and Ether 3:12.) It was apparently either a sarcastic rationale, spoken in disdain, or it has been transmitted wrongly. (It is only when a passage is clearly contrary to true or moral doctrine elsewhere established that one is safe in considering the rejection of a reading, however!)

Note that it must have been by reason of personal worthiness that Jehoshaphat was spared in battle, and that by the influence of the Lord, for it is strange that the enemy would spare any opponent, especially a royal one. Directly you will note that they who were looking for Ahab had been told by the King of Syria to fight against no one else. (IOT 2:9.)
