Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

2 KINGS

See "Kings, Books of" in the Bible Dictionary, page 721.

1:2, 3, 6, 16 The only time the Philistine god of Ekron is mentioned by the name Baal-zebub is in this chapter. Variations of the name are also used in place of the name of Satan.

In New Testament times the Pharisees challenged the Savior's healing of the "one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb," by stating: "This fellow [Jesus] doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils." (Matt. 12:22-24.)

The Hebrew meaning of Baal-zebub is "lord of the flies." (See "Beelzebub," BD, p. 620.)

2:1-18 This account seems to indicate that Elijah, Elisha, and the "sons of the prophet" knew in advance the exact day when Elijah was to be translated.

Joseph Fielding Smith has likened the "school of the prophets" in this dispensation to the meeting of the sons of the prophets in the days of Elijah:

The "School of the Prophets" is not something new to this dispensation. In ancient Israel, especially in the days of Samuel, Elijah and Elisha, there was such a school. We read in I Samuel, tenth chapter, that after Samuel had anointed Saul to be king of Israel he met a company of prophets and prophesied with them. In II Kings, chapter two, where we have the account of the translation of Elijah, we are told that a company of the sons of the prophets accompanied Elisha who was determined to follow Elijah. "And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood in view afar off, and they two (Elijah and Elisha) stood by Jordan," and when Elisha returned to them after the departure of Elijah, these sons of the prophets discovered that the power of Elijah was upon Elisha. (CHMR 1:373.)

2:9-11 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on (1) Elisha's request for a "double portion" of Elijah's spirit and (2) Elijah's translation:

Elisha's request for a "double portion" of Elijah's spiritual gift [verse 9] is to be understood in connection with the law of inheritances (Deuteronomy 21:17), which specify that an heir, or birthright son, receive a larger portion of the inheritance than the other children of a man. It is as if Elisha asked to be made Elijah's official "heir," spiritually speaking. Note also that the mantle of Elijah, which was earlier placed symbolically on Elisha (1 Kings 19:19), was now transferred to him. This significant garment has become proverbial in our references to "the mantle of the prophet" falling upon someone.

Concerning Elijah's "translation" to heaven without tasting of death in the ordinary way, and concerning his functions in both the meridian of time and in the fullness of times, there are several allusions in other scriptures. See, for instance, the inquiry about him by Jesus' apostles (Matthew 17:11). In Jesus' reply it is evident not only that the old Prophet was still to be expected to usher in the Messianic age, but also that others, such as John the Baptist, could serve as forerunners to important dispensations. (Unfortunately the name spelled "Elijah" in the Old Testament comes through Greek transliteration as "Elias" in the New Testament, and only by context can one tell when the reference is to Elijah, when to any "forerunner," and when to a prophet named Elias.) His coming to "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers" is spoken of in the Pearl of Great Price, JS-H 1:38-39. This is slightly different from the version of Malachi 4:5-6 as found in the common Old Testament text or as alluded to by the Apostles in the reference above cited in Matthew. Besides some discussion of his future function by the modern Prophet Joseph Smith (in the compilation called Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith by Joseph Fielding Smith, on pages 335-341), there are numerous references in the Doctrine and Covenants, readily found in its concordance.

Jewish people have honored Elijah with a place left vacant for him at every Passover table for these many centuries, as the anticipated herald of the Messianic kingdom as they understood it from the promise of the prophet Malachi. (IOT 2:10-11.)

2:9-14 John Taylor has provided the following observations concerning the translation of Elijah and the subsequent designation of Elisha as Elijah's successor:

Elisha, knowing that he had something to do and that he was about to be left alone, and that he might be the better prepared to perform the work before him, requested Elijah to let a double portion of his spirit rest upon him. But could Elijah grant his request? No, he could not. What answer did Elijah make him? He said, thou hast asked a hard thing; nevertheless, if thou seest me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not it shall not be so. How did Elijah know that? Because he knew that the Melchizedec Priesthood holds the keys of the mysteries and the revelations of God; and that if he could see him as he ascended, it would be an evidence to him that the Lord had granted his request, although he himself had not power to grant it, Elisha would then know that his prayer was heard. Those other prophets, who knew that Elijah was to be translated, went and stood to view the event afar off; I do not support that they saw anything of Elijah as he was being taken up into heaven. But he was taken up, and Elisha saw the manner in which he went, and cried out, "My father! my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof." And how did he see them? God had conferred upon him that priesthood by which he was enabled to see them. Elijah threw down his mantle as he ascended, which Elisha took up and started off alone, his "head" having been translated. But he had received the answer to his prayer; and approaching the banks of the Jordan, with the mantle that had been left him he smote the waters saying, "Where is the Lord God of Elijah?" And when he did so they parted as they had done at the command of Elijah, and Elisha passed over. And God was with him, manifesting his power through him, as he had done through his predecessor. I speak of this as a certain principle and I speak of it now for the information of you elders, that they did not have then an organized Melchisedec Priesthood, but that if it was conferred upon individuals, they did not have the power to confer it upon others, unless through special command of the Lord. And Elijah knew that if Elisha could see him when he was ascending, that his prayer would be answered: Why? Because the Melchizedec Priesthood holds the keys of the mysteries and the revelations of God. (JD 21:248-49.)

2:11 One purpose for the translation of some persons is to allow them to continue to administer to the earth, as explained in this statement by Joseph Fielding Smith:

We learn from modern revelation that there are no angels who administer to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it. [D&C 130:5.] Therefore the angels who appeared to Adam and the antediluvian prophets must have been spirits who had not yet tabernacled in the flesh. Since that time messengers coming to give instruction to the prophets could have been spirits of just persons who had lived on the earth or translated beings who had been reserved for that purpose. We may be sure that any messenger coming before the resurrection of Jesus who had a tangible body was a translated being who had lived on the earth and had been translated to become a messenger to men on the earth. Such would be the case evidently in the visitors who came to Abraham and the personage who wrestled with Jacob.

According to the Pearl of Great Price, when Enoch was translated, the inhabitants of the city Zion were also taken and were also translated. How many others have been given this great honor we do not know, but there may have been many of whom we have no record. Prominence has been given to the case of Elijah as well as to Enoch, and the purpose of granting to prophets this great blessing is that they may minister upon the earth. Moreover, the Lord, of necessity, has kept authorized servants on the earth bearing the priesthood from the days of Adam to the present time; in fact, there has never been a moment from the beginning that there were not men on the earth holding the Holy Priesthood. [Moses 5:59.] (AGQ 2:44-45.)

2:19-22 The major spring supplying water for modern Jericho is still known as "Elisha's Spring."

2:23-25 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on these verses:

The stories of Elisha are mostly tales of his "good-turn" miracles for people, but this initial one is different. He was insulted by youths (Hebrew na'arim is "youths" usually, rather than "little children") who challenged him to ascend (as they had perhaps heard that Elijah had ascended), and taunted him with the dishonorable epithet "bald-head." Note that the account does not say the bears ate the children, nor even that they killed them, but tore them. The Hebrew word also means to "lacerate." (IOT 2:11.)

4:18-37 The miracle of bringing the dead back to life is mentioned rarely in the Old Testament. Two such instances are:

1 Kings 17:17-24, where Elijah restored to life the widow's son.

2 Kings 4:18-37, where Elisha brought back to life the son of the Shunammite couple.

5:10-11 The initial unbelief of Naaman in the way God should demonstrate his power is common to peoples of all ages, as explained in this statement by Spencer W. Kimball:

Many people of our own day expect that revelations will come only in spectacular vision on Sinais accompanied with lightnings and thunderings. They are not unlike Naaman the Syrian war lord seeking relief from his leprosy. He was dumbfounded when the prophet Elisha ignored his letters of recommendation, his wealth, his position, his prestige, his impressive retinue of servants with chariots. The prophet Elisha merely sent his servant out to meet Naaman with the simple message, "Go and wash in Jordan seven times." (2 Kings 5:10.) The pompous foreign official was angered and bitterly complained: "I thought, He will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the leper." (2 Kings 5:11.) But there were no dramatic histrionics, no spectacular demonstrations, no pomp and show, no glamorous display; and Naaman lost confidence. He did not believe. He was unwilling to accept manifestations from God except in the way he himself prescribed.

Even in our day, many people like him expect if there be revelation it will come with awe-inspiring, earth-shaking display. For many it is hard to accept as revelation those numerous ones in Moses' time, in Joseph's time, and in our own year—those revelations which come to prophets as deep, unassailable impressions settling down on the prophet's mind and heart as dew from heaven or as the dawn dissipates the darkness of night.

The burning bushes, the smoking mountains, the sheets of four-footed beasts, the Cumorahs, and the Kirtlands were realities; but they were the exceptions. The great volume of revelation came to Moses and to Joseph and comes to today's prophet in the less spectacular way—that of deep impressions, without spectacle or glamour or dramatic events.

Always expecting the spectacular, many will miss entirely the constant flow of revealed communication. (Germany Are. CR, Aug. 1973, pp. 76-77.)

6:8-12 Through the power of the Holy Ghost, both ancient and modern prophets have had the power to see and hear what is happening elsewhere; hence, Elisha could know the words which the king of Syria spake "in [his] bedchamber."

Concerning this power, Brigham Young has stated:

When Joseph had a revelation, he had, as it were, the eyes of the Lord. He saw as the Lord sees. How did I know what was going on in Washington? I have known what was going on there all the time, and I know what is going on in other places. I know it by the spirit of God. (WW, p. 415.)

6:24-33 to 2 Kgs. 7:1-20 This story of war between Israel and Syria is apparently from an earlier time period than the one recounted in 2 Kings 6:8-23. The war account earlier in chapter 6 ended with the words "So the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel"; yet in the very next verse the "king of Syria gathered all his host, and went up, and besieged Samaria." It should be remembered that this section of 2 Kings primarily consists of a series of stories that are not necessarily arranged chronologically.

6:25-33 The Old Testament contains several accounts of people becoming so desperate in times of famine they resort to eating their own relatives. (See Jer. 19:9; Lam. 2:20; 4:10.) Moses had prophesied that this condition would come upon Israel if the people did not live righteously: "And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters. . . . The tender and delicate women . . . shall eat them [her children] . . . secretly in the siege." (Deut. 28:53, 56-57.)

7:1-18 Many principles can be learned from the stirring prophecy by Elisha and its startling fulfillment. One obvious lesson is that it is not wise to ridicule the teachings of a prophet.

13:21 Even after the death and burial of Elisha the Lord restored life through him. As the body of a dead man was lowered into the sepulchre of Elisha "when the man was let down, and touched the bones of Elisha, he [the man] revived, and stood on his feet."

15:11 The book of Chronicles in the Old Testament is not "the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel" mentioned here. In fact, virtually nothing is said in Chronicles about the kings of Israel; 1 Chronicles and 2 Chronicles are both concerned primarily with the kings of Judah.

15:16 The savage act of disembowling pregnant women so both mother and baby died at the same time had been prophesied by Elisha in 2 Kings 8:12.

16:2-4 The statement that Ahaz made his son to pass "through the fire, according to the abominations of the heathen" refers to the sacrifices of children to the fire-belching idol, Moloch.

17:6-23 This was the famed scattering of the "ten lost tribes of Israel." Verses 12-23 provide a detailed list of the sins of the people of the northern kingdom of Israel "against the Lord their God." (See Part I 48, 54, 79, 120-23, 224.)

17:24 The foreigners mentioned in verse 24, and their descendants, eventually intermarried with many of the Israelites who remained in Samaria after the ten tribes were taken into captivity. The offspring of these mixed marriages were the "Samaritans," who were not acceptable to the orthodox of Judah because of their mixed blood.

The scorn of most Jews for the Samaritans was still evident in New Testament times and provided the background for the visit of Jesus with the woman of Samaria at Jacob's well (John 4:3-42) as well as the story of the good Samaritan who proved to be a neighbor to the man who fell among thieves. (Luke 10:25-37.)

17:41 The power of example is one of the most effective teaching techniques, as reflected in the statement "as did their fathers, so do they unto this day." Unfortunately during this period of Israel's history the example was bad, for they "served their graven images, both their children and their children's children."

This verse also illustrates the principles behind the Lord's statement that "the iniquity of the fathers" will be visited "upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me." (Ex. 20:5.)

18:4 Evidently the brass serpent raised up by Moses in the wilderness when the children of Israel were bitten by the fiery serpents (Num. 21:4-9) had been kept as a memorial and was now being used as an idol. Thus Hezekiah has the idol broken "in pieces."

18:5 It seems unusual to read praise for one of the political leaders, and the statements of commendation used here for Hezekiah are similar to those used centuries earlier for Moses. (See Deut. 34:10.)

18:9-37 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the Assyrian assault against Judah:

Ten years later, the Assyrian armies came to Judah and Hezekiah was obliged to resume his payment of tribute. The precious metal given to Assyria has been estimated to have a value today of some $22,800,000. Sennacherib's record on a stone cylinder confirms the amount of gold involved (30 talents), but claims some 800 talents of silver rather than the 300 mentioned by the Bible.

During these crisis times, Isaiah the prophet was warning Judah against depending upon armed opposition or upon aid from Egypt to bring security against Assyria. (See Isaiah, chapters 30, 31.)

It appears that while Sennacherib was involved at Lachish, he sent three of his aids and a host of soldiers to try to persuade the people of Jerusalem to capitulate. The threats, the promises, and the arguments against depending either upon military might or the help of God to break the Assyrians' siege were very persuasive, and had it not been for Isaiah's reassurance, would probably have succeeded. Note that Rabshakeh asserted that (a) the Lord would not help them because they had torn down his altars on the "high places"; (b) the Lord had told Sennacherib to destroy Judah; (c) the Lord could not defend it against the might of Assyria even if He wanted to do so—any more than the gods of other lands had defended them. All of these assertions were either half-truths or bold assumptions, or both. Though there were other attempts to entice and to frighten the people, these were the crucial issues. (See also Isaiah 36.) (IOT 2:62.)

19:30-31 These intriguing verses evidently refer (1) to a group of Jews ("remnant . . . of the house of Judah") who have either left or will yet leave that area and settle elsewhere and become numerous, and (2) to another remnant of people who shall yet go forth "out of Jerusalem . . . they [shall] escape out of mount Zion."

The Book of Mormon tells of two such groups who fled out of the kingdom of Judah shortly after this period:

20:20-21 Unfortunately the Bible provides scant information concerning the feat of Hezekiah's engineers in bringing the waters of the Gihon spring (located outside the walled city) through an underground tunnel to the pool of Siloam (inside the walled city). The account in Chronicles includes only this brief note:

"This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David." (2 Chr. 32:30.)

A popular guidebook to modern Israel includes the following information regarding Hezekiah's tunnel:

In order to protect the water supply from the invading Assyrians, Hezekiah had a 1,777-foot conduit (1,090 feet in a direct line) cut through the solid rock to carry the waters of Gihon Spring to the Pool of Siloam. The Gihon Spring was then covered over from the outside. It was probably completed just before Sennacherib besieged Jerusalem, but after Sargon had captured Samaria in 721 B.C.

Workmen began on each end and accomplished a remarkable engineering feat to meet in the middle within 4 feet of each other. The tunnel averages 6 feet high. In 1880 a boy discovered the Siloam Inscription 5 feet from the floor and 19 feet from the Siloam end of the tunnel. The inscription told of "the meeting of workmen." The stone is located in the Archaeological Museum at Istanbul. The inscription in early Hebrew script said: "The completing of the piercing through. While the stone cutters were swinging their axes, each toward his fellow, and while there were yet three cubits to be pierced through, there was heard the voice of a man . . . then ran the waters from the spring to the pool for twelve hundred cubits, and a hundred cubits was the height of the rock above the head of the stone cutters." (DWB, p. 279.)

21:3 The Hebrew word Asherah translated as "grove," has reference to a fertility goddess who was supposedly the wife of Baal. Some English translations use the word shrine for this Hebrew word, since shrines and pillars were usually erected in the groves where fertility rites were practiced.

22:14 Huldah "the prophetess" is mentioned in two biblical references: 2 Kings 22:14 and 2 Chronicles 34:22. She was also mentioned by Wilford Woodruff on January 1, 1877, as part of the dedication of the St. George Temple: "May the society [Relief Society] influence the daughters of Zion to deeds of virtue, holiness, righteousness, and truth. May the blessings of Sarah, Huldah, Hannah, Anna, and Mary, the ancient prophetess, and of the holy women rest upon them." (WW, p. 492.)

The Hebrew words translated "in the college" have also been translated "in the second part" or "in the second quarter."

23:2 The record does not make clear exactly what prophets were present on this occasion. Jeremiah, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah all lived about this time.

23:27 LeGrand Richards has commented concerning the prophecy in this verse:

This prophecy, as history recounts, was literally fulfilled.

Israel was divided into two kingdoms, Judah and Israel, about 975 B.C. The Kingdom of Israel was overthrown and taken into captivity in the days of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, and Hoshea, king of Israel about 721 B.C. It is supposed that early in their captivity they made their escape, the main body going northward into unknown lands. Since then they have been known as the "lost tribes."

About a century later, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took Jerusalem and carried the tribe of Judah and part of the tribe of Benjamin to Babylon, where Judah served in captivity for seventy years: [Quoted 2 Chr. 36:19-21.]

After this captivity the Kingdom of Judah was restored to its lands by Cyrus, king of Persia. They rebuilt the city and the temple: [Quoted Ezra 1:1-3, 5.]

This gathering of the House of Judah to their promised land, and the rebuilding of their city and temple under Cyrus, king of Persia, occurred about 538 B.C. They continued to occupy the land from this time on until 70 A.D. when Jerusalem was destroyed and the Jews taken captive under an order issued by Nero and executed by Titus, son of Vespasian. After an insurrection headed by Bar-Cochba, 132-135 A.D., Hadrian completely razed to the ground the remains of Jerusalem left by Titus, and erected in its place a Gentile city, with the title Aelia Capitolina. Jews were forbidden to enter this city on pain of death, and the name of Jerusalem was not revived until the time of Constantine. (IDYK, pp. 19-20.) (See Part I 56, 58, 174-76, 239.)

23:29-30 A much more detailed account of the death of Josiah is contained in 2 Chronicles 35:20-27.

24:1 Babylonia replaced Egypt as the real ruler of the land "from the river of Egypt [at Wadi El Arish] unto the river Euphrates" (v. 7). (To locate the present site of Wadi El Arish, see "Brook of Egypt" on Map 3, grid C3.) The Babylonian king, Nebuchadnezzar, captured Jerusalem (v. 10); had "all the treasures of the house of the Lord" carried to Babylon (v. 13); carried the royal family into captivity, together with the "mighty of the land" (v. 15); and appointed a new puppet king whose name had been Mattaniah ("God's gift") but was then changed to Zedekiah—"God is (my) righteousness" (v. 17).

Within a year of Zedekiah's "coronation," Lehi and his family left Jerusalem (1 Ne. 1:4), and eleven years later Jerusalem was destroyed through a return visit of Nebuchadnezzar. (2 Kgs. 24:18; 25:1-5.)

25:7 The biblical account states that Nebuchadnezzar "slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes," so most scholars assume all the sons of Zedekiah were killed. The Book of Mormon, however, states "the sons of Zedekiah were . . . slain, all except it were Mulek" (Hel. 8:21).

Several explanations of this apparent discrepancy have been offered:

LeGrand Richards has offered the following commentary on Helaman 8:21:

It will thus be seen that one of the sons of Zedekiah escaped and he and his people were led to the land of America. This seems to have been about 588 B.C., or twelve years after Lehi and his family left Jerusalem. It seems that the people of Mulek did not keep records but after a sojourn in the land of America for approximately 400 years, the Nephites discovered them, and the two peoples were united under king Mosiah of the people of Nephi. [Quoted Omni 1:15-16, 19.] (IDYK, p. 36.)

Ezekiel had prophesied earlier (Ezek. 12:13) that Zedekiah would be taken to Babylon but would not see it. This verse records the fulfillment of that prophecy.

25:9 Although the temple was burned, it was not completely destroyed and was later rebuilt under the direction of Zerubbabel, Ezra, and others. (See Ezra 1-10.)

25:21 This is the first major scattering of the Jews since they returned from Egypt. Many of them returned to their homeland after seventy years when Cyrus conquered Babylonia. They were scattered for the second time by the Romans around 70 A.D. Thus, the present gathering of Judah to the land of their inheritance is the "second time" the Lord has "set his hand" to recover "his people." (See 2 Ne. 6:14; 21:11; 25:17; 29:1; Jacob 6:2 and Part I 56-57, 174.)
