Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

2 CHRONICLES

See "Chronicles" in the Bible Dictionary, page 635.

1-9 These chapters are similar to 1 Kings 1-11.

2:4 The last sentence of this verse reads as follows in the Joseph Smith Translation: "And this ordinance shall be kept in Israel for ever."

7:22 According to the Joseph Smith Translation the words "all this" should be deleted from the last clause of this verse.

13:5 The "covenant of salt" mentioned in this verse refers to the use of salt in connection with sacrifice. (See Lev. 2:13.) Even much later, in the Arab world it became customary for a person to use the expression "there is salt between us" to indicate the existence of a bond that would guarantee hospitality, protection, and assistance if necessary.

13:22 A "prophet" and "seer" named Iddo lived at this particular time and kept a record of the major historical events of the period. Some of the key references pertaining to this prophet and his writings are:

2 Chronicles 9:29: "Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not written . . . in the visions of Iddo the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat?"

2 Chronicles 12:15: "Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the book . . . of Iddo the seer concerning genealogies?"

2 Chronicles 13:22: "And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo."

Unfortunately the record of Iddo is not in our present Old Testament; it is one of the missing books of the Bible. (See "Lost Books," BD, pp. 725-26.)

Also the Bible does not make it exactly clear which of the men named Iddo mentioned in the Bible is this "prophet" and "seer." One possibility is the Iddo mentioned by Ezra: "And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto Iddo, and to his brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring unto us ministers for the house of our God." (Ezra 8:17.)

Nehemiah also mentions a "priest and Levite" named Iddo who returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel (Neh. 12:4, 16), but again it is not clear whether this is the "prophet" Iddo.

The prophet Zechariah was a grandson of the prophet Iddo, as revealed in these words that also provide a date for the calling of Zechariah and a general time period of Iddo, his grandfather: "In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet." (Zech 1:1; see also 1:7.)

15:1-15 During this period of general apostasy and almost constant warfare, a prophet named Oded and later his son Azariah led a reform movement. Asa, the king of Judah, supported the efforts of these prophets and destroyed the idols out of some sections of the land and "renewed the altar of the Lord, that was before the porch of the Lord" (v. 8).

Asa also "gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the Lord his God was with him" (v. 9; italics added).

Thus the kingdom of Judah (the citizens of which later became known as Jews) consisted not only of descendants of Judah but also descendants of Benjamin, Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon.

This scripture is of particular interest to Latter-day Saints, for the Book of Mormon claims that hundreds of years later—even after the ten tribes comprising the northern kingdom had been taken captive and dispersed—descendants of Ephraim and Manasseh were living in Jerusalem. The two major families that fled Jerusalem about 600 B.C. and eventually were led to the lands now known as the Americas were headed by Lehi, who was a descendant of Manasseh (Alma 10:3) and Ishmael, who was a descendant of Ephraim. (Erastus Snow, JD 23:184-85.) It is possible that the progenitors of Lehi and Ishmael were among those who migrated to the kingdom of Judah (and thus to Jerusalem) in 941 B.C. in the days of Asa.

16:1 The date here is evidently in error. Perhaps it should read "In the six and thirtieth year since the beginning of the reign of Jeroboam" rather than the reign of Asa.

18:20 According to the Joseph Smith Translation, the first sentence of this verse should read: "Then there came out a lying spirit, and stood before them, and said, I will entice him." (Italics added.)

20:6 The Joseph Smith Translation reads as follows: "And said, O Lord God of our fathers, thou God who art in heaven; and rulest over all the kingdoms of the heathen; and in thy hand thou hast power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee."

20:11 The Joseph Smith Translation adds a not at a significant point in this verse: "Behold, they reward us not, but have come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to inherit." (Italics added.)

20:17 The first clause of this verse reads as follows in the Joseph Smith Translation: "Ye shall not go to fight in this day." (Italics added.)

21-28 The parallel history for this period is found in 2 Kings 9-17.

21:12-5 This writing probably came from Elisha rather than Elijah inasmuch as Elijah was translated some thirteen years before this episode.

21:20 The Hebrew words describing the death of Jehoahaz ("he departed without being desired" [italics added]) literally read "without desire." The meaning might be that Jehoahaz may have lost his desire for life because of his "incurable disease" (v. 18), or the construction may be an idiom meaning "the people did not regret his passing."

22:2 The Joseph Smith Translation indicates that this verse should begin "Two and twenty years old," as does 2 Kings 8:26. Ahaziah could not very well have been forty-two years old when he began to reign, since his father had died that very year and was only forty years old at the time of his death. (See 2 Chr. 21:20.)

24:22 According to the Joseph Smith Translation, the last clause of this verse should read: "The Lord look upon me, and require me." (Italics added.)

29:1-2 How refreshing (and relatively rare) to read about a king who "did that which was right in the sight of the Lord."

32-36 These chapters have much of the same information as contained in 2 Kings 18-25.

The fall of Jerusalem is also related in Jeremiah 39-41 and 52.

Nearly half of the book of Ezekiel contains warnings to Judah before Judah was overthrown by Babylon.

The books of Daniel, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah pertain to this same time period.

32:30 For information concerning Hezekiah's tunnel, see the commentary for 2 Kings 20:20-21.

32:32 Unfortunately at least one of the books listed here (the book of the kings of Judah and Israel) is not in our present Old Testament. Also it is not clear whether the second book (the vision of Isaiah) is part of the book of Isaiah; if so, it is probably chapters 36 through 39, for only in these chapters does Isaiah mention in detail "the acts of Hezekiah and his goodness."

34:16 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the word of the king back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they do."

35:1-6 The ark of the covenant had been placed in the holy of holies when Solomon's temple was completed (1 Kgs. 8:1-8), but evidently it had been removed by Manasseh (2 Chr. 33:1-10, especially v. 7) and was being reinstated by Josiah. (See the commentary for 1 Chr. 13:5-14; also see "Ark of the Covenant," BD, pp. 613-14.)

35:20-27 It is not clear why Josiah decided to go "out against" Necho, king of Egypt, to battle. Obviously Josiah was not very happy about the Egyptian armies marching through his land on the way to Carchemish, but the major opponent of the Egyptians in this war was Babylonia, not the kingdom of Judah.

Josiah was one of the very few righteous kings of Judah. Little wonder "all Judah and Jerusalem mourned" for him, and the prophet Jeremiah also "lamented for Josiah."

A brief account of Josiah's death is also found in 2 Kings 23:29-30.

36:5-8 Because of the rapid turnover in kings during this period and also because several kings had more than one name, it is sometimes hard to understand the relationship of one king to the others. The following summary might help:

Josiah: This good king ruled for thirty-one years; he held the great Passover in the eighteenth year of his reign (2 Chr. 35:1-19); he was killed near Megiddo in a battle with Necho, king of Egypt. (2 Chr. 35:20-25.)

Jehoahaz, son of Josiah: The people made him king at age twenty-three, but he ruled for only three months before he was deposed by the Egyptians and carried into Egypt; the Egyptians replaced Jehoahaz with his brother Jehoiakim, who was also called Eliakim. (2 Chr. 36:1-4.)

Jehoiakim (Eliakim), brother of Jehoahaz and thus son of Josiah: He was named as the successor to Jehoahaz by the Egyptians; he reigned eleven years and was taken into captivity when the Babylonians first conquered Jerusalem, wresting it from the control of the Egyptians. (2 Chr. 36:5.)

Jehoiachin, son of Jehoiakim (Eliakim) and thus grandson of Josiah: He started to reign at eight years of age but only reigned "three months and ten days" before the Babylonians took him captive into Babylon and replaced him on the throne with Zedekiah. (2 Chr. 36:9.)

Zedekiah, the brother of Jehoiachin and thus a son of Jehoiakim and a grandson of Josiah: He began to reign when he was twenty-one years old and reigned for eleven years before Babylonia conquered Jerusalem for the second time and took Zedekiah captive into Babylon. This ended the reign of the kings of Judah. (2 Chr. 36:10-11.)

36:11-21 Bible scholars disagree as to the exact year Jerusalem was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar and the kingdom of Judah came to an end. Many of the scholars agree the date was around 587 B.C., which is the date listed for the "capture of Jerusalem" in the chronology in the Bible Dictionary (p. 639).

Some Latter-day Saints place the date of the destruction of Jerusalem at 589 B.C., rather than 587 B.C. Their reasoning is as follows:

36:22-23 and Ezra 1:1-3 Notice that these references are virtually identical. See the commentary for Ezra 1:1 for a possible explanation.

35-36 and 2 Kings 23-25 contain most of the facts and dates concerning this period, but Jeremiah (1:1-3; 21:1-14; 39:1-7) also contains vital and interesting information.
