Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

EZRA

See "Ezra" in the Bible Dictionary, page 669.

1:1 One explanation that the first three verses of Ezra are essentially the same as the last two verses of 2 Chronicles is that an editor wanted to show continuity between the two books. The book of Ezra has not always followed 2 Chronicles in the Hebrew scriptures, and this repetition might indicate an editor's preference for the present arrangement.

1:1 Jeremiah was not the only prophet who foretold the eventual destruction of Babylonia and the return of at least some of the exiled Jews to their homeland. (See Jer. 25:12-14.) Isaiah also prophesied Babylon's downfall (see Isa. 13:1-22; 48:14) and even foretold, over one hundred years before the event, the name of the king who would defeat the Babylonians—Cyrus, the king of Persia. (See Isa. 44:28; 45:1-4.)

1:8 The name Shesh-bazzar (possibly Persian "fire-worshipper") occurs only four times in the Bible—all in the book of Ezra. (1:8, 11; 5:14, 16.) Some scholars believe Shesh-bazzar is simply another name for Zerub-babel ("born in Babylon"), since both of them were of royal blood ("princes of Judah"), had Babylonian names, and were prominent in the return of the exiles. The Septuagint version of the Bible, however, distinguishes between them, showing that they were probably two different people. (1 Esdras 6:18.)

2:61-62 On November 27, 1832, the Lord specifically mentioned these verses of Ezra to Joseph Smith in regard to the apostasy of priesthood members in the latter days. Such "shall not find an inheritance among the saints of the Most High; Therefore, it shall be done unto them as unto the children of the priest, as will be found recorded in the second chapter and sixty-first and second verses of Ezra." (D&C 85:11-12.)

2:61-63 A group of the "children of the priests" was not able to prove their lineage and thus was unable to establish their rightful claim to the priesthood. They were then considered to be "as polluted" and were dropped from the priesthood. If the time should come when their lineage could be proven through a priest with "the Urim and Thummim," then, and not until then, they could eat of "the most holy things."

The Book of Mormon indicates that a person who is entitled to use the Urim and Thummim (or "holy interpreters") can learn things of the past—"things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known." (Mosiah 8:17.)

2:64-65 Nehemiah 7:66-69 also provides a list of the returning exiles. Although the totals of Ezra do not agree precisely with those of Nehemiah, they are strikingly similar.

Ezra Nehemiah

Number in the "whole

congregation" 42,360 42,360

Number of servants 7,337 7,365

Number of "singing men and

women" 200 245

3:8-13 The Levites were particularly interested in rebuilding the temple, for they would soon be offering sacrifices there again. Some of the older "priests and Levites and chief of the fathers" could remember the temple erected by Solomon, and they had mixed feelings on the occasion—they "wept with a loud voice" when they remembered what had been destroyed, but "shouted aloud for joy" at the prospects of a new temple.

4:1-7 The "adversaries of Judah and Benjamin" are the part-Israelitish people living in the lands of Samaria (hence, Samaritans), where the peoples of the ten northern tribes had previously lived. The Israelites who had remained in the area at the time of the Assyrian captivity (about 722 B.C.) intermarried with the foreigners who moved in. These mixed-blooded peoples were not considered to be pure Israelites by the returning exiles and were not allowed to assist in the rebuilding of the temple.

The Samaritans then became bitter enemies to the Jews (seventy years of the enmity are accounted for in Ezra 4:5-6), which was still evident in New Testament times. (See John 4:1-42.)

See the commentary for 2 Kings 17:24.

5:1 The prophets Haggai and Zechariah were prophesying "in Judah and Jerusalem" at this time. The Old Testament books named after these prophets provide important historical information concerning this period.

6:1-12 When Darius found the decree of Cyrus providing for the rebuilding of the temple, he wanted to maintain the honor of Persia and thus vigorously supported the project. He even ordered the death of those who opposed the work, suggesting that scaffolds be built from the timbers of their houses and that they "be hanged thereon."

6:15-22 Now the temple was functional again and many of the feasts and festivals were reemphasized.

7:1-26 Although the entire book was named after Ezra, the first time he is mentioned in the book is 7:1. A listing of his genealogy (vs. 1-5) proves he is a descendant of Aaron and thus entitled to the priesthood. Throughout the rest of the book, Ezra is referred to by such titles as "the priest, the scribe, even a scribe of the words of the commandments of the Lord" (v. 11); the title prophet is not used for Ezra.

The letter from King Artaxerxes gives permission to Ezra "to set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that are beyond the river"; Ezra thus held some civil power over the people to go with his priestly authority.

9:1-10 When Ezra arrived in Jerusalem, he was greatly dismayed to learn that the people were not observing many of the commandments given by the Lord through Moses. He was particularly incensed to discover that the people of Israel (and the priests and the Levites!) had intermarried ("the holy seed have mingled themselves") with the local people and were "doing according to [the] abominations . . . of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites." Marriage with these exact groups had been specifically forbidden by the Lord. (See Ex. 23:20-33; Deut. 7:1-6.)

It is little wonder when Ezra observed these things he rent his garment and mantle, and at the time of the evening sacrifice he promised the Lord he would do what he could to remove these evils (vs. 6-15).

10:1-12, 18, 44 "All the congregation" agreed to separate themselves "from the people of the land, and from [their] strange [foreign] wives," and the list of the offenders included "sons of priests" (vs. 18-22), "Levites" (v. 23), "the singers" (v. 24), and "[others] of Israel" (vs. 25-43).
