Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

ESTHER

See "Esther, Book of" in the Bible Dictionary, page 667.

1:1 Ahasuerus is the English translation of the Hebrew name for the Persian ruler. The English translation of the Greek version of the same name is Xerxes. The dates of this king are 486-465 B.C. according to the Chronological Tables in the Bible Dictionary, p. 640.

1-10 The book of Esther contains no references to God, Providence, or prayer, although it does mention fasting (4:16) and hints of a belief in foreordination (4:14).

At least fragments from all the books of the Old Testament have been discovered among the Dead Sea Scrolls except for the book of Esther. The fact that Esther does not contain the word God may be a reason why the book (or even portions from it) was not discovered among the Dead Sea Scrolls. The writers of the scrolls believed it was necessary to preserve everything that had the name God written upon it.

3:1-6 Mordecai's refusal to bow before Haman and do "him reverence" was in keeping with the first and portions of the second commandments: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me. . . . Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them." (Ex. 20:3, 5.) Apparently there was nothing personal against Haman in Mordecai's behavior, although Haman was filled with "wrath and . . . sought to destroy all the Jews."

3:13 Haman wanted to make certain all the Jews were permanently removed from the land! The orders are very specific and thorough—the people are "to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old, little children and women, in one day."

4:15-16 The principles of faith and willingness to sacrifice demonstrated so clearly in the story of Esther should also be observed by the Saints today, according to Lorenzo Snow:

In many instances of a similar nature where the destruction of the people of God seemed imminent, and there appeared no way of escape, suddenly there arose something or another that had been prepared for their salvation to avert the impending destruction. We find this in the case of the Israelites when led by Moses. When they came to the Red Sea and the Egyptian army in their rear threatened their destruction, there seemed no way of escape, but at the very moment when deliverance was required, behold, it appeared and they were delivered. So it has been and so it ever will be with us. Notwithstanding our difficulties may appear very great, yet there will be means provided for our escape if we ourselves perform the duties incumbent upon us as the children of God. But it may become necessary in the future—and this is the point I wish to make—for some of the Saints to act the part of Esther, the queen, and be willing to sacrifice anything and everything that is required at their hands for the purpose of working out the deliverance of the Latter-day Saints. . . .

But it is our business to step forward as did Esther, and be willing to risk all for the salvation of the people. In undertaking her task, Esther said, "If I perish, I perish." Here is a lesson for our sisters. But the people of God will not perish. There will always be a ram caught in the thicket for their deliverance. (JD 23:290, 293.)

5:14 The extreme height of the gallows (fifty cubits, or seventy-five feet) is probably a reflection of the extreme hatred of Haman and his family for Mordecai.

8:3-17 The earlier order to kill the Jews could not be rescinded because it had been "written in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring" (v. 8). Now a new letter is sent out, written in the name of the king and "sealed . . . with the king's ring" authorizing the Jews to defend themselves. Not only did many of the Persians and the Medes decide it was the better part of valor not to assault the Jews under these conditions, but "many of the people of the land became Jews" (v. 17).

9:1-10 Ellis Rasmussen has provided a brief commentary on the battle that ensued between the Jews and their enemies:

It should be noted that the carnage that ensued was not, as some commentators have said, a show of bloodthirsty vengeance by the Jews. Under the circumstances it was the result of an inevitable conflict, as there were naturally some who were sympathetic with Haman and antagonistic to the Jews who would follow the first edict; on the other hand those among the officers, deputies, rulers, etc., who knew of the vindicating order and of the trend to favor the Jews, opportunely would fight in their behalf. (IOT 2:117-18.)

9:10, 16 The same Hebrew word translated "spoil" in verse 10 is translated "prey" in verse 16.

9:20-32 The festival of Purim is still observed annually by Jews throughout the world on "the fourteenth . . . and the fifteenth day" "of the month Adar." (See "Feast of Purim," BD, p. 673, and Part I 44.)
