Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

JOB

See "Job, Book of" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 713-14.

Interpretations to the book of Job have been so varied and extreme that it has been claimed that Job has suffered more from the hands of the critics than he ever did from the hands of Satan.

Many critics of the Bible have suggested that Job is a mythological character. In modern times, however, the Lord has verified that Job existed as a real person. To an inquiring Joseph Smith, the Lord replied: "Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job." (D&C 121:10.)

Several other scriptures are also concerned with the themes of the suffering of the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked. (See Jer. 12, 20, 26, 32; Hab. 1; Mal. 3; Alma 14; D&C 121, 122.)

Several statements from Job have been quoted extensively both on and off stage. Some of the more widely quoted statements are:

1:21 Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.

2:4 All that a man hath will he give for his life.

2:10 Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

5:7 Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.

5:17 Happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty.

7:1 Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth?

10:21 Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death.

11:7-8 Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know?

14:1-2 Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.

14:14 If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.

19:25-27 For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me.

21:17 How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger.

28:28 And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.

31:35 Oh . . . that mine adversary had written a book.

32:8 But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding.

38:4-7 Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding. Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?

38:36 Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart?

40:2 Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that reproveth God, let him answer it.

40:7 Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.

2:10 If God has the power to bestow blessings upon his people, then he also has the power to cease giving those blessings, which would result in deprivation or relative punishment. Job reflects this principle in his rhetorical question directed toward his wife: "What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?"

5:17 God does not pamper those he would make strong, as is indicated in the story of Job and the lives of many other righteous persons.

Tribulation is the heritage of the righteous. It was never intended that those who serve the Lord in faithful obedience to covenants should find a rosy path to eternity. Persecution has been the reward of righteousness. Hatred of those who love the world is usually made manifest against that which is good. (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:308.)

9:2-10 At least as long ago as Abraham, some people on the earth knew a great deal about heavenly bodies. (See Abraham 3:1-18.) Evidently Job was one of these, as indicated by Joseph Fielding Smith:

It is a foolish notion to think that the ancient inhabitants of the earth were ignorant of the heavenly bodies. They were acquainted with many of the constellations and the movements of the planets and sang about them. . . . Moreover, we read in the words of Job, that he was evidently an astronomer, at least was well acquainted with the stars: In his defense against the accusations of his tormentors he said: [Job 9:2-3, 5-10.]

From these passages written anciently we learn that the people of the Lord from the beginning knew the nature of this earth, the course it is pursuing which is the same that has been covered by other worlds throughout the eternities. They were not ignorant of the planets circling our sun in their established courses.

It was not until a later age, when men had fully departed from the teachings of the prophets, that mankind lost touch with the heavens and began to look upon the earth as the great center around which everything revolved. (AGQ 4:118-19.)

19:25 The term "latter day" in this verse refers to the time of the Second Coming, according to LeGrand Richards:

What Job was given to know was that his Redeemer would stand upon the earth at the latter day and that in his flesh, though it had been destroyed by the worms, he would see God, his Redeemer. This, of course, has reference to Christ's second coming. (IDYK, p. 104.)

19:25-27 The strong testimony of Job concerning the resurrection has strengthened many others, as explained by Spencer W. Kimball.

The question asked by Job has been asked by millions who have stood at the open bier of a loved one: "If a man die, shall he live again?" (Job 14:14.)

And the question has been answered acceptably to numerous of them as a great, sweet peace settles down upon them like the dews of heaven. And innumerable times hearts that were weary in agonizing suffering have felt the kiss of that peace which knows not understanding.

And when a deep tranquility of soul has brought a new warm assurance to minds that were troubled and hearts that were torn, those numerous could repeat with beloved Job: [Quoted Job 19:25-27.]

Job had expressed the wish that his testimony could be printed in books and cut into stone for the generations following him to read. His wish was granted, for peace has come into many souls as they have read his strong testimony. (CR, Apr. 1969, pp. 30-31.)

John Taylor taught that Job's knowledge of and faith in the resurrection were proof that he understood the gospel of Jesus Christ:

"Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." And why? Because he had the everlasting gospel. What! Job had the Gospel? Yes, to be sure he had. How do I know? Because the Gospel brings life and immortality to light; and he had a knowledge of that. And hence he says, "For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." (JD 20:306.)

19:26-27 Brigham Young has offered the following commentary concerning Job's testimony of the literalness of the resurrection:

You see life in human beings and in the growing vegetation, and when that spirit of life departs, another condition of life at once begins to operate upon the organization which remains. By way of illustration I will quote one passage from the book of Job, who in his afflictions was visited by several friends, and after he had concluded that they were all miserable comforters, he exclaimed, "Though worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God." To make this passage clearer to your comprehension, I will paraphrase it, though my spirit leave my body, and though worms destroy its present organization, yet in the morning of the resurrection I shall behold the face of my Saviour, in this same tabernacle; that is my understanding of the idea so briefly expressed by Job. (JD 3:277.)

32:8 Things of the Spirit are understood only through inspiration from the Almighty, as explained in these statements:

If the Lord does not speak from heaven, and touch the eyes of their understanding by His Spirit, who can instruct or guide them to good? who can give them words of eternal life? It is not in the power of man to do it; but when the Lord gives His Spirit to a person, or to a people, they can then hear, believe, and be instructed. An Elder of Israel may preach the principles of the Gospel, from first to last, as they were taught to him, to a congregation ignorant of them; but if he does not do it under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord, he cannot enlighten that congregation on those principles, it is impossible. Job said that "There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." Unless we enjoy that understanding in this probation, we cannot grow or increase, we cannot be made acquainted with the principles of truth and righteousness so as to become exalted. (Brigham Young, JD 1:2-3.)

The Scriptures tell us that there is a spirit in man, and that the inspiration of the Almighty giveth it understanding. It is upon this principle that we become acquainted with the truth, and the power of the Gospel which we have received. The principles of eternal life are manifested unto us by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; for that Spirit rests upon us—it influences our minds; and if we watch those teachings, having within us the right feeling, we shall comprehend things clearly as they are. (Wilford Woodruff, JD 9:56-57.)

According to Joseph F. Smith, the interaction of the spirit of man with the inspiration of the Almighty distinguishes man from the "brute creation":

I read a Scripture something like this: that "there is a spirit in man." Now, if that should stop here, there would not be perhaps anything very remarkable about man; for the spirit of man knoweth only the things of man, and the things of God are discerned by the Spirit of God. But while there is a spirit in man, it is further stated that "the inspiration of the Almighty giveth it understanding." There is not a man born into the world but has a portion of the Spirit of God, and it is that Spirit of God which gives to his spirit understanding. Without this, he would be but an animal like the rest of the brute creation, without understanding, without judgment, without skill, without ability, except to eat and to drink like the brute beast. But inasmuch as the Spirit of God giveth all men understanding, he is enlightened above the brute beast. He is made in the image of God Himself, so that he can reason, reflect, pray, exercise faith; he can use his energies for the accomplishment of the desires of his heart, and inasmuch as he puts forth his efforts in the proper direction, then he is entitled to an increased portion of the Spirit of the Almighty to inspire him to increased intelligence, to increased prosperity and happiness in the world; but in proportion as he prostitutes his energies for evil, the inspiration of the Almighty is withdrawn from him, until he becomes so dark and so benighted, that so far as his knowledge of God is concerned, so far as the future or hopes of eternal life are concerned, he is quite as ignorant as a dumb brute. (JD 25:53-54.)
