Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

PSALMS

See "Psalms" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 754-55.

The Book of Psalms is one of the most frequently quoted Old Testament books by New Testament writers. The Bible Dictionary contains a list of quotations from the Old Testament found in the New Testament (pp. 756-59). Sixty-four quotations are listed from Psalms, the most from any Old Testament book. It would be educational to read each of these quotations directly in Psalms and then see how each is used in New Testament quotations.

Some of the better known quotations from Psalms are:

1:1, 3 Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. . . . he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

8:4-5 What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

14:1 The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.

18:2 The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.

19:1 The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork.

19:14 Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer.

23:1-6 (This is probably the best known of all the psalms, and should be read in its entirety.)

24:1 The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.

24:3-4 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

27:1 The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?

27:14 Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.

37:11 But the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.

40:4 Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

49:16-17 Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased; For when he dieth he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after him.

103:17 But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children.

118:8 It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man.

126:6 He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

127:1 Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.

127:3,5 Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward. . . . Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them.

133:1 Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!

137:5-6 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

139:7-8 Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.

145:8 The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great mercy.

10:6-7, 10 These three verses read as follows in the Joseph Smith Translation:

"For he hath said in his heart, I shall not be moved; never in adversity.

"His mouth is full of cursing and deceit; and his heart is full of fraud; and under his tongue is mischief and vanity. . . .

"He croucheth to the strong ones, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by his devices."

11:1-5 The Joseph Smith Translation makes several significant changes in the first five verses of this psalm. (See Ps. 11:1-5, Bible Appendix, p. 800.)

14:1-7 All the verses of this psalm are changed in the Joseph Smith Translation. (See Ps. 14:1-7, Bible Appendix, p. 801.)

17:1-15 This entire psalm should be compared with the Joseph Smith Translation. As examples, note the changes in verses 1 and 14:

18:1-50 This psalm was also included in 2 Samuel 22. (See the commentary for 2 Sam. 22.)

22:2 The word translated here as "hearest" could have been translated "answerest" according to both the Hebrew and the Joseph Smith Translation.

22:12 The two words translated here as "bulls" should have been translated "armies," according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

22:16 Concerning this verse, LeGrand Richards has written:

That they pierced the hands and feet of the Christ is a well recorded fact of history. The prophets in declaring the second coming of the Messiah indicated that He would present the wounds that He received in the house of His friends as evidence that He was the promised Messiah whom they had rejected. [Quoted Zech. 12:10 and 13:6.] (IDYK, p. 87.)

24:7-10 See these verses on p. 801 in the Appendix of the Bible for clarification.

27:13 The Joseph Smith Translation renders this verse as: "Unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, thou wouldst deliver my soul into hell."

30:12 The clause "to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee" is worded in the Joseph Smith Translation, "To the end that my soul may give glory to thy name." (Italics added.)

32:3 The Joseph Smith Translation reads as follows: "When I kept silence, my spirit failed within me; when I opened my mouth, my bones waxed old through my speaking all the day long."

33:4 The first clause reads in the Joseph Smith Translation, "For the word of the Lord is given to the upright."

36:1-6 The Joseph Smith Translation makes several significant changes in the first six verses. Verse 1 reads: "The wicked, who live in transgression, saith in their hearts, There is no condemnation; for there is no fear of God before their eyes."

38:7 The word "disease" should read "distress" according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

39:9 The word "it" should be changed to "chasten me" according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

42:2-3 The Joseph Smith Translation renders these verses as follows:

"My soul thirsteth for to see God, for to see the living God; when shall I come and appear before thee, O God?

"My tears have been poured out unto thee day and night, while mine enemies continually say unto me, Where is thy God?"

46:5-6 These verses read as follows in the Joseph Smith Translation:

"For Zion shall come, and God shall be in the midst of her; she shall not be moved; God shall help her right early.

"The heathen shall be enraged, and their kingdoms shall be moved, and the Lord shall utter his voice, and the earth shall be melted." (Italics added.)

46:8 The Joseph Smith Translation indicates that these events are in the future: "Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he shall make in the earth in the latter days." (Italics added.)

49:7-9 The Joseph Smith Translation makes significant changes in sentence structure and content:

"None can by any means redeem his brother.

"Nor give to God a ransom for him that he should still live for ever, that it ceaseth not for ever to see corruption.

"For the redemption of their souls is through God, and precious."

50:1-5 Joseph Smith has provided the following commentary on these verses:

It is . . . the concurrent testimony of all the Prophets, that this gathering together of all the Saints, must take place before the Lord comes to "take vengeance upon the ungodly," and "to be glorified and admired by all those who obey the Gospel." The fiftieth Psalm, from the first to the fifth verse inclusive, describes the glory and majesty of that event. (HC 4:272.)

53:5-7 The Joseph Smith Translation reorganizes these verses and makes several significant changes:

There is none that doeth good, no not one. They were in great fear, for God hath scattered the bones of him that encampeth against him.

O Lord, thou hast put to shame those who have said in their hearts there was no fear, because thou hast despised them.

Oh that Zion were come, the salvation of Israel; for out of Zion shall they be judged, when God bringeth back the captivity of his people. And Jacob shall rejoice; Israel shall be glad.

56:3 This verse reads in the Joseph Smith Translation: "What! am I afraid? I will trust in thee."

82:2 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "How long will ye suffer them to judge unjustly?" (Italics added.)

90:13 The Joseph Smith Translation reads:

"Return us, O Lord. How long wilt thou hide thy face from thy servants? and let them repent of all their hard speeches they have spoken concerning thee."

94:3 The essential meaning of the lament "Lord, how long shall the wicked . . . triumph?" was repeated in this dispensation by Joseph Smith when he cried to the Lord:

"O God, where art thou? . . . How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people . . . before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them?" (D&C 121:1-3.)

102:18 The word "created" should read "gathered" according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

102:21 Joseph Smith has commented:

"The city of Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will be built upon the land of America." (HC 1:315.)

104:1 The word "honour" should read "power" according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

106:45 The word "repented" should read "spared his people" according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

110:4 The statement "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek" refers to an office in the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has been used by the Lord several times in this dispensation. (See D&C 68:19; 76:57; 107:1-4; 124:123.)

112:8 The words "his desire" should read "judgment executed," according to the Joseph Smith Translation.

119:20 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "My heart breaketh, for my soul longeth after thy judgments at all times."

124:1-3 The Joseph Smith Translation equivalent reads: "Now may Israel say, If the Lord was not on our side when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled against us."

135:21 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "Blessed be the Lord out of Zion; Blessed be the Lord out of Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord."

137:1-6 Spencer W. Kimball has commented concerning these verses:

Can one ever forget the tribulations of the tribes of Israel as the foreign nations came upon them and despoiled their cities and their country, ravished their women, blinded their king and took them captive to serve as slaves? Their temple was defiled, their sacred vessels expropriated, their national identity terminated. We read with sad hearts of the song of regret and anguish and loneliness sung by the Jewish survivors: [Psalm 137:1-6.] (MF, p. 136.)
