Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

PROVERBS

See "Proverbs, Book of" in the Bible Dictionary, page 754.

The book of Proverbs contains a number of "wise sayings" from various authors and periods of time. Most of them have been attributed to Solomon.

Successive chapters of Proverbs are not necessarily related to each other; in fact, many of the "wise sayings" even in successive verses are not related. Alternate readings from the Hebrew and other sources are included where needed in the Bible text.

Some of the better known quotations from Proverbs are:

1:7 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise wisdom and instruction.

3:5-6 Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

3:11-12 Despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction: For whom the Lord loveth he correcteth.

3:13-14 Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.

4:7 Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding.

6:6 Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise.

6:16-19 These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.

10:1 A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

11:1 A false balance is abomination to the Lord: but a just weight is his delight.

12:1 Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth reproof is brutish.

13:24 He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.

14:34 Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people.

15:1 A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger.

15:32 He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding.

16:18 Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.

16:32 He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.

17:15 He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.

17:17 A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.

17:28 Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: and he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.

20:1 Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.

20:13 Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread.

21:23 Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles.

22:1 A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favour rather than silver and gold.

22:6 Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it.

25:19 Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.

25:21-22 If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink: For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee.

25:25 As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.

26:12 Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him.

26:20-21 Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: so where there is no talebearer, the strife ceaseth. As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a contentious man to kindle strife.

27:1-2 Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips.

27:10 Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity: for better is a neighbour that is near than a brother far off.

28:1 The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion.

29:2 When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.

29:18 Where there is no vision, the people perish.

30:18-19 There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not: The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a maid.

31:10 Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies.

28:20 Concerning those who "haste to be rich," Spencer W. Kimball has written:

Are there not many who are hasting to be rich? Is money taken in on the Sabbath, when it is unnecessary, unclean money? Some must work on the Sabbath. If it is not their fault, then of course there is no blame. But men and women who deliberately develop Sunday business programs to increase their holdings, I feel sorry for them. (FPM, p. 238.)
