Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

ECCLESIASTES

See "Ecclesiastes" in the Bible Dictionary, page 659.

Some of the better known quotations from Ecclesiastes are:

1:7 All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full.

1:9 There is no new thing under the sun.

1:18 For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.

3:1-8 To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven. . . . (Read this passage in its entirety.)

5:12 The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

9:4 A living dog is better than a dead lion.

11:1 Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days.

And finally one quotation that perhaps is only a personal choice at the moment:

12:12 Of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.

1:1 The Hebrew word for preacher (koheleth) comes from a root meaning "to gather," "to call together." Bible scholars disagree as to why the author of this book chose to identify himself by this designation. Some suggest he is "gathering together" some major principles of life.

It is also unknown whether or not Solomon was the actual writer of these words; someone else could have written them and then ascribed them to Solomon to gain great readership and influence.

1:2 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following background on the Hebrew word translated here as "vanity":

The introductory statement presents the author's observation that all things tend to be cyclically transient and repetitive. The word "vanity" means basically "emptiness" and "uselessness" combined with the idea of transitoriness; it translates here the Hebrew word hevel, which is a mere breath, a puff, a whiff that is here and gone. The word may be seen translated in its basic sense in Job 7:16: "for my days are a breath"; see also Proverbs 13:11, "wealth vanisheth more swiftly than a breath." Similar usage may be seen in Proverbs 21:6; 31:30; Psalm 39:6, and in Ecclesiastes it is so used in 1:14; 2:11, 17, 23; 4:4, 8; 5:9; 6:9, and in 11:10. The meaning seems always to be, in the context of this book, that which is evanescent, ephemeral, transitory, and in general not enduring. (IOT 2:133.)

1:9 The statement "there is no new thing under the sun" means the same as "there is no new thing on earth."

3:1-15 The writer has noted there are opposites in all things, and most people experience both aspects of opposites at one time or another in their lives. The statement may or may not reflect a belief in predestination or a form of foreordination.

3:2 Spencer W. Kimball has observed concerning the statement that there is "a time to die":

Just as Ecclesiastes (3:2) says, I am confident that there is a time to die, but I believe also that many people die before "their time" because they are careless, abuse their bodies, take unnecessary chances, or expose themselves to hazards, accidents, and sickness.

Of the antediluvians, we read:

"Hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?

"Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a flood." (Job 22:15-16.)

In Ecclesiastes 7:17 we find this statement:

"Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?"

I believe we may die prematurely. . . . (FPM, pp. 103-4.)

12:7 The Preacher has hinted several times before that man is a dual creature—part of earth and part of a more eternal nature. (See 2:11, 9:5.) Here he expresses the truth that "the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." The word return in the English and its equivalent in Hebrew both suggest going back to something that was before.

Harold B. Lee has commented on this verse:

So the Old Testament prophets declared with respect to death: "Then shall the dust [meaning our mortal bodies] return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." (Ecclesiastes 12:7.)

Obviously we could not return to a place where we had never been, so we are talking about death as a process as miraculous as birth, by which we return to "our Father who art in heaven," as the Master taught His disciples to pray. (SHP, pp. 8-9.)

12:11 "Goad" suggests action (see footnote in the Bible), while "nails fastened" suggests permanency or fixing in place. Words are indeed wise if they fix truths firmly in our minds and yet motivate us to righteous action.

12:13-14 These summary words help to bring everything back in perspective and are "the conclusion of the whole matter." After everything else is said and done, all we need to know is that we should "fear [revere] God, and keep his commandments." One good and perhaps sufficient reason is given for this in the final verse: "For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil."
