Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

SONG OF SOLOMON

See "Song of Solomon" in the Bible Dictionary, page 776.

The Prophet Joseph Smith indicated that the Song of Solomon is not an inspired book (introduction to "Song of Solomon" in the Joseph Smith Translation), and this book does not appear in the Joseph Smith Translation.

B. F. Cummings has left the following interesting account concerning the statement by Joseph Smith:

One day in June, 1909, while I was laboring as a missionary in Independence, Mo., and editing Liahona, The Elders' Journal, Mr. Frederick M. Smith, one of the first presidency of the Reorganized church, called me up over the telephone and invited me to come to his office, saying he had something to show me which would interest me. . . . I immediately went to the office . . . and on entering was pleasantly received. On a large office table [was] . . . the manuscript of the inspired revision of the Bible. . . . It was of foolscap paper and made a package three or four inches thick. It bore evidence of having been written at different times and by different scribes. Most of it had been written on paper that had never been cut through the center as a writer would do now-a-days. A quarter or a half a quire of paper, folded in the center in the old-fashioned way, was stitched through the "saddle" or fold, and thus fastened in the form of a book. Sometimes stocking yarn had been used for stitching. Some of these quarter or half quires were enclosed in covers made of a newspaper. Part of a newspaper thus used contained an advertisement dated, 1838. In those days news print paper was far more durable than it is now.

I was permitted to handle the manuscript and scan its pages, but of course anything like a critical examination of it was out of the question within the time at my disposal. As I was turning its leaves I came to a page on which was written in a bold hand and large letters, bolder and larger than the rest of the writing on that page, this sentence, which, unless memory is at fault, I here reproduce verbatim:

"The Song of Solomon is not inspired writing." (IE, Feb. 1915, p. 388-89.)
