Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

ISAIAH

See "Isaiah" in the Bible Dictionary, page 707.

1-66 The resurrected Jesus Christ emphasized the importance of the writings of Isaiah when He counseled the Nephites. (See 3 Ne. 23:1-3.)

1:18 The statement "though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow" has frequently been misinterpreted, according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

This quotation from Isaiah [1:18] is quite generally misunderstood. It is clear from a careful reading of this first chapter in Isaiah, that this remark had no reference to individuals at all, but to the House of Israel. The first verse states clearly this prophecy is what Isaiah saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, and in succeeding verses we have the following: [Isaiah 1:4, 7-9, 17.]

The promise now follows. If you, a rebellious nation, will repent and turn again unto the Lord, your sins, "though as scarlet, they shall be as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." [Isaiah 1:18.] So, we see, this is not an individual promise, but one to a rebellious nation. No matter how many prophets the Lord sent to Israel and Judah, and how many times he pleaded with them, all through their history they were rebellious.

Here we find a promise that if they would return to the Lord, their past sins would be forgotten, and he would again receive them as his people and bless them abundantly, and they should continue to be his covenant people. So we see that this passage does not apply to individuals and individual sins.

If you will read through Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others of the prophets, you will discover that Israel and Judah did not repent; they were finally driven from their cherished land and have suffered through the ages for their iniquities. (AGQ 2:179-80.)

1:21 The Old Testament prophets often compared the spiritual relation between God and his people to a betrothal or marriage; apostasy, through idolatry or other sin, was likened to harlotry or unfaithfulness on the part of the marriage partner. (See also Jer. 3:1-20; Ezek. 16, 23; Hosea 2.)

1:21-31 The writings of Isaiah are considered difficult to understand by many people. However, Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, testifies that "the words of Isaiah . . . are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy . . . Yea, and my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah." (2 Ne. 25:4-5.)

1:29-30 The "oaks" or terebinth trees mentioned here are common in the eastern Mediterranean area and are used either as decorative windbreaks and sunshields or to yield a resin from which turpentine is derived.

2-14 Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, quoted all of these chapters from Isaiah, and they are now in the Book of Mormon—2 Nephi chapters 12 through 24. Nephi then provides an inspired commentary for six chapters (2 Ne. 25-30) on the meaning of the teachings of Isaiah. Every serious student of Isaiah should study carefully these chapters from the Book of Mormon.

2:2 This prophecy clearly has to do with the gathering of Israel in the last days. Some LDS students of the scriptures have noted the possibility of dual fulfillment: (1) the temple built in Salt Lake City which has been the center of the gathering of the dispersed of Israel for over one hundred years, and (2) the temple yet to be built in Jerusalem, Israel, which is in the tops of the mountains of Judea.

Joseph Fielding Smith has observed:

This prediction [Isa. 2:2] has been literally fulfilled. Thousands of people have come to the valleys of these mountains from all lands and climes, proclaiming these words of Isaiah and Micah, and here they have found the word of the Lord and have entered into the covenants, in the house of the Lord which the prophets said would be offered them that they might walk in his ways. No other place on the earth is there to be found a place which fits this description and unto which the people are gathering. (RT, p. 143.)

See also Part I 86, 112.

2:2-4 Micah 4:1-3 is nearly identical with these verses from Isaiah. The terms Zion and Jerusalem refer to two separate, distinct places "in the last days" according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

There are many references which point clearly to the fact that Zion and Jerusalem are two separate and distinct places. This is true of the prophecy in Isaiah so frequently quoted. [Quoted Isa. 2:2-3.]

We have lived to see this partly fulfilled. There are to be two great capitals. One Jerusalem of old and the other the City of Zion, or New Jerusalem. The latter is to be on this continent. The one will be the Lord's headquarters for the people of Judah and Israel his companions; the other for Joseph and his companions on the Western Hemisphere, which was given to Joseph and his seed after him as an everlasting inheritance. (CHMR 1:412.)

See the commentaries for Micah 4:1-2 and Joel 2:32 and Part I 95, 132-33.

2:5 The Joseph Smith Translation adds to this verse the clause: "for ye have all gone astray, every one to his wicked ways."

2:9 The Joseph Smith Translation makes a significant change in this verse: "And the mean man boweth not down, and the great man humbleth himself not; therefore forgive them not." (Italics added.)

2:12, 14-15 The Joseph Smith Translation renders these verses as follows:

"For the day of the Lord of hosts soon cometh upon all nations; yea, upon every one; yea, upon the proud and lofty, and upon every one who is lifted up, and he shall be brought low.

"And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills, and upon all the nations which are lifted up;

"And upon every people, and upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall."

2:16 This verse is quoted differently in the Book of Mormon and various versions of the Bible, as indicated by Sidney B. Sperry:

In 2 Nephi 12:16 (cf. Isaiah 2:16) the Book of Mormon has a reading of remarkable interest. It prefixes a phrase of eight words not found in the Hebrew or King James versions. Since the ancient Septuagint (Greek) version concurs with the added phrase in the Book of Mormon, let us exhibit the readings of the Book of Mormon (B.M.), the King James Version (K.J.), and the Septuagint (LXX) as follows:

B.M. And upon all the ships of the sea,

K.J. __________________________________

LXX And upon ever ship of the sea,

and upon all the ships of Tarshish.

And upon all the ships of Tarshish,

and upon all pleasant pictures.

and upon all pleasant pictures.

and upon every display of fine ships.

The Book of Mormon suggests that the original text of this verse contained three phrases, all of which commenced with the same opening words, "and upon all." By a common accident, the original Hebrew (and hence the King James) text lost the first phrase, which was, however, preserved by the Septuagint. The latter lost the second phrase, and seems to have corrupted the third phrase. The Book of Mormon preserved all three phrases. (Our Book of Mormon, pp. 172-73.)

2:20 A possible interpretation of this verse has been suggested by Joseph Fielding Smith:

We have frequently quoted these verses [Isa. 2:1-5], but we have failed to study the verses which follow, and they all have to do with our present day. One significant thing in it is that the Lord says we would throw our idols of gold and silver which men worship in these days, to the moles and the bats, and we have nearly done this, have we not? You do not have much gold and did not the Government take it and bury it? This is close to giving it to bats and moles. (ST, pp. 56-57.)

2:20 When Isaiah uses the phrase "in that day," it almost always pertains to the last days (see v. 2) or to the dispensation of the fullness of times. (See also the commentary for Isa. 19:18-25.)

2:21 The King James statement "for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty" is translated in the Joseph Smith Translation as "for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them, and the majesty of the Lord shall smite them."

3:5 The clause "the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient" is an apt description of one of the causes of communication gaps between generations.

3:16-26 Joseph Fielding Smith believed these verses apply primarily to women of the latter days:

Today it is a common sight, even on the streets of the cities of the Latter-day Saints, to see women dressed in pants and suits similar to those worn by men. We are forced to declare that this is not a lovely sight. Moreover, it is also frequently the case at parties and places of entertainment that women are arrayed in what I think they call full or party dress, thus exposing a part of the body which should be sacred and not exposed.

The Prophet Isaiah without question saw our day, for he speaks of the daughters of Zion who, in the latter days, would be guilty of all kinds of improprieties in their dress. I will not quote what he said, but if any are curious enough and wish to read it you will find it in the third chapter of Isaiah, verses sixteen to the end.

Now, my good brethren and sisters, I am making a plea for modesty and chastity and for the members of the Church, male and female alike, to be chaste, clean in their lives, and obedient to the covenants and commandments the Lord has given us. (CR, Apr. 1964, p. 108.)

4 The footnotes in the Bible are very helpful in understanding this chapter of Isaiah.

4:1 In a Semitic society, the greatest disgrace for a woman was to be barren. Here Isaiah describes a time in the latter days when women will support themselves financially, but they will seek a husband who will make it possible for them to achieve the honor of motherhood and thus take away their "reproach."

5:10 The seriousness of the desolation in the fields is demonstrated by the terms used in verse 10. Ordinarily, a farmer would hope to get a thirty, sixty, or even a hundred-fold increase from the seed he planted. But instead he would only get one tenth back because one homer of seed (equal to ten ephahs) would only yield one ephah of harvest. This is a type of "reverse tithing" that results from unfaithfulness.

5:11, 22 Isaiah includes several warnings in his writings concerning the evils of "strong drink," including the contents of these two verses.

See the commentary for Leviticus 10:1.

5:20 When a person claims that a certain thing is not a sin when he knows it is sinful, he is calling "evil good." He may do this in order to gain popularity with sinful people or to excuse his own weakness. Concerning such people, Spencer W. Kimball has written:

Woe unto those who wrest the scriptures to interpret them to cover their weaknesses. . . .

Many of the modern terms for sin were not used in the scriptures and in olden days, and some people, therefore, excuse their contaminations because the age-old transgressions were not identified with modern terms. But, if one reads the scriptures carefully, all sins are denounced there in every shade of error. . . .

Surely, every soul who has reached the age of accountability, and especially those who have received the Holy Ghost after baptism, knows the difference; but so often we hear what we want to hear and we see what we want to see. There is a definite war against the soul when evil is perpetrated. And I challenge any normal baptized person who says he did not know he was doing wrong. There is no compatibility between sin and righteousness, between guilt and peace. (BYUSY, Jan. 1965, p. 7.)

5:26-29 A modern "prophet, seer, and revelator," LeGrand Richards, has interpreted these verses to refer to modern trains or planes and the use of these forms of transportation by LDS missionaries going out into their fields of labor:

In fixing the time of the great gathering, Isaiah seemed to indicate that it would take place in the day of the railroad train and the airplane. [Quoted Isa. 5:26-29.]

Since there were neither trains nor airplanes in that day, Isaiah could hardly have mentioned them by name. However, he seems to have described them in unmistakable words. How better could "their horses' hoofs be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind" than in the modern train? How better could "their roaring . . . be like a lion" than in the roar of the airplane? Trains and airplanes do not stop for night. Therefore, was not Isaiah justified in saying: "none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken"? With this manner of transportation the Lord can really "hiss unto them from the end of the earth," that "they shall come with speed swiftly." Indicating that Isaiah must have foreseen the airplane, he stated: "Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?" [Isaiah 60:8.] (IDYK, p. 182.)

6:1-5 "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." (2 Cor. 13:1.) The fact that Isaiah had a personal vision and witness of the Redeemer is testified by Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet: "Isaiah . . . verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen him. And my brother, Jacob, also has seen him as I have seen him; . . . Wherefore, by the words of three, God hath said, I will establish my word. Nevertheless, God sendeth more witnesses, and he proveth all his words." (2 Ne. 11:2-3.)

Careful study of Isaiah indicates that he knew a great deal concerning the coming of Jesus Christ and his mission, including the following:

6:9-10 The Joseph Smith Translation of these verses reads:

"And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but they understood not; and see ye indeed, but they perceived not.

"Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed."

6:9-13 The subjects contained in these verses are indicated in the chapter headings of the Bible: Isaiah "prophesies of the rejection by the Jews of Christ's teachings—A remnant shall return."

7:14 This is one of the most famous of the Messianic prophecies of Isaiah: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel."

Unfortunately (and erroneously) some modern translations render this verse "a young maiden" rather than "a virgin." Such a change is not justified by the text and destroys the meaning of the statement. How could a young maiden having a child be "a sign" that would help convince the Jews of the coming of their Messiah?

See Part I 64.

8:1-4 The date of this prophecy concerning the capture of the northern kingdom by "the king of Assyria" can be determined quite closely because the newly-born son (Mahershalal-hash-baz, "to speed to the spoil") would not even be old enough to speak before the captivity was to take place. This capture of the ten tribes comprising the kingdom of Israel is usually dated 722 B.C.

8:5-7 Isaiah prophesied that Assyria would also invade much of the territory of Judah while capturing the northern kingdom.

9:1-2 The heading of this chapter in the Bible says that "Isaiah speaks Messianically." When Jesus Christ came on the earth he was indeed reared in "the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali' (where Nazareth and Capernaum are located) "beyond Jordan, in Galilee" as prophesied by Isaiah. (See Matt. 4:14-16.) Then the people in that area who had "walked in darkness" would see "a great light" who is the Light and Life of the world—Jesus Christ.

See Part I 64.

9:3 The Joseph Smith Translation indicates that the word "not" should be deleted from the King James text.

9:6 Because of his several visions, Isaiah knew a great deal about the birth, life, mission, and titles of Jesus Christ, even though Isaiah lived some 700 years before Christ was born on the earth. Some Bible scholars who do not believe in the principle of revelation and the spirit of prophecy question whether Isaiah could really have known these things in such detail. That the titles in these verses actually do apply to Jesus Christ is substantiated and explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

These titles, and the sayings that Jesus was the Creator and all things were made by him, have proved to be a stumbling block to some who are not well informed. The question arises, "How could he, if he had not body and flesh and bones, before he was born of Mary, accomplish these things as a spirit?" Jesus had no body of flesh and bones until he was born at Bethlehem. This he fully explained to the brother of Jared. The answer to this question is simply that he did these wonderful works because of the glory his Father had given him before he was born (John 17:5-24) and because at that time he was God. (CHMR 1:168.)

See Part I 59-74.

9:17 The King James phrase, "every one is a hypocrite," is changed in the Joseph Smith Translation to "every one of them is a hypocrite."

10 The first portion of this chapter prophesies of the coming destruction of Assyria, and the last part compares this destruction to what will happen to the wicked in the last days.

10:23 The statement "shall make a consumption, even determined" could have been translated from the Hebrew "shall make a full end, as ordained."

11:1-16 This chapter of Isaiah was quoted by the angel Moroni when he first appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith on September 21, 1823. Moroni stated that the chapter "was about to be fulfilled." (JS-H 1:40.)

11:1-2 The chapter heading in the Bible says that the "stem of Jesse" who is to judge in righteousness is Jesus Christ.

11:1-10 Joseph Smith was once asked a series of questions concerning the contents of these verses. The questions and his inspired answers are in D&C 113:1-6:

Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th verses of the 11th chapter of Isaiah?

Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ.

What is the rod spoken of in the first verse of the 11th chapter of Isaiah, that should come of the Stem of Jesse?

Behold, thus saith the Lord: It is a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power.

What is the root of Jesse spoken of in the 10th verse of the 11th chapter?

Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days.

11:6-9 Isaiah and other prophets have indicated that during the Millennium enmity will cease between beast and beast, between man and beast, and between man and man. See Part I 100, 155-65.

11:10-13 LeGrand Richards has provided the following commentary on these verses:

From this prophecy we learn:

First: That the Lord would establish an ensign among the Gentiles.

Second: That the Lord would set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of His people.

Third: It will be noted that when the Lord would set His hand "the second time" to gather Israel, it would be twofold in nature: (1) That He would "assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah." (2) That this great movement would have its inception among the Gentiles, the Kingdom of Israel or Ephraim.

Fourth: That "The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim." (IDYK, pp. 153-54.)

12:2 The phrase "God is my salvation!" is actually a play on Isaiah's own given name, as his name has this exact meaning and uses the same Hebrew root.

13:1-22 Chapter 13 prophesies the type of destruction that will come upon Babylon and then likens it to the destruction of the wicked at the time of the Second Coming. The pattern of the chapter is similar to chapter 10, which prophesied Assyria's destruction.

Concerning the Lord's power to prophesy such events as the forthcoming destruction of Babylon, LeGrand Richards has written:

The Prophet Mormon gave us to understand that all the promises of the Lord would be fulfilled:

"For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled." (Mormon 8:22.)

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith given at Hiram, Ohio, February 16, 1832, the Lord gave the prophet to understand that "his purposes fail not:" [Quoted D&C 76:1-4.]

In light of these declarations, it is not difficult to understand how the Prophet Isaiah could declare, one hundred and seventy years in advance, the destruction of the great city Babylon, the greatest city in all the world at that time, and declare in positive terms that it should never be rebuilt. (See Isaiah 13:19-22.) And it never has been rebuilt. (IDYK, p. 211.)

13:3 The Joseph Smith Translation has significantly clarified this verse: "I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones, for mine anger is not upon them that rejoice in my highness."

13:15 The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies the meaning of this verse: "Every one that is proud shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined to the wicked shall fall by the sword."

13:22 The Joseph Smith Translation adds the following statement at the end of the King James verse: "for I will destroy her speedily; yea, for I will be merciful unto my people, but the wicked shall perish."

14:1-3 That Isaiah's prophecies concerning the gathering of Israel in the last days included the promise they should never "be scattered again" is verified by Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet:

"I spake unto them [his brethren] concerning the restoration of the Jews in the latter days.

"And I did rehearse unto them the words of Isaiah, who spake concerning the restoration of the Jews, or of the house of Israel; and after they were restored they should no more be confounded, neither should they be scattered again." (1 Ne. 15:19-20.)

14:2 The words in italics are added in the Joseph Smith Translation:

"And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: yea, from far, unto the end of the earth, and they shall return to their land of promise, and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord."

14:3-4 In the Joseph Smith Translation both of these verses contain the phrase "in that day," indicating that these events pertain to the last days.

14:12-17 The "Lucifer" referred to in these verses also has other titles such as "devil," "Satan," "the adversary," "the evil one," "the liar from the beginning," and "perdition." (See "Devil," BD, p. 656; "Lucifer," BD, p. 726.)

Lucifer is apparently the title or name of the personage in the pre-earthly existence who is now referred to as Satan or the devil. The fact that Isaiah refers to Lucifer and his role in the pre-earthly existence seems to indicate that the Old Testament prophets were acquainted with the doctrine of a pre-earthly existence. It may be that Isaiah and others of the ancient prophets had access to the writings of Moses that are not in our present Old Testament but which were revealed anew to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December 1830. These writings of Moses include the following statement concerning Lucifer and his role in the pre-earthly councils:

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:3-4.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has provided the following commentary on Lucifer:

Satan was denied the privilege of receving a body of flesh and bones, the blessing of mortality and the resurrection, because of his rebellion. There must have been a time in the eternity past when he was considered faithful and great honors had been bestowed upon him, for he was known as Lucifer, which is interpreted as "light-bearer." It is written of him in Isaiah. [14:12-17.]

Lucifer sought to dethrone our Eternal Father and rebelled against the plan for our redemption from the grave. For this rebellion he was cast out with those who followed him, and from that time henceforth he has been the enemy of every mortal man. (AGQ 2:170.)

14:19 The King James clause "and as the raiment of those that are slain" appears in the Joseph Smith Translation as "and the remnant of those that are slain."

17:1 Isaiah continues with his prophecies of the coming destruction of cities and countries. He had already prophesied the destruction of Assyria (10:5) and Babylon (13:1-5). Now the destruction of Damascus is foretold (17:1).

18:1 The identification of the "land shadowing with wings" has been provided by Joseph Fielding Smith:

I will read from the 18th chapter of Isaiah because this has to do with this latter-day work. . . . The way it begins in the King James version is: "Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia." This is a mistranslation. In the Catholic Bible it reads: "Ah, land of the whirring of wings, beyond the rivers of Cush," and in Smith and Goodspeed's translation it reads: "Ah! Land of the buzzing of wings, which lies beyond the rivers of Ethiopia." The chapter shows clearly that no woe was intended, but rather a greeting, as indicated in these other translations. A correct translation would be, "Hail to the land in the shape of wings." Now, do you know of any land in the shape of wings? Think of your map. About twenty-five years ago one of the current magazines printed on the cover the American continents in the shape of wings, with the body of the bird between. . . . Does not this hemisphere take the shape of wings; the spread out wings of a bird? (ST, p. 51.)

18:2 Joseph Fielding Smith has indicated: "the word 'bulrushes' is . . . wrong. The meaning is vessels of speed." (ST, p. 51.)

18:2-3 The "ambassadors" or "swift messengers" in verse 2 are missionaries of the true Church, according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

This chapter is clearly a reference to the sending forth of the missionaries to the nations of the earth to gather again this people who are scattered and peeled. The ensign has been lifted upon the mountains, and the work of gathering has been going on for over one hundred years. No one understands this chapter, but the Latter-day Saints, and we can see how it is being fulfilled. (ST, p. 54-55.)

America was discovered because the Lord willed it. The gospel was restored in America, rather than in some other land, because the Lord willed it. This is the land "shadowing with wings" spoken of by Isaiah that today is sending ambassadors by the sea to a nation scattered and peeled, which at one time was terrible in the beginning. (Isa. 18:1-2.) Now that nation is being gathered, and once again they shall be in favor with the Lord. (CR, Apr. 1966, p. 14.)

This interpretation suggests that the "ensign on the mountain" in verse 3 is the gospel of Jesus Christ.

19:1-10 These verses concerning the "burden" (message) to Egypt have been subject to various interpretations. Some scholars believe the statement "the Egyptians [will fight] against the Egyptians" refers to the struggles for power among many of the Egyptian leaders. Scholars disagree as to whether "the river" referred to in verse 5 is the Nile (whose flow has been altered by the construction of the high dam at Aswan) or the "river of Egypt" that is usually interpreted to be an ancient stream near Wadi El Arish which "dried up" long ago.

19:18-25 The term "in that day" (verses 18, 19, 21, 23, and 24) is frequently used by Isaiah to refer to the period of the last days. If this is the meaning here, the contents of some of these verses are still to be fulfilled. (See the commentary for Isa. 2:20.)

20:1-6 The contents of this brief chapter evidently refer to the time of the captivity of the northern tribes by the Assyrians. See Part I 54, 120-23, 173, 224, 235-36.

21:2-12 In discussing the "grievous vision" described by Isaiah, President Harold B. Lee recalled similar words from the apostle Paul:

This vision [Isa. 21] pictures in our minds a watchman upon a tower, placed there by the Lord in the courtyard below, keeping watch for the approach of a possible enemy, which would be perceived by clouds of dust or other evidences. As he reported hour by hour what he could see, here in the vision you have the Lord asking the watchman, "what of the night, what of the night"; and the watchman said, "the morning cometh, and also the night; if ye will inquire, inquire ye."

This vision of Isaiah recalls the descriptive words of the apostle Paul as he wrote to the Ephesians: "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand." (Ephesians 6:12-13.) (Germany Area CR, 1973, p. 67.)

21:11 Harold B. Lee has provided the following modern application on the meaning of the expression "Watchman, what of the night?"

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord said that Satan drew after him a third part of the spirits whom God created, and that they with Satan became the force in the world to try to destroy the work of righteousness. That power was spoken of by Isaiah in a vision which he received which he called a grievous vision, in which it was said: "Set a watchman on the tower to tell what he seeth and report the coming of horsemen and chariots," but a voice spoke out of Mount Seir saying, "Watchman, what of the night." (See Isaiah 21:6-11.) "Watchman, what of the night," suggesting that, more to be feared than the enemies that could be perceived with the physical senses or could be seen by physical eyes were the powers of darkness that came unseen by physical eyes. . . .

Using words that are common to modern warfare, we might say that there are in the world today fifth columnists who are seeking to infiltrate the defenses of every one of us, and when we lower those defenses, we open avenues to an invasion of our souls. There are carefully charted on the maps of the opposition the weak spots in every one of us. They are known to the forces of evil, and just the moment we lower the defense of any one of those ports, that becomes the D Day of our invasion, and our souls are in danger.

The experiences and the examples of many cases recited in testimonies in this and other dispensations of the gospel seem clearly to indicate that whenever we allow ourselves to become doubtful, bitter in our souls, melancholy, and otherwise downcast, or despondent, we open avenues to the forces which are ready to take us in a snare just the moment these weaknesses are discovered in us. (CR, Oct. 1949, p. 56.)

22:2 The first clause could have been translated "Crashings fill the noisy city, the joyous city."

22:20-25 The chapter heading in the Bible indicates that the essential message of these verses is that the "Messiah shall hold the key of the house of David, inherit glory, and be fastened as a nail in a sure place."

24:2 The word priest as used in this verse does not necessarily refer to an office in the priesthood, as Spencer W. Kimball has explained:

The term priest is here used to denote all religious leaders of any faith. . . . From among the discordant voices we are shocked at those of many priests who encourage the defilement of men and wink at the eroding trends and who deny the omniscience of God. Certainly these men should be holding firm, yet some yield to popular clamor. (CR, Apr. 1971, p. 9.)

26:2 Some modern students of the scriptures have suggested that "the righteous nation which keepeth the truth" is the United States of America, which provided the basis of religious freedom necessary for the restoration of the true Church in the last days.

26:19 This statement clearly teaches of the resurrection of the Lord (Jehovah) and of all mankind. Concerning this verse, B. H. Roberts has written:

This is Jehovah speaking! "Thy dead men," O Israel, "shall live"—the resurrection of the dead proclaimed! Together with Jehovah's dead body shall they arise! Jehovah, then, is to have a "body"! He is to become "dead," and to "arise," Jehovah is to dwell with men in the flesh, to be "Immanuel," to live with men, to die, to arise from the dead, and the dead men of Israel to rise with him! (Rasha, the Jew, p. 16.)

Harold B. Lee has also emphasized the teaching of this verse:

The question of every man is: "If a man die, shall he live again?" And it is answered by the certainty of the word of God: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise." (Isaiah 26:19.) (Ye Are the Light of the World, p. 235.)

27:6, 12 The children of Israel (Jacob) will "blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit . . . [and] shall be gathered one by one."

28:1-29 The headings and the explanatory footnotes of this chapter shed considerable light on the meanings of these verses.

28:10 Similar instructions were given by the Lord to the prophet Nephi as recorded in the Book of Mormon. (See 2 Ne. 28:30.)

29:1-8 The Joseph Smith Translation makes several significant changes in these verses. See Isaiah 29:1-8, Bible Appendix, page 801.

29:4 Several modern prophets, seers, and revelators have identified this verse with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. LeGrand Richards has written:

Isaiah saw the downfall of Ariel, or Jerusalem, at a time far in the future, "add ye year to year," or approximately 170 years before Jerusalem was destroyed as prophesied by Lehi. Then he seems to have been carried away in vision to witness a similar destruction of the cities of Joseph, "and it shall be unto me as Ariel." Then he describes how they would be besieged and forts would be raised against them. They would be brought down and would speak "out of the ground." Their speech would be low "out of the dust." Now, obviously, the only way a dead people could speak "out of the ground" or "out of the dust" would be by the written word which was accomplished through the "Stick of Joseph." Truly it has a familiar spirit, for it contains the words of the Nephite and Lamanite prophets of God. (IDYK, p. 38.)

29:9 The Joseph Smith Translation indicates that this verse is addressed to "all ye that do iniquity."

29:10 The Joseph Smith Translation indicates that the Lord did not close the eyes of the people, but "behold, ye have closed your eyes."

29:10-13 The Joseph Smith Translation adds thirteen significant verses to the King James text, relating in detail the taking of the "words of the book" to the "one that is learned."

According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, this prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled in the visit of Martin Harris with professor Charles Anthon. (See HC 1:19-20.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has provided the following comments on this visit:

When Martin returned to the Prophet from New York he seemed to be elated. He gave a detailed report of his visit to these noted gentlemen of learning. If Martin went to them with some misgivings in his mind, these were evidently quieted by the report which he received. From that time forth he became enthusiastic over the work the Prophet was doing. . . .

We have reason to believe that Martin Harris was unacquainted with this prophecy. Certainly when he went to Dr. Anthon, he had no thought in his mind in relation to this prediction. How could he know its meaning? Evidently when he returned he was still ignorant of the significance of the event in which he had played such a prominent part. . . . The story of Martin Harris, in connection with its significance in the fulfillment of the words of Isaiah, should impress every member of the Church deeply and reveal to him the marvelous way in which the Lord acts. This is not merely a coincidence, but the actual fulfillment of the predictions. . . .

Let us stop and reflect how Joseph Smith the man "unlearned" according to the Lord's prediction, has confounded the wise and the learned, the professors of science and of religion, and how their theories and doctrines have crumbled before the truth. False teachings have been exposed. The humble have had the Gospel taught to them, while the wise in their own conceit have stood astounded but unrepentant before the onslaughts of this youth against the citadel of their superstitions and false philosophy. We should humbly thank our Father in heaven for the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy. (CHMR 1:21-23.)

29:14 The "marvellous work and a wonder" of the last days definitely includes the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon according to LeGrand Richards:

The bringing forth of the Stick of Joseph [Book of Mormon] which the Lord has done, surely constitutes "a marvelous work and a wonder." It has truly caused "the wisdom of their wise men [to] perish, and the understanding of their prudent men [to] be hid." (Isaiah 29:14.) It is one of the great steps in the unfoldment of the Lord's eternal program looking to the uniting of the two great houses of Israel, Judah and Joseph, since now He has united their records. (IDYK, p. 39.)

Joseph Fielding Smith believed that the missionary program of the Church should also be included:

Surely this prophecy has been fulfilled, to the satisfaction of every Latter-day Saint. When we think of the manner of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, its influence upon thousands who have come into the Church; the miraculous, but logical, manner in which the Church was restored and its success in the midst of almost universal hatred or opposition, it is something to make us marvel and wonder. Then again, when we think of the missionary work of the Church; how our young inexperienced men have gone forth to proclaim the Gospel to an unbelieving world and have come off victorious, we must acknowledge that only the guiding hand of the Lord could have accomplished this great work. We have seen the wisdom of the wise perish and the understanding of the prudent, who trust in the world and the traditions of men, come to naught. And so it will and must be. (CHMR 1:23.)

29:16 The Joseph Smith Translation equivalent of this verse (29:28) begins with the clause: "But behold, I will show unto them, saith the Lord of hosts, that I know all their works."

29:20 The equivalent verse in the Joseph Smith Translation (29:31) begins: "For, assuredly as the Lord liveth."

30:14 The imagery of Israel being broken (destroyed and scattered) even as a "potters' vessel that is broken in pieces" was also used by the prophet Jeremiah. (See Jer. 18:1-10; 19:1-15.)

31:1 In the days of Isaiah, the leaders of Israel were placing their faith in the arm of flesh (Egypt) rather than in the Lord (the Holy One of Israel). During the times of the captivity by both Assyria and Babylonia, the Israelites did not receive any assistance from Egypt.

33:1-24 The chapter heading in the Bible adds significantly to an understanding of these verses.

34:4 At least three possible interpretations might explain the phrase "the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll":

34:5-6 The Hebrew word translated here as "Idumea" is the word for Edom. The Doctrine and Covenants indicates that this word is also used to designate "the world." (See D&C 1:36.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

Now, some Bible commentators, because the name of Idumea, a little country east of the Jordan, is mentioned, have an idea that this had reference to that little country; but the term Idumea is one that the Lord uses to mean the world. You will find it so recorded in Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants. He is speaking of the world.

. . . This prophecy had nothing to do with that little country called Idumea but to the nations of the earth. (ST, pp. 150-51.)

34:16 The second clause reads in the Joseph Smith Translation: "and read the names written therein." The last clause is "my Spirit it hath gathered them."

35:3 The word "confirm" here means to "firm up."

35:8 The Joseph Smith Translation adds the words in italics:

"And a highway shall be there; for a way shall be cast up, and it shall be called the way of holiness. The unclean shall not pass over upon it; but it shall be cast up for those who are clean, and the wayfaring men, though they are accounted fools, shall not err therein."

36:5 The Joseph Smith Translation punctuates the first part of this verse as follows: "I say, thy words are but vain when thou sayest, I have counsel and strength for war."

36:12-22 The servants of the king of Assyria urged the people of the northern kingdom to surrender to Assyria, rather than to continue to resist in the hope then God would deliver them. Samaria (the northern kingdom of Israel) had already been conquered in the campaign of the Assyrians (v. 19).

37:7 The word rumour as used here does not mean the report will be false or incorrect. The sense of the sentence is that the king of Assyria will hear (receive) news from home that will cause him to return.

37:32 The "remnant" that went forth "out of Jerusalem" at the time of the Assyrian siege of Jerusalem could have been one of the "graftings" mentioned by the prophet Zenos as recorded in the Book of Mormon. (See Jacob 5:8, 13-14, 20-28.)

The Joseph Smith Translation adds the words in italics: "and they that escape out of Jerusalem shall come up upon mount Zion."

37:36 The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies the last portion: "and when they who were left arose. . ."

38:16 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "Oh Lord, thou who art the life of my spirit, in whom I live; so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live; and in all these things will I praise thee."

38:17 The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies the meaning of the first clause: "Behold, I had great bitterness instead of peace."

40:9 See the commentary for Isaiah 2:2-4. Joseph Fielding Smith has commented:

These are a few of the passages of scripture which indicate the fact that there are to be two capital cities which will be established when the millennial reign shall come. Zion, the New Jerusalem in America and Jerusalem in Palestine which shall be rebuilt and become a city of magnitude and magnificence. (CHMR 1:412-13.)

40:15 In modern times, the Lord has indicated again that he controls the destinies of nations and armies: "Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?" (D&C 117:6.)

41:8 Several terms of endearment have been used by the Lord in referring to his servants. The title "my friend" is used by him several times in connection with Abraham. (See 2 Chr. 20:7; James 2:23.) The Lord has also used the term several times in this dispensation to refer to leaders in the Church. (See D&C 84:77; 88:3, 62; 93:45, 51; 94:1; 100:1; 103:1; 104:1; 105:26.)

41:10 The term right hand has been used by the Lord on several occasions to refer to precedence, authority, or righteousness. Concerning such references to the use of the right hand, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

"The showing favor to the right hand or side is not something invented by man but was revealed from the heavens in the beginning. To Isaiah the Lord said: [Isaiah 41:10, 13.] . . .

"There are numerous passages in the scriptures referring to the right hand, indicating that it is a symbol of righteousness and was used in the making of covenants." (AGQ 1:156-57.)

See the commentary for Genesis 48:13-19.

41:18 LeGrand Richards has commented concerning this verse:

"Rivers in high places" could have reference to the reservoirs built in the canyons to impound the winter run-off of water so it may be used for summer irrigation.

"And fountains in the midst of the valleys." If you have seen some of the flowing wells that have been drilled in some of the dry valleys, you can understand this part of the prophecy. (IDYK, p. 185.)

42:6-8 See the commentary for Isaiah 61:1-2.

42:7 An inspired commentary on the meaning of such verses as Isaiah 42:7 has recently been added to the Doctrine and Covenants and thus is now accepted as scripture in the Church (see section 138, the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead).

The fact that the gospel of Jesus Christ was taught to the spirits in prison was also mentioned by Peter and commented upon by Joseph Smith:

"He went and preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah," [1 Peter 3:19-20]. Here then we have an account of our Savior preaching to the spirits in prison, to spirits that have been imprisoned from the days of Noah; and what did He preach to them? That they were to stay there? Certainly not! . . . Isaiah has it—[Isaiah 42:7]. It is very evident from this that He not only went to preach to them, but to deliver, or bring them out of the prison house. (HC 4:596.)

42:9 Often when ancient prophets would speak of future events or prophecies, they would use a verb form sometimes called the "prophetic past tense." That is, they would talk about the future as though the event had already happened. For example, over one hundred years before the birth of Jesus Christ, the prophet Abinadi said: "And now if Christ had not come into the world, speaking of things to come as though they have already come, there could have been no redemption. And if Christ had not risen from the dead . . ." (Mosiah 16:6-7; italics added.) Study Isaiah 42:9 with D&C 93:24 and see why a prophet would talk of the future but be so confident that events would happen that he would talk of them in a "prophetic past tense."

42:19-23 The Joseph Smith Translation makes several significant changes in these verses. See Isaiah 42:19-23, Bible Appendix, page 801.

42:25 The last portion in the Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And they have set them on fire round about, yet they know not, and it burned them, yet they laid it not to heart." (Italics added.)

43:1-28 Several significant and appropriate titles of Jehovah the Messiah are used in this chapter, including Lord (vs. 1, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16), God (3, 10, 12), Holy One of Israel (3, 14), Saviour (3, 11), your redeemer (14), your Holy One (15), the creator of Israel (15), and your King (15).

See Part I 74.

43:13 The meaning of the clause "who shall let it?" is "who shall reverse it?" or, as the Joseph Smith Translation phrases it, "who shall hinder it?"

43:19 LeGrand Richards has provided a possible interpretation for this verse:

What is this new thing the Lord speaks of through the Prophet Isaiah? Could it not be the great system of "irrigation" which the Lord inspired His servants to teach to His people when they entered the valleys of the mountains? It was irrigation which caused the desert to "rejoice, and blossom as the rose;" to "make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert." The great irrigation canals are larger than many rivers as they flow through the desert, bringing tens of thousands of acres of otherwise arid lands under profitable cultivation. (IDYK, p. 184.)

43:25 The Lord "blotted out" the transgressions of men through their repentance and his atonement. In such instances, he has promised that he will remember the sins of man no more. (D&C 58:42.)

44:6 The several titles of Jehovah used in this verse (Lord, King of Israel, redeemer, Lord of hosts, the first and the last, and God) also appear numerous times in other scriptures, including the modern scripture, the Doctrine and Covenants. (See the numerous titles listed under the heading "Jesus Christ," Bible Appendix, p. 240; see also Part I 74.)

44:28 Although Isaiah lived approximately seven hundred years before Christ, he mentioned by name in this verse (and in 45:1) the exact name of Cyrus, the future king of Persia who conquered the Babylonians around 537 B.C. and allowed the Jewish captives to return home. Bible scholars who question or deny the power of revelation and the spirit of prophecy claim it was not possible for Isaiah, the son of Amoz, to have written these verses. They therefore attempt to credit these and subsequent chapters of Isaiah to a "second" or even a "third" Isaiah living hundreds of years later.

That Isaiah could and did know the name of Cyrus over a hundred years before the birth of Cyrus has been verified and explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

The Prophet Joseph Smith once said: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council in heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." We read in the Bible that this was the case with Jeremiah [Jeremiah 1:5] and John the Baptist who was called to be the messenger to prepare the way before the Lord. [Malachi 3:1; Luke 1:13.] Nor were these pre-mortal callings confined to the prophets, for in a remarkable prophecy made by Isaiah, the Lord revealed the mission which was assigned Cyrus, king of Persia, over one hundred years before he was born. [Isaiah 44:28; 45:1-3.] (AGQ 5:181.)

46:11 The "ravenous bird from the east" refers to Cyrus of Persia and his rapid conquest of the area, according to the footnote of the Bible.

48:1 The phrase "the waters of Judah" is amplified by an additional phrase in the Book of Mormon where this chapter is quoted. Although the additional phrase "or out of the waters of baptism" in 1 Nephi 20:1 was not in the original 1830 edition of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith allowed it to be included in later editions as an inspired interpretation of the phrase "waters of Judah."

49:18-26 As indicated in the chapter heading, "Israel shall be gathered with power in the last days." (For additional information on this important subject, see Part I 78-95, 105-23, 177-97, 205-13, 223, 228-32, 239-50.)

49:22-23 Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, quoted these two verses of Isaiah to his people and then provided an inspired commentary on the meaning of this prophecy. (See 2 Ne. 6:4-15 and Part I 193-94.)

49:22 Orson Pratt has explained the meaning of "my standard":

"[The Standard is] the same as an ensign—an ensign that is to be lifted up upon the mountains, upon a land afar off. It is the standard of the Almighty." (JD 16:85.)

49:25 The Joseph Smith Translation adds the words in italics: "For the mighty God shall deliver his covenant people. For thus saith the Lord, I will contend with them."

50:1 The Joseph Smith Translation begins this verse: "Yea, for thus saith the Lord, Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off for ever?"

50:2 The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear this message is addressed to "O house of Israel."

50:6 Portions of this prophecy were fulfilled in Matthew 26:67 and 27:26. (See "Jesus Christ, Condescension of," TG, p. 244.)

51:3 Other scriptures and statements pertaining to the desert blossoming as a rose are found in Part I 82, 195.

51:20 The Joseph Smith Translation adds the phrase "save these two" to the introductory statement "Thy sons have fainted."

52:1 Joseph Smith was once asked: "What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52d chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion— and what people had Isaiah reference to?" (D&C 113:7.) His inspired answer:

"He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost." (D&C 113:8.)

52:1 Nathan Eldon Tanner has explained the meaning of the term "put on thy strength, O Zion":

The Prophet Isaiah foresaw the time in which we are now living, with the development of the priesthood administrative system through the present correlation program. I feel that he had reference to us and that the question and answer exchange referred to by the Prophet Joseph Smith in Section 113 of the Doctrine and Covenants has reference to us now. "What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52nd chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion—and what people had Isaiah reference to?" He said, "He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage."

Priesthood correlation is asking the priesthood member and the priesthood leadership to "Put on the strength of the priesthood," and to assume full responsibility with the "power" at their disposal to build up the Church and, eventually, the Kingdom of God here upon the earth. (Priesthood Correlation Genealogy Committee Training Session, Dec. 1963.)

52:2 This verse could have been translated and punctuated as follows: "Shake yourself from the dust; rise up! Sit, Jerusalem! Free yourselves from your neckbands, O captive daughter of Zion."

52:2 Another question asked of Joseph Smith was "What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck?" (D&C 113:9.) Joseph Smith's answer was:

We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See the 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles. (D&C 113:10.)

52:7-8 These or similar words have been quoted by several prophets, including those of the Old Testament and the Book of Mormon. (See "Missionary Work," TG, pp. 325-26; "Peace," TG, pp. 360-61; "Peacemakers," TG, pp. 361-62.) Abinadi quoted and explained these words to King Noah and his wicked priests. (See Mosiah 12:21-24; 15:11-31.)

52:8-10 These words of Isaiah were quoted to the Lehites by the resurrected Jesus Christ, with the explanation that these words would be fulfilled after "this land [the Americas]" should be given "unto this people [the descendants of the Lehites] . . . for their inheritance." (3 Ne. 16:16-20, italics added.)

In a subsequent meeting with the righteous Lehites, the Savior provided an inspired (and inspiring) commentary on the words of Isaiah. Every serious student of the scriptures should study carefully these teachings of Jesus Christ. (See 3 Ne. 20:11-46 and chapters 21-23.)

52:8 The last clause, "when the Lord shall bring again Zion" literally reads in the Hebrew, "when Jehovah brings back Zion."

Zion will become a reality only when the people strive and live for it, according to Brigham Young:

It is written [Isaiah 52:8] . . . We talk and read about Zion, we contemplate upon it, and in our imaginations we reach forth to grasp something that is transcendant in heavenly beauty, excellency and glory. But while contemplating the future greatness of Zion, do we realize that we are the pioneers of that future greatness and glory? Do we realize that if we enjoy a Zion in time or in eternity, we must make it for ourselves? (JD 9:282.)

For further information and references pertaining to the building up and redemption of Zion in the latter days, see Part I 124-36.

52:11 The commandment "be ye clean" is as vital today as it was when recorded by Isaiah, according to President Spencer W. Kimball:

The Lord said, "Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord." (Isaiah 52:11.) And we must state and restate and call to the attention of our children and their children that chastity and cleanliness are basic in the Church. Parents should teach their children in their home evenings and in all their activities as they rear them that unchastity is a terrible sin, always has been, always will be and that no rationalization by any number of people will ever change it. As long as the stars shine in the heavens and the sun brings warmth to the earth and so long as men and women live upon this earth, there must be this holy standard of chastity and virtue. (Sweden Area CR, 1974, p. 10.)

52:14 Another possible translation from the Hebrew is: "Just as many were astonished over you—so much was the disfigurement of His appearance away from man, and His form from sons of man."

52:15 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces the word "sprinkle" with "gather."

53 A Book of Mormon prophet, Nephi, reaffirms that Isaiah knew a great deal the coming of the Messiah. (See 1 Ne. 19:23.)

Abinadi, a Book of Mormon prophet, quoted this entire chapter to the priests of king Noah and then offered an inspired commentary, relating these teachings to major events in the life of Jesus Christ. (See Mosiah 14-16.)

Bible scholars disagree whether this chapter is speaking of Jesus Christ. Those scholars who claim it would have been impossible for Isaiah to know this much about the life and mission of Jesus Christ some seven hundred years before Christ was born either do not believe in the spirit of prophecy or do not understand it. Joseph Fielding Smith and LeGrand Richards state unequivocally, however, that the chapter does pertain to Christ.

I want to read to you the 53rd chapter of Isaiah. Now Bible commentators will tell you that this has nothing to do with the life of Jesus Christ. To them this story is one concerning suffering Israel. I want to tell you that it is a story, a synopsis of the life of our Redeemer, revealed to Isaiah 700 years before the Lord was born. If you have the proper discernment you will discover this. I am going to make some comments on it as I read it. [Quoted Isa. 53:1-2.]

What is the meaning of that? Did not Christ grow up as a tender plant? There was nothing about him to cause people to single him out. In appearance he was like men; and so it is expressed here by the prophet that he had no form or comeliness, that is, he was not so distinctive, so different from others that people would recognize him as the Son of God. He appeared as a mortal man. [Quoted Isa. 53:3-4.]

Was not Christ a man of sorrows? Was he not rejected of men? Was he not acquainted with grief? Did not the people (figuratively) hide their faces from him? Did not the people esteem him not? Surely he knew our griefs and carried our sorrows, but he was thought to be stricken of God and forsaken by him. Did not the people say that? How true all these things are! (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:23-24.)

In the life and mission of Jesus Christ He met every requirement necessary to fulfill all the prophet Isaiah predicted He would do, as herein set forth. [Quoted Isaiah 53.] (LeGrand Richards, IDYK, p. 82.)

53:4 LeGrand Richards believes that this verse offers proof that there are at least two great Gods (the Father and the Son) referred to in the Old Testament:

The statement that He would bear Israel's griefs, carry their sorrows, and that he would be "smitten of God," indicates that there were two Gods and not one. How could this Redeemer be smitten by Himself? (IDYK, p. 79.)

53:7 This statement that "he" (the Messiah) will be "as a sheep before her shearers" clearly refers to the time of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, as is verified by Abinadi, a Book of Mormon prophet. After quoting these words from Isaiah, Abinadi commented: "Yea, even so shall he [the Son of God] be led, crucified, and slain." (Mosiah 15:7.)

54:1-17 These verses on the gathering of Israel and the establishment of Zion are supplemented by the materials in Part I 75-136.

54:6 The statement "and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused" could have been translated "even a wife of young men when she is rejected."

54:10 The term "the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed" evidently refers to the period in the last days when the Lord's voice out of Zion and Jerusalem will be "as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found.

"He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the Islands shall become one land;

"And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." (D&C 133:22-24.)

Concerning these events, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

If one should take a map showing the Western and the Eastern hemispheres, and study them, one would see clearly how today they might be fitted together. Well, that day will come, for, as the earth was divided, so shall it in the restoration be brought back to its original form again, with all the land surface in one place. There are many prophecies in the Bible bearing on this union of continents and islands again. (AGQ 4:23.)

The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "peace" with "people."

See the commentary for Genesis 10:25 concerning the dividing of the earth in the days of Peleg. See also Part I 96, 161 for information on events concerning the earth in the last days.

54:15 The Joseph Smith Translation adds the words in italics: "they shall surely gather together against thee."

55:6-7 Joseph Fielding Smith has provided the following commentary on these verses:

If at times we have been requested to seek the help of the Lord in this great struggle which has deluged the world, have we prayed in the true spirit of prayer? What good does it do for us to petition the Lord, if we have no intention of keeping His commandments? Such praying is hollow mockery and an insult before the throne of grace. How dare we presume to expect a favorable answer if such is the case? "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near." [Quoted Isa. 55:7.] But is not the Lord always near when we petition Him? Verily no! [D&C 101:7-8.] If we draw near unto Him, He will draw near unto us, and we will not be forsaken; but if we do not draw near to Him, we have no promise that He will answer us in our rebellion. (CR, Apr. 1943, p. 14.)

56:7 Jesus Christ quoted the phrase "mine house shall be called an house of prayer" in referring to the temple in Jerusalem during his lifetime. (Luke 19:46.)

57:17 The word "frowardly" here means "returning."

58:1-7 The origin of the principle of fasting, which is discussed here by Isaiah, is uncertain, although Joseph Fielding Smith believes it must have been taught by God from the days of Adam.

Fasting we may well assume is a religious custom that has come down from the beginning of time, and always associated with prayer. There are numerous customs and practices that were given anciently about which the knowledge became so common that their origin has been lost in antiquity; therefore we cannot give time or place where the first commandment on fasting was given. It was common in the most ancient times, and there are numerous incidents recorded in the Old Testament indicating that it was well established not only among the true worshipers of Deity but also among the heathen nations. All of this indicates the antiquity of fasting, which we may presume was revealed to Adam.

We may obtain the understanding from the writings of Isaiah that fasting and prayer were commanded by the Lord. For their perversion of this doctrine, Isaiah rebukes Israel and endeavors to bring them back to the path of faithful obedience. His words and commandment are as follows: [Isaiah 58:1-7.]

Here Isaiah points out clearly the intent of the fast. It was observed with a contrite spirit, a humbled heart, before the Lord. Evil was to be forsaken, prayer and supplication offered with a covenant to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and let the oppressed go free. If they would do this, then, said the Lord, "shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward." Israel, however, had perverted the fast and thus merited Isaiah's and the Lord's rebuke.

All through the Old Testament we find evidence of the observance of fasting and prayer. (AGQ 1:88-90.)

59:7 The eagerness of the Israelites of this period to commit sin ("their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood") was similar to that of the wicked Lehites in the days of Mormon ("they have become strong in their perversion . . . they delight in everything save that which is good." [Moro. 9:19]).

60:1-22 Materials related to these events of the last days are found in Part I 124-36, 196-97, 222.

60:3 According to Wilford Woodruff, this verse pertains to the last days:

The whole history of this people has been foretold by the prophet Isaiah, thousands of years ago; and it has been a steady growth from the commencement to the present. And will the Lord stop here? No; whether men believe or not, this Zion so often spoken of in holy writ, has got to arise and put on her beautiful garments; these mountain vales have got to be filled with the saints of God and temples reared to his holy name, preparatory to the time when "the Gentiles shall come [to] thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising." And this time will come when the nations are fully warned by the preaching of the servant of God, and his judgments commence to be poured out upon the world, in fulfilment of the revelations of St. John. Faith then is what the unbelieving world needs to exercise in God and in his revelations to man; but as I have said, whether we do it or not, our unbelief will never turn the hand of God to the right or the left. (JD 19:359.)

LeGrand Richards believes countries such as Great Britain have helped to fulfill this prophecy:

The Jews will understand how literally this prophecy has been in the course of fulfillment in the establishment of the Nation of Israel, and the help that has been given by the Gentile nations. The part that Great Britain played in the liberation of Palestine from Turkish rule is a matter of history which occurred during World War I, in a remarkable manner. The issuance of the Balfour Declaration on November 2, 1917 had great significance. The text reads:

"His Majesty's Government view with favor the establishment in Palestine of a National Home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavors to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of the existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country. (The Autobiography of Chaim Weizmann, Trial and Error, Harper and Brothers, publishers, page 208.)" (IDYK, p. 206.)

See also Part I 196-97, 240-44.

60:5, 11 The term "forces of the Gentiles" in these verses could have been translated "wealth of the nations."

60:8 LeGrand Richards indicates the development of the airplane has helped fulfill this prophecy:

Clearly, Isaiah was referring to individuals and not to birds. Surely there has never been a time in the history of this world when men flew "as a cloud" or "as the doves to their windows," until our present time since the advent of the airplane. (IDYK, p. 101.)

61:1-2 These verses of Isaiah were quoted by Jesus Christ in the synagogue at Nazareth as recorded in Luke 4:16-21. Concerning the meaning of the contents of these verses, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

These references to the opening of the prison and the proclaiming of liberty to the captives evidently have reference to the dead who had been confined in darkness not knowing their fate. Shortly after the Savior entered his ministry he visited his home town, Nazareth, and upon entering the synagogue the scriptures were placed in his hands. He opened them and read the words of Isaiah, and said to the people: "This day is the scripture fulfilled in your ears." [Luke 4:21.] That is to say, the time had come for the preaching of the gospel and the redemption of both the living and the dead. (AGQ 2:81.)

See Part I 64.

62:4 The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "Hephzibah" with "Delightful," and "Beulah" with "Union."

62:5 The King James clause "so shall thy sons marry thee" is changed in the Joseph Smith Translation to "so shall thy God marry thee."

63:1-6 These verses should be taken literally, according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

Isaiah has pictured this great day when the Lord shall come with his garments, or apparel, red and glorious, to take vengeance on the ungodly. [Isaiah 63:1-6.] This will be a day of mourning to the wicked, but a day of gladness to all who have kept his commandments. Do not let any one think that this is merely figurative language, it is literal, and as surely as we live that day of wrath will come when the cup of iniquity is full. We have received a great many warnings. The great day of the Millennium will come in; the wicked will be consumed and peace and righteousness will dwell upon all the face of the earth for one thousand years. (CHMR 1:191-92.)

See the commentary for Malachi 4:1 and Part I 94, 154, 211.

63:4 According to John Taylor, the "day of vengeance" will come upon the wicked:

When he comes again he comes to take vengeance on the ungodly and to bring deliverance unto his Saints; [Isaiah 63:4]. It behoves us to be made well aware which class we belong to, that if we are not already among the redeemed we may immediately join that society, that when the Son of God shall come the second time with all the holy angels with him, arrayed in power and great glory to take vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the Gospel, or when he shall come in flaming fire, we shall be among that number who shall be ready to meet him with gladness in our hearts and hail him as our great deliverer and friend. (JD 10:116.)

64:5 The Joseph Smith Translation reads "Thou meetest him that worketh righteousness, and rejoiceth him that remembereth thee in thy ways." (Italics added.)

64:8 Harold B. Lee has commented on the statement, "O Lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand":

I've read that many times, but had not received the full significance until I was down in Old Mexico a few years ago at Telacapaca where they feature the molding of clay into various kinds of pottery. There I saw them take lumps of clay which had been molded, usually by crude, primitive methods, the molder wading in the mud to mix it properly. Then it was put upon a potter's wheel, and there the potter began to fashion the intricate bits of pottery which he was to place on the market. And as we watched, we saw occasionally, because of some defect in the mixing, the necessity for pulling the whole lump of clay apart and throwing it back in to be mixed over again, and sometimes the process had to be done several times before the proper kind of mud was mixed for the potter.

With that in mind, I thought I began to see the meaning of this scripture: "We are as clay in the hands of the potter, and we are all the work of His hands." Yes, we too, have to be tried and tested by poverty, by sickness, by the death of loved ones, by temptation, sometimes by the betrayal of supposed friends, by affluence and riches, by ease and luxury, by false educational ideas, and by the flattery of the world. (BYUSY, Oct. 1956, p. 3.)

65:1 The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "I am found of them who seek after me, I give unto all them that ask of me; I am not found of them that sought me not, or that inquireth not after me."

65:11 The terms "that troop" and "that number" refer to the idols Gad and Meni respectively. The clause could have been translated: "who array a table for Fortune and who fill mixed wine for Fate."

65:17 The following commentaries on this verse have been offered by Joseph Fielding Smith:

That is, the earth as it is now, this mundane earth covered all over its face with wickedness will not be remembered when this change comes. We will be glad to get rid of this condition, and we will not bring it up to mind. Remember, in speaking of the heavens he is not referring to the sidereal heavens. He is speaking of that which pertains to our own earth, the heavens in which the birds fly. . . .

You can see that [Isa. 65:17-20] does not have any reference at all to the earth when it is celestialized. The new heaven and earth have nothing to do at all with this earth as it will be after it dies and is raised in the resurrection to be a celestial body because then there will not be any death at all. It is going to be restored as nearly as possible to what it was in the beginning. This is coming to pass when Christ comes, and that's part of this restoration. (ST, pp. 36-37.)

This new heaven and new earth are our own earth and its heavens renewed to the primitive beauty and condition. This is not the great last change which shall come at the end of the earth, but the change to take place at the coming of Jesus Christ. Moreover, when this change comes all things will be set in order. Enmity between man and man and beast and beast will cease. (RT, p. 23.)

For other materials relating to the changes that will take place in the earth during the latter days, see Part I 97, 154, 161.

65:20 The Joseph Smith Translation begins with "In those days," indicating that these events will take place during the Millennium after the "new heavens and a new earth" are created.

66:22 The "new earth" referred to here by Isaiah is the terrestrial earth of the Millenium, according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

When the Lord comes to rule on the earth in his own right, and all kingdoms become subject unto him, and the earth is renewed and again receives its paradisiacal glory, death shall be removed as far as it possibly can be removed before the resurrection, and while mortality remains. During the Millennium the earth will be transformed into a "new earth" with a new heaven, as Isaiah has declared. It will no longer be a telestial earth, but will become a terrestrial earth. Infants will not die until they become old and then death shall be the transition to the immortal from the mortal state in the twinkling of an eye. This day is near at hand, "speaking after the manner of the Lord," and then shall come the time of the entire separation of the wicked from the righteous. (CHMR 1:232-33.)

See also Part I 97, 154, 161.
