Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

JEREMIAH

See "Jeremiah" in the Bible Dictionary, page 711.

1:1-3 At least some of the writings of Jeremiah have been preserved on the brass plates of Laban, for they contained "the five books of Moses . . . and also the prophecies of the holy prophets, from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah." (1 Ne. 5:11, 13.)

It is difficult to tell from the arrangement of the chapters in the King James Version exactly what portions of the book were written before the reign of Zedekiah and which chapters were written after. One possible listing of the chapters chronologically would be: 1-6, 22, 7-13, 17-18, 26, 19-20, 35, 14-16, 25, 36, 45-46, 23-24, 29, 27, 28, 30-31, 33, 21, 34, 37, 32, 38-44, 47-52.

1:5 Many scholars, Jewish and Christian, have concluded from this verse that Jeremiah was foreordained (or destined) to be a prophet before his birth. To some, this also implies a pre-earthly existence for Jeremiah.

The Pearl of Great Price teaches that Abraham was also chosen as a prophet before his birth upon the earth. (Abr. 3:22-23.) Joseph Smith and Wilford Woodruff taught that all prophets and other priesthood leaders are so foreordained:

Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council. (Joseph Smith, HC 6:364.)

Joseph Smith was ordained before he came here, the same as Jeremiah was. . . .

So do I believe with regard to this people, so do I believe with regard to the apostles, the high priests, seventies and the elders of Israel bearing the holy priesthood, I believe they were ordained before they came here; and I believe the God of Israel has raised them up, and has watched over them from their youth, and has carried them through all the scenes of life both seen and unseen, and has prepared them as instruments in his hands to take this kingdom and bear it off. If this be so, what manner of men ought we to be? If anything under the heavens should humble men before the Lord and before one another, it should be the fact that we have been called of God. (Wilford Woodruff, JD 21:317.)

1:6 The substance of the statement "I cannot speak: for I am a child" is that Jeremiah did not know how to speak the will of God for he was inexperienced and young.

The exact age of Jeremiah when he was called as a prophet is not known; the Hebrew simply refers to him then as "a boy." Other prophets who were called when they were relatively young include Enoch (Moses 6:31), Samuel (1 Sam. 3:1-21), Nephi (1 Ne. 2:19-24), Mormon (Morm. 1:15), and Joseph Smith (JS-H 1:7).

1:17 Ellis Rasmussen suggests that the idiom "gird up your loins" means "gather up the long robe under the belt or sash and get ready for action." (IOT 2:77.)

2:13 It was bad enough for the Israelites to forsake Jehovah ("the fountain of living waters"), but they have compounded the sin by worshipping idols ("hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water").

Brigham Young maintained that if we do not obey the fountain of living waters today (Jesus Christ), we shall be like the Jews of old.

Unless we believe the Gospel of Christ and obey its ordinances we have no promise of the life to come. If we ever attain to that it will be only by complying with the terms that Jesus has laid down. We cannot build and plan for ourselves; if we do we shall be like the Jews of old, who, as the prophet says, "have hewn out cisterns that will hold no water." We must submit to the ordinances of the house of God. (JD 13:213.)

Sterling W. Sill has taught that through accepting Jesus Christ and his teachings, we can develop a well of living waters within ourselves.

Jesus gave us the best approach for this accomplishment when, on the last day of the passover feast, he stood up and cried, "If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, . . . out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." (John 7:37-38.) That is, our eternal success is not like pouring water into a cistern; rather it is like opening a living spring within ourselves. Through the Prophet Jeremiah the Lord said, [Quoted Jeremiah 2:13]. And Jesus elaborated upon this idea by saying, ". . . unto him that keepeth my commandments I will give the mysteries of my kingdom, and the same shall be in him a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life." (D&C 63:23.) What a tremendous possibility for us! (CR, Apr. 1968, p. 17.)

2:20-28 A harlot is not faithful to her husband, and the Israelites were playing the role of a harlot in that they were unfaithful to their husband (Jehovah). The people in the kingdom of Judah have worshipped many idols and false gods ("according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah"); hence, the Israelites have "played the harlot with many lovers." (Jer. 3:1.)

3:6-11 By the time of Jeremiah, the ten tribes of the northern kingdom had already been taken captive because of their wickedness. These verses show that people of the kingdom of Judah were committing the same sins which brought about the captivity of the kingdom of Israel. When "backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also."

Judah's grievous sin is that she not only committed whoredoms (by marrying with unworthy people) but she "committed adultery with stones and with stocks" (by worshipping idols of stone and wood).

3:14 At first glance the following statement seems in error: "I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion." A city is usually larger than a family, so one might ask, "Shouldn't the verse read 'two of a city and one of a family'?"

The gathering referred to here is the gathering of Israel, and the fact that a person belongs to a particular family (Israel) will have more of an influence on whether or not he will gather than will the place of his residence.

Spencer W. Kimball has provided the following insight on this verse:

In my youth I used to wonder how the world could be converted to the gospel when it was to go to ". . . one of a city, and two of a family . . ." (Jer. 3:14) but as I came to understand the gospel more clearly, the matter seems quite clear. My grandfather came out of the world only a hundred and forty-four years ago, as one of a family, and today there are possibly eight or ten thousand or more of his direct posterity, most of whom were born in the Church and many of whom are faithful.

"One of a city"—not the world—is to be converted.

I am sure that the veil is thin. My grandfather, being one of a family, searched all his life to get together his genealogical records; and when he died in 1868, he had been unsuccessful in establishing his line back more than the second generation beyond him. I am sure that most of my family members feel the same as I do—that there was a thin veil between him and the earth after he had gone to the other side and that which he was unable to do as a mortal he perhaps was able to do after he had gone into eternity. After he passed away, the spirit of research took hold of men: his family in the west and two wholly disconnected distant relatives, not members of the Church in the east. For seven years these two men—Morrison and Sharples—unknown to each other and unknown to the members of the family in the west, were gathering genealogy. After seven years they happened to meet and then for three years they worked together. The family feels definitely that the Spirit of Elijah was at work on the other side and that our grandfather had been able to inspire men on this side to search out these records; and as a result, two large volumes are in my possession, with about seventeen thousand names.

". . . one of a city and two of a family . . ." may yet accomplish the great objective. (Regional Representatives' Seminar, Apr. 5, 1976.)

3:15 The word "pastors" could have been translated "shepherds." It does not refer to a specific calling or office in the priesthood, as is explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

The dictionary definition of a pastor is a correct one even from our understanding of this term; it is "a Christian minister who has a church or congregation under his official charge." The term pastor does not refer to an order in the priesthood, like deacon, priest, elder, seventy, and so on, but is a general term applied to an officer who presides over a ward, branch in a mission or a stake, and it could even be applied to a president of a stake. There are several references to pastors in the Old Testament, particularly in the Book of Jeremiah. I quote one or two of these showing that this is a general term applied to the priests and teachers in Israel, and not to an order of the priesthood: [Jeremiah 3:15.] (AGO 1:127.)

LeGrand Richard has provided the following commentary on these verses:

From these prophecies it will be seen that Jeremiah realized that as Israel had been "sifted among the nations," the Lord would gather them, not in great multitudes, but "one of a city and two of a family," and that when He should bring them to Zion, He would give them "pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding." In other words, He would lead them to Zion where He had established His Church and Kingdom, restored His Priesthood, that they may be fed "with knowledge and understanding." (IDYK, p. 176.)

3:16 Evidently the old ark of the covenant will not have place under the new covenant in effect when Israel has returned and "increased in the land." (See also Jer. 31:31-34.)

3:18 At least two different major groups will be gathered in the latter days ("in those days")—the house of Judah and the house of Israel. The pronoun "they" in the final clause could mean that Judah and Israel will come together "out of the land of the north." (But they will also come from the east and west and south, from the four corners of the earth. See Ezek. 37:21-28; 1 Ne. 22:25.)

Another possible interpretation is that "they" refers to a third group of people who is specifically to come from "out of the land of the north." The three major gathering groups would then be (1) the house of Judah (descendants of those who lived in the kingdom of Judah); (2) the house of Israel (descendants of those who had been dispersed from the kingdom of Israel), and (3) those who are to come out of the land of the north (descendants of the ten lost tribes).

LeGrand Richards believes all the elements of the house of Israel will be gathered at that time:

The Prophet Isaiah also speaks [Isa. 11:12-13] of the time when the Lord would establish His Kingdom among men. He indicates they would be brought back together so that a common understanding would exist between them as one nation and one people, even the whole House of Israel. (IDYK, p. 23.)

See Part I 78-95, 105-123, 177-91, 204-19, 223-24, 228-50.

4:5-7 Some of the prophets of the Book of Mormon were shown in vision the destruction of Jerusalem in the days of Zedekiah and Nebuchadnezzar. (See 2 Ne. 1:4.) One Book of Mormon prophet, Nephi the son of Helaman, specifically mentioned the prophecy of Jeremiah concerning this event: "Jeremiah being that same prophet who testified of the destruction of Jerusalem." (Hel. 8:20.)

4:10 The Jewish Targums have this verse as follows: "And I said, Receive my supplication, O Lord God; for, behold, the false prophets deceive this people and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying 'Ye shall have peace.'"

4:22 Jeremiah's lament ("my people . . . are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge") is reminiscent of the lament of Mormon in the Book of Mormon concerning the wicked people of his day when he said, "They delight in everything save that which is good." (Moro. 9:19.)

4:30 The Hebrew words translated "thou rentest thy face with painting" could have been translated "you enlarge your eyes with paint."

5:4 Jeremiah's attempt to defend the actions of his people is similar to Moses' defense of the people of his day. Unfortunately both groups of people were sinful and did not sin ignorantly.

5:6 The word "evenings" should have been translated "deserts" or perhaps "plains" or "wilderness."

5:13, 31 The words of the false prophets will have no more effect than wind, for their words will not come to pass. A modern idiom meaning about the same thing is "they will be full of hot air." The final responsibility for the apostasy will not rest entirely upon the prophets who "prophesy falsely . . . ; my people love to have it so."

7:8-11 The worship in the temple had also become corrupted in the day of Jeremiah. When a similar corruption occurred in New Testament times, the Savior referred to Jeremiah 7:11: "It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves." (Matt. 21:13.)

7:15 The "seed of Ephraim" was largely scattered some one hundred years before, as they were part of the ten tribes who were taken into captivity by Assyria.

10:21 See the commentary for Jeremiah 3:15 on the meaning of "pastor."

11:7 The Hebrew word translated as "protested unto" could have been translated "admonished."

11:13 Earlier in Jeremiah the Lord accused the people of Judah of having as many idol gods as they had cities (2:28). Here he accuses the people of Jerusalem of having as many altars to false gods as they have streets.

12:13 The Hebrew words translated "they have put themselves to pain" could have been translated "they are exhausted" or "they are worn out."

14:2 The Hebrew words translated "they are black unto the ground" could have been translated more literally "they put on ashes for the land." The idea is that they were mourning for the land.

14:13-16 Some suggestions are given here to help determine whether or not a prophet is truly sent from God. (See also Isa. 8:19-20.)

14:22 The Lord has power to cause rain, or to withhold rain from the earth, and he has given this power to his prophets in the past (1 Kgs. 17:1-7; 18:1-2, 41-46; Jer. 3:3; Hel. 11:3-18) and will give it to his prophets in the future (Rev. 11:6). Several scriptures clearly indicate the power of God in this regard. (See Gen. 7:4, 12; Lev. 26:4; Deut. 11:14; 1 Kgs. 8:35; 2 Chr. 6:26; Isa. 5:6; Amos 4:7; Zech. 14:17; Ether 2:24.)

15:3 "Four kinds [of doom]" are listed here.

16:2 The Lord commands Jeremiah not to marry at that time, for he is not to have "sons or daughters in this place." Then the Lord recounts some of the terrible things that will come upon the "sons and daughters" in that area as a consequence of their extreme wickedness.

16:14-15 These verses are repeated in Jeremiah 23:7-8. The miracles performed by the Lord in gathering the various groups of Israel in the last days will even exceed in greatness the miracles performed during the exodus from Egypt in the days of Moses.

In modern times, the Lord has mentioned in greater detail some of the events that will be associated with the return of that portion of Israel from the north countries. (See D&C 133:26-37.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has observed:

Here [D&C 133:26] the Lord says that these people have prophets among them, and Joseph Smith at a conference of the Church held in June, 1831, said: "John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, King of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion." This is the mission given to John portrayed in the symbol of the little book which he was given to eat, in the tenth chapter of Revelation. [See D&C 77:14.] (CHMR 2:36.)

16:16 The "fishers" and "hunters" are missionaries, according to LeGrand Richards:

It is evident that the Lord has made bare His arm to fulfill His promise made by the Prophet Jeremiah with respect to the gathering of Israel in the latter days. The prophet indicated that the Lord would send fishers and hunters to "hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes in the rocks," showing how completely He would fulfill His promise, that after Israel was sifted among the nations, "yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth." (Amos 9:8-9.)

In the establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon the earth in these latter days, the Lord has provided therein a great missionary program, through which a great many male members of the Church give two years or more of their lives, at their own expense, to preach the message of the restored gospel to all the inhabitants of the earth. . . . These are the "fishers" and "hunters" the Lord promised to send. (IDYK, p. 175.)

When Wilford Woodruff was engaged in missionary work, he considered himself to be such a hunter and fisher of men:

One day Elder Hale and I ascended to the top of a high granite rock on South Island for prayer and supplication. We sat down under the shade of a pine tree which grew out of a fissure in the rocks, and Elder Hale read the sixteenth chapter of Jeremiah, where mention is made of the hunters and fishers that God would send in the last days to gather Israel. . . . And what had brought us here? To search out the blood of Ephraim, the honest and meek of the earth, and gather them from these islands, rocks, holes, and caves of the earth unto Zion. (WW, pp. 79-80.)

17:7-8 The statement that the blessings of a righteous man might be compared to the blessings of "a tree planted by the waters" is found in several scriptures (Ps. 1:3; D&C 97:9) and is the theme of various spiritual songs in America.

The value of water, and of providing reservoirs for the storage of water, was the theme of a major talk by Spencer W. Kimball:

I am grateful to my parents, for they made reservoirs for my brothers, my sisters, and myself. They filled them with prayer habits, study, activities, positive services, and truth and righteousness. Every morning and every night, we knelt at our chairs with backs to the table and prayed, taking turns. When I was married, the habit persisted, and our new family continued the practice.

Some parents are casual or careless or fail to do their duty. These constitute leaks in the dams. The story of Peter with his thumb in the dike may be a myth, but the moral is not a myth. . . .

Abraham built such a reservoir for his son Isaac, and it seemed never to have leaked dry, for we find his son one of the patriarchs and always linked with the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And he seems to fit the words of Jeremiah. [Jeremiah 17:8.] (CR, Oct. 1969, pp. 20-21.)

17:21 See the commentary for Exodus 20:8-11; see also Part I 32.

18:1-6 The parable of the potter and the clay that was marred has been given several interpretations by biblical scholars. A modern prophet has given help on the correct meaning:

Elder Heber C. Kimball preached at the house of President Joseph Smith, on the parable in the 18th chapter of Jeremiah, of the clay in the hands of the potter, that when it marred in the hands of the potter it was cut off the wheel and then thrown back again into the mill, to go into the next batch, and was a vessel of dishonor; but all clay that formed well in the hands of the potter, and was pliable, was a vessel of honor; and thus it was with the human family, and ever will be: all that are pliable in the hands of God and are obedient to His commands, are vessels of honor, and God will receive them.

President Joseph arose and said—"Brother Kimball has given you a true explanation of the parable." (HC 4:478.)

20:9 Jeremiah's statement has probably echoed in the hearts of many missionaries who might be somewhat reluctant to call a wicked world to repentance but who feel compelled to do so: "[The Lord's] word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones."

22:1-30 The various chapters of Jeremiah are not arranged chronologically. Some scholars believe chapter 22 should be between chapters 6 and 7 if a chronological order were maintained.

23:1-2 See the commentary for Jeremiah 3:15 on the meaning of "pastors."

23:5-6 These verses are almost identical to Jeremiah 33:14-16. The events discussed here clearly belong to the period of the last days.

23:5-8 The chapter heading in the Bible indicates that Jesus Christ is the "King Messiah," the Branch that "shall reign in righteousness." A Book of Mormon prophet, Nephi the son of Helaman, testified at least two decades before Christ of the prophecy of Jeremiah that the Son of God should come: "There have been many prophets that have testified these things . . . Isaiah, and Jeremiah, (Jeremiah being that same prophet who testified of the destruction of Jerusalem) and now we know that Jerusalem was destroyed according to the words of Jeremiah. O then why not the Son of God come, according to his prophecy?" (Hel. 8:19-20.)

23:7-8 See the commentary for Jeremiah 16:14-15. Concerning the "King" mentioned here, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

This King, of course, is Jesus Christ, and he will reign when Judah and Israel are cleansed and restored to their own land, and when the offering of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former times, as spoken of by Malachi. (RT, p. 25.)

23:23-24 The Lord is the God of the whole earth; he is, or can be, aware of everything that is going on: "Am I a God at hand . . . and not a God afar off?"

24:1-10 The "good figs" in the vision are the Israelites the Lord has already allowed to be taken captive into Babylon "for their good" (v. 5—these would have included Daniel and his companions). The "bad figs" are king Zedekiah and the wicked Israelites in Jerusalem and "in the land of Egypt." Apparently a "residue" of wicked Jews has already fled into Egypt in an attempt to escape the impending destruction by the Babylonians.

A relatively righteous group of Israelites had also previously left Jerusalem to escape the Babylonian captivity; they were led by the prophet Lehi, and had left Jerusalem "in the commencement of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah." (1 Ne. 1:4.)

24:2, 8 The same Hebrew word translated "naughty" in verse 2 is translated "evil" in verse 8. The idea is that the figs are bad, not worthy or good enough to be eaten.

25:12-14 This prophecy of the Lord through Jeremiah was fulfilled when Cyrus became king of Persia and conquered Babylonia.

26:1, 11 This chapter is definitely out of sequence chronologically since Jehoiakim was king (26:1) before Zedekiah (24:8). Jeremiah's life was threatened, and the wicked people exclaimed, "This man is worthy to die." Lehi, the first prophet mentioned in the Book of Mormon, was also preaching in Jerusalem during this general period of time, and his life was also threatened as noted by his son Nephi:

"Lehi . . . went forth among the people [of Jerusalem], and . . . testified of their wickedness and their abominations. . . . And when the Jews heard these things they were angry with him . . . and they also sought his life, that they might take it away." (1 Ne. 1:18-20.)

26:12-15 True prophets must warn the people of their unrighteousness when commanded to do so by the Lord, regardless of any threat to their personal safety. Jeremiah's stirring testimony and warning in verses 14 and 15 are similar to those of Abinadi, a Book of Mormon prophet, before the wicked king Noah and his evil priests:

"Touch me not, for God shall smite you if ye lay your hands upon me, for I have not delivered the message which the Lord sent me to deliver. . . .

"But I finish my message; and then it matters not whither I go, if it so be that I am saved. But this much I tell you, what you do with me, after this, shall be as a type and a shadow of things which are to come." (Mosiah 13:3, 9-10.)

26:20-24 At least one prophet of the Lord had already been put to death because of his testimony of those things which were to come—Urijah (Jer. 26:23), who was killed by king Jehoiakim, being buried in "the graves of the common people."

29:1-32 This letter of Jeremiah to the Israelites in exile in Babylonia contains the following advice and prophecies:

30:1-24 The Lord commands Jeremiah to write his words in a book because he is going to bring his chosen people (both of Israel and of Judah) back "to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it" (v. 3). The remainder of this chapter is primarily concerned with prophecies of the Lord concerning what will happen to his people during their period of scattering (the diaspora). Because the record of Jeremiah will be preserved, the people on the earth will understand these prophecies "in the latter days" (v. 24).

30:3 At first glance the following statement looks as though the Lord is going to take Israel and Judah captive again: "I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah." However, the real meaning of this statement is "I will bring again my people Israel and Judah from their captivity."

30:24 A more literal translation from the Hebrew for this verse would be: "The fierce anger of Jehovah shall not turn back until he has finished and until he has fulfilled the intentions of his heart. In the latter days you will understand it."

31:3 The Hebrew translated here as "the Lord hath appeared of old unto me" could have been translated more literally "Jehovah has appeared to me from far away."

31:8 The word "coasts" could have been translated "remote parts."

31:8 LeGrand Richards has commented on the word "thither":

Note that Jeremiah does not say that they will return hither, or to the place where this prediction was made, but thither, or to a distant place. (IDYK, p. 177.)

31:9 Joseph eventually received the birthright of Jacob (Israel) and Ephraim received the birthright of Joseph. (See Gen. 48:13-22.) Thus in a real sense Ephraim became the "firstborn" of Israel.

Concerning this, LeGrand Richards has written:

Recall that the birthright was taken from Reuben, the firstborn of the twelve sons of Israel, or Jacob, and was given to Joseph, and from him to his sons Ephraim and Manasseh, (1 Chronicles 5:1-2). Thereafter, the Lord regarded Ephraim as his "firstborn." (Jeremiah 31:9.) Therefore, this was to be a gathering of the descendants of Joseph and Ephraim, "to Zion unto the Lord our God." (IDYK, p. 177.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has explained the significance of this:

Ephraim was blessed with the birthright in Israel, and in this dispensation he has been called to stand at the head to bless the other tribes of Israel. . . .

It is essential in this dispensation that Ephraim stand in his place at the head, exercising the birthright in Israel which was given to him by direct revelation. Therefore, Ephraim must be gathered to prepare the way, through the gospel and the priesthood, for the rest of the tribes of Israel when the time comes for them to be gathered to Zion. The great majority of those who have come into the Church are Ephraimites. It is the exception to find one of any other tribe, unless it is of Manasseh. (DS 3:247, 252.)

31:15 These words are embroidered in Hebrew on the covering of Rachel's tomb, which is located between modern Jerusalem and Bethlehem.

31:29-30 "In those days [the latter days]" the punishments of God will not be delayed unduly; they will come almost immediately.

31:31-34 Joseph Smith has made the following observations concerning the covenants between God and His chosen people, the Israelites:

This covenant has never been established with the house of Israel, nor with the house of Judah, for it requires two parties to make a covenant, and those two parties must be agreed, or no covenant can be made.

Christ, in the days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, and in consequence thereof, they were broken off, and no covenant was made with them at that time. But their unbelief has not rendered the promise of God of none effect; no, for there was another day limited in David, which was the day of His power; and then His people, Israel, should be a willing people;—and He would write His law in their hearts, and print it in their thoughts; their sins and their iniquities He would remember no more.

Thus after this chosen family had rejected Christ and His proposals, the heralds of salvation said to them, "Lo, we turn unto the Gentiles;" and the Gentiles received the covenant, and were grafted in from whence the chosen family were broken off: but the Gentiles have not continued in the goodness of God, but have departed from the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, and have broken the covenant in which their fathers were established (See Isaiah 24:5); and have become high-minded, and have not feared; therefore, but few of them will be gathered with the chosen family. (HC 1:313-14.)

According to Joseph Fielding Smith, the "new covenant" the Lord will make with Israel in the last days will include the covenants contained in the volume of scripture entitled the Doctrine and Covenants:

"This book [the Doctrine and Covenants] . . . in large measure . . . fulfills the promise of the Lord to his ancient prophets in relation to his covenants which he would make with Israel in the last days." (CHMR 3:65.)

31:34 In the last days all those of true Israel, "from the least of them unto the greatest," will "know the Lord." Joseph Fielding Smith has explained this responsibility:

If I may be pardoned for saying it, I think many members of the Church will be condemned for their failure to search for knowledge which is given in clearness in our standard works. When will the time come which was spoken of by the Prophet Jeremiah: [Jeremiah 31:31-34.]

It has always been an astonishment to me that so many members of the Church fail to prepare themselves by study and by faith to know the truth. How many fathers in Israel take time out once a week, or every two weeks, or even once a month, to sit down with the members of their families and have an hour or two in study, reflection, and consideration of the fundamental teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ? This is a duty which each parent owes to his family. No male member of this Church should be so busy or so completely occupied in this world's affairs that he cannot take out time an evening each week to sit down with his family and teach them and have a discussion on the fundamental principles of the gospel. I often think of the rebuke the Lord gave to Frederick G. Williams and Sidney Rigdon because they had failed to teach their children and bring them up "in light and truth." How many other parents in Israel are worthy of a similar rebuke? (AGQ 5:46-47.)

32:1 This prophecy was given after the Babylonian siege had already started and just one year before the destruction of Jerusalem.

32:2-3 The fact that Jeremiah was imprisoned is verified by Nephi, the Book of Mormon writer who lived in Jerusalem at the same time as Jeremiah. Concerning the residents of Jerusalem of about 600 B.C., Nephi wrote: "They have rejected the prophets, and Jeremiah have they cast into prison. And they have sought to take away the life of my father, insomuch that they have driven him out of the land." (1 Ne. 7:14.)

32:36-44 Although the city of Jerusalem is going to be delivered into the hands of the Babylonians and destroyed, yet in the latter days Israel will be gathered back to that land again and the Lord "will make an everlasting covenant with them . . . that they shall not depart from me" (v. 40).

33:15-16 See the commentary for Jeremiah 23:5-6.

34:9 This is the first time the word Jew appears in the Old Testament. It is used here in the general sense of "being an Hebrew or an Hebrewess."

The title Hebrew was applied to Abraham (Gen. 14:13), and his descendants are known as Hebrews.

The name and title Israel was given to Jacob (Gen. 32:28; 35:10), and his descendants are known as Israelites. Inasmuch as Jacob is a descendant of Abraham (he is Abraham's grandson through Isaac), all Israelites (descendants of Jacob) are also Hebrews (descendants of Abraham). But, not all Hebrews (descendants of Abraham) are Israelites (descendants of Jacob).

Now to the next generation after Jacob (Israel). The descendants of Judah are known as Jews. All Jews (descendants of Judah) are Israelites (descendants of Jacob) and are also Hebrews (descendants of Abraham).

Thus, as indicated in this verse, a Jew is also a Hebrew. Although all Jews (descendants of Judah) are Hebrews (descendants of Abraham) not all Hebrews (descendants of Abraham) are Jews (descendants of Judah).

Unfortunately even many of the Jewish people today fail to make this distinction. It is true that the Jews are Israelites, but they are not the only Israelites. The descendants of the other eleven sons of Jacob (Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and Benjamin) are also entitled to be called both Israelites and Hebrews. Also, the Arab peoples, who are also descendants of Abraham, deserve to be called Hebrews.

36:1-32 This chapter indicates how scriptures can be restored even though the original copy may be lost or destroyed.

In modern times the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the writings of John the Revelator, which help to clarify John 21. (See D&C 7.) Also the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the complete writings of Matthew, which contained the teachings of the Savior to a select group of his apostles during the last week of his life on earth. (See JS-M in the Pearl of Great Price.)

36:26 The Hebrew word translated here as though it were the proper name Hammelech, literally means "the king." It should probably have been translated according to its basic meaning rather than formed into a name. The statement would then read "Jerahmeel the son of the king." (See also Jer. 38:6.)

38:5 The final clause of this verse contains several italicized words, indicating that the equivalent to those words do not appear in the Hebrew text. This rather awkward construction in the King James text could have been translated "for the king cannot do anything against you."

38:6 See the commentary for Jeremiah 36:26 on the meaning of the Hebrew Hammelech.

38:7 The English word Ebed-melech is a transliteration of a Hebrew word that literally means "servant of the king." Thus the word could be translated simply as a description of the function of the person or it could be the proper name of the person. The King James translators consider it a proper name. (See also vs. 8, 10, and 12.)

38:19 The meaning of the last clause is that Zedekiah is fearful "they" [the Chaldeans] will "mock" ("abuse," "maltreat") him.

41:10 The daughters of King Zedekiah survived the destruction of Jerusalem and are last mentioned in the Old Testament as having fled to Egypt. (See Jer. 43:6-7.)

A strong tradition exists among some of the peoples of the British Isles that the daughters of Zedekiah were eventually led to their shores and that some of the British people are their descendants. The Bible neither substantiates nor contradicts this tradition.

46:27-28 This promise to gather Israel in the last days will not be completely fulfilled until near the beginning of the Millennium when the Lord "will make a full end of all the nations whither I have driven thee [O Jacob]."

48:12 The clause translated "I will send unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander" could more literally have been translated "I will send pourers to him who shall pour him off."

48:47 The first sentence of this verse could have been translated: "But I will restore the prisoners of Moab in the latter days [end of the days], says Jehovah."

49:17 Parley P. Pratt has discussed the fulfillment of this prophecy:

Edom also presents a striking fulness of plain and pointed predictions in the prophets. These predictions were pronounced upon Edom at a time when its soil was very productive and well cultivated, and everywhere abounding in flourishing towns and cities. But now its cities have become heaps of desolate ruins, only inhabited by the cormorant, bittern, and by wild beast, serpents, etc., and its soil has become barren; the Lord has cast upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness, and it has been waste from generation to generation, in express fulfillment of the word of prophecy.(VW, p. 25.)

50:17-20 Two separate scatterings and gatherings of the house of Israel are mentioned in these verses:

For additional information on these two major scatterings and gatherings of Israel, see Part I 54-58, 78-80, 105-19, 177-91, 193-97, 204-19, 223, 228-50.

50:33-34 The Lord will redeem both the "children of Israel" and "the children of Judah."

51:31 This verse could have been translated: "A runner shall run to meet a runner, and a herald to meet a herald, to announce to the king of Babylon that his city is captured from end to end."

52:1 The beginning of the reign of Zedekiah also marked the year that Lehi, the great patriarch and prophet of the Book of Mormon, left the city of Jerusalem. Nephi recorded: "For it came to pass in the commencement of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, (my father, Lehi, having dwelt at Jerusalem in all his days) . . . my father, Lehi . . . went forth." (1 Ne. 1:4-5.)

52:10-11 Earlier accounts of the capture of Jerusalem and the blinding of Zedekiah are in 2 Kings 25:1-7 and 2 Chronicles 36:11-20.
