Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

EZEKIEL

See "Ezekiel" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 668-69.

1:1-3 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on these verses:

There has been a question as to what Ezekiel refers to as the "thirtieth year." Traditional Jewish commentaries say it was the thirtieth year of the jubilee, but do not say when the last jubilee year had occurred. Thirty years from 625 B.C., the beginning of the reign of Nebopolassar, father of Nebuchadnezzar, gives the date 595 B.C. That would be about the same as the fifth year of Jehoiachin's captivity and would be a reasonable interpretation.

The place, the river Chebar, could have been the Euphrates by its Babylonian name—Naru Kabari. However, some think it was a canal which connected the Euphrates and the Tigris near their confluence.

We do not have record of any other Hebrew prophets called to the prophetic mission while living outside the land of Israel. (IOT 2:84.)

1:22 This verse could have been translated: "And a likeness was over the heads of the living creature, an expanse, like the color of awesome crystal, stretched out over their heads from above."

1:26-28 This description of Jehovah by Ezekiel has a spirit of reverence and awe similar to the descriptions of other prophets, including Isaiah (Isa. 6:1-8), Moses (Moses 1:9-11), and Joseph Smith (JS-H 1:17).

3:1-3 The eating of this "roll of a book" by Ezekiel is similar to a later eating of "a little book" by John the Apostle (Rev. 10:8-11), although the purpose may have been different and certainly the results varied. In the experience of John, the book was "sweet as honey" in his mouth but his "belly was bitter."

Joseph Smith has provided the following explanation concerning John's experience:

"Q. What are we to understand by the little book which was eaten by John . . . ?

"A. It was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel." (D&C 77:14.)

3:17-19 The reminder that Ezekiel is a watchman whose responsibility is to warn is repeated later in the book of Ezekiel (33:1-9) in greater detail.

Even if a prophet knows the people will not repent as a result of his preaching, he must still warn in order that his garments might be clean from the blood of that generation. (See Jacob 1:18-19.)The prophet Mormon cautions that even though the people reject the message of missionaries, prophets, or other representatives of God because of their own "hardness, let us labor diligently; for if we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God." (Moro. 9:6.)

In modern times, Spencer W. Kimball has taught the importance of this principle:

I am sure that Peter and James and Paul found it unpleasant business to constantly be calling people to repentance and warning them of dangers, but they continued unflinchingly. So we, your leaders, must be everlastingly at it; if young people do not understand, them the fault may be partly ours. But, if we make the true way clear to you, then we are blameless. (BYUSY, Jan. 5, 1965, p. 6.)

3:25-27 The Lord did not always require Ezekiel to preach repentance, for He knew the people would not repent at that time and therefore he would be bringing greater condemnation upon the wicked. However, the Lord promised Ezekiel He would open Ezekiel's mouth and be with him when Ezekiel was sent forth to testify.

The prophet Mormon had a similar experience in regard to the wicked Lehites of his day.

"And I did endeavor to preach unto this people, but my mouth was shut, and I was forbidden that I should preach unto them; for behold they had wilfully rebelled against their God.

". . . I was forbidden to preach unto them, because of the hardness of their hearts." (Morm. 1:16-17.)

4:6 The last clause could have been translated literally from the Hebrew as follows: "a day for a year; a day for a year I have set it for you."

4:14 From the days of Moses, the Israelites had been forbidden to eat "of the beast that dieth of itself, and . . . which is torn with beasts." (Lev. 7:24; see also Ex. 22:31.) Ezekiel had been faithful in keeping these commandments.

5:1-5, 12 Although Ezekiel was a prophet to the Israelitish exiles in Babylonia, he was permitted to see in vision what would happen to the Israelites who were still around Jerusalem: one-third would die by "pestilence, and with famine," one-third would "fall by the sword," and one-third would be scattered into different parts of the earth ("into all the winds"). This last statement would indicate that the scattering of the people of the kingdom of Judah during this period would not be limited to Babylonia.

The Book of Mormon indicates that some residents of Jerusalem during this period (Lehi, Ishmael, Mulek, and their families and groups) were led across the ocean to the continents now known as the Americas. (See 1 Ne. 2:1-5; 18:1-25; Hel. 6:10; 8:21.)

5:10 Similar prophecies concerning cannibalism among Israelites in Jerusalem at the time of the Babylonian siege were recorded in Deuteronomy (28:52-53) and by Jeremiah (19:9).

11:16-20 When the Lord gathers Israel from "among the heathen" where they have been scattered, he promises them that he will give them "the land of Israel" and "one heart" and a "new spirit . . . [then] they shall be my people, and I will be their God." See Part I 179-91, 212-13, 240-44.

12:8-16 The "burden [message of doom]" to "the prince in Jerusalem [Zedekiah]" includes the baffling information that he should die in the land of Babylon yet should not see that land (v. 13).

The striking way in which this apparent riddle is solved is explained in Jeremiah's account of the capture of Zedekiah (king of Judah) by Nebuchadnezzar (king of Babylon):

Then he [Nebuchadnezzar] put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death. (Jer. 52:11.)

13:3 False prophets do not receive visions from God; therefore their purported visions (they "have seen nothing") come from their own minds (they "follow their own spirit").

14:4-21 The contemporary prophets Ezekiel (in Babylon) and Jeremiah (in the land of Judah) had come to the same conclusion—the people of the kingdom of Judah were so wicked they would not repent until they had experienced the humbling effects of captivity. (See also Jer. 14:13-16.) Ezekiel claimed that even the presence of "Noah, Daniel, and Job" could not have saved the people (vs. 14, 20), and Jeremiah said the presence of "Moses and Samuel" would not have delivered them (Jer. 15:1). This is the first time Job is mentioned in a prophetic book.

14:22-23 In the end, the scattering (dispersion) of Israel will prove to be a blessing, for they will finally return to the Lord and accept him. The Lord has purpose in everything he does—"and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have done."

16:3 Although this generation of Israelites had been born in the promised land ("thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan"), yet they were still worshipping foreign gods and idols as though they were living in the lands of the heathen ("thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite"). This "proverb" is later expanded by Ezekiel (16:44-46).

16:31-34 The imagery (1) of Israel as a wife who has become a harlot and (2) of the Lord (Jehovah) as a husband who greatly desires his wife to return and be faithful to him is used by several of the Old Testament prophets. (As examples, see also Isa. 1:21; Jer. 3:1-6; Ezek. 16; Hosea 4:15; Micah 1:7.)

16:44-46 See the commentary for Ezekiel 16:3.

16:55 The term "Sodom and her daughters" refers to the Moabites and Ammonites, as Lot and his daughters escaped from Sodom and their seed became known as the Moabites and Ammonites. (See Gen. 19:36-38.)

"Samaria and her daughters" refers to the peoples of the northern kingdom of Israel. These had already been taken captive as a group before the days of Ezekiel (2 Kgs. 17:6), although remnants of the northern tribes were to be scattered during the lifetime of Ezekiel. (As examples, the peoples of Lehi, Ishmael, and Mulek mentioned in the Book of Mormon—see 1 Ne. 2:1-5; 18:1-25; Hel. 6:10; 8:21.)

Note that all these groups shall "return to their former estate" during the period of gathering in the last days.

17:11-13 A careful reading of these verses reveals that there were to be several scatterings of the peoples of Judah at the time of the Babylonian captivity. Some would be taken "to Babylon" (v. 12), which included Zedekiah and those who accompanied him. Also, the Lord "hath . . . taken the mighty of the land" (v. 13, italics added), which could be Daniel and his companions who had been taken into Babylon earlier when "all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand" were taken captive (2 Kgs. 24:11-6). Ezekiel 17:13 seems to refer to a third group involving the "king's seed" (singular) because the Lord had "made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath of him." (Italics added.) Orson Pratt believed this statement referred to Mulek, the son of King Zedekiah, who came with a company of exiles to America:

When Zedekiah, king of Judah, was carried away captive into Babylon, the Lord took one of his sons, whose name was Mulek, with a company of those who would hearken unto His words, and brought them over the ocean, and planted them in America. This was done in fulfillment of the 22nd and 23rd verses of the seventeenth chapter of Ezekiel, which read thus: [Quoted Ezek. 17:11-13.] By reading this chapter, it will be seen that the Jews were the "high cedar," that Zedekiah the king was the "highest branch," that the "tender one" cropped off from the top of his young twigs, was one of his sons, whom the Lord brought out and planted him and his company upon the choice land of America, which He had given unto a remnant of the tribe of Joseph for an inheritance, in fulfillment of the blessing of Jacob and Moses upon the head of that tribe. [See Gen. 48-49; Deut. 33 ] (Orson Pratt's Works, pp. 280-81.)

17:15 The Lord had warned Zedekiah through Jeremiah not to form a military alliance with Egypt. (Jer. 43:1-13.) Zedekiah disregarded this counsel, however, and incurred the results of his disobedience.

17:22 Some LDS scholars have suggested that the "tender one" taken from "the highest branch of the high cedar . . . the top of his young twigs" who was to be planted "upon an high mountain and eminent" was Mulek, the son of Zedekiah. Mulek would not have been very old when his father was taken into captivity, for his father was only thirty-two years of age at the time. Also, any elder sons of Zedekiah would undoubtedly have been killed when Nebuchadnezzar "slew the sons of Zedekiah." (2 Kgs. 25:7.) Another possibility is that Mulek was not yet born at the moment of the destruction of Jerusalem, for undoubtedly Zedekiah's wife was still of child-bearing years.

See the commentary for 2 Kings 25:7.

18:2 Spencer W. Kimball has likened this verse to a modern situation:

There is the man who resisted release from positions in the Church. He knew positions were temporary trusts, but he criticized the presiding leader who had released him, complaining that proper recognition had not been given; the time had not been propitious; it had been a reflection upon his effectiveness. He bitterly built up a case for himself, absented himself from his meetings, and justified himself in his resultant estrangement. His children partook of his frustrations, and his children's children. In later life he "came to himself," and on the brink of the grave made an about-face. His family would not effect the transformation which now he would give his life to have them make. How selfish! Haughty pride induces eating sour grapes, and innocent ones have their teeth set on edge. "It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks." . . .

. . . Sour grapes! Such unhappy food! (IE, June 1955, p. 426.)

18:14-30 The scriptures teach there is an opposite in all things. Thus, if the sinner who repents can have all his sins removed, then the person who commits a sin should expect all his former sins to return. One possibility cannot exist without the possibility of the other.

20:10-26 According to Joseph Fielding Smith, it is as important for members of the Church to keep the Sabbath day holy as it was for the people of ancient Israel:

Those are the words of the Lord to Ezekiel. [Ezek. 20:10-26.] Notwithstanding all their backsliding and their wickedness and their violation of his commandments, the Lord still pleaded with them; and in the days of Ezekiel, after the greatest number of the tribes of Israel had been carried off because of their rebellion, the Lord pleaded with those who still remained to keep his sabbaths, to walk in his statutes—and even then they refused. Yet he said if they would do these things, it was a covenant with him, and by keeping that covenant he would bless them.

Now, this is the law to the Church today just as it was the law to ancient Israel, and some of our people get rather disturbed because they feel that observing the Sabbath day curtails their activities. (CR, Apr. 1957, p. 61.)

20:33-43 The Lord will fully expect Israel to be obedient to his commandments when he gathers them back to the land and brings them "into the bond of the covenant" (v. 37). When the chosen people recognize they have been disobedient to the Lord during the centuries, they will "lothe" themselves in their "own sight" (v. 43).

The Savior has described the feelings of the descendants in those days:

"And then shall they [the Jews] weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king [the Messiah]." (D&C 45:53.)

21:5, 27 The terminology that the Lord will draw a sword "out of [its] sheath" and it shall not be returned "any more" to the sheath "until he come whose right it is" was used by Brigham Young in recounting an experience of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery:

Oliver Cowdery went with the Prophet Joseph when he deposited these plates. Joseph did not translate all of the plates; there was a portion of them sealed, which you can learn from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. When Joseph got the plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver says that when Joseph and Oliver went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. He says he did not think, at the time, whether they had the light of the sun or artificial light; but that it was just as light as day. They laid the plates on a table; it was a large table that stood in the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than probably many wagon loads; they were piled up in the corners and along the walls. The first time they went there the sword of Laban hung upon the wall; but when they went again it had been taken down and laid upon the table across the gold plates; it was unsheathed, and on it was written these words: "This sword will never be sheathed again until the kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our God and his Christ." (JD 19:38.)

24:15-18 If the contents of chapter 24 all pertain to the same day, the wife of Ezekiel died the very day the "king of Babylon [Nebuchadnezzar]" started his siege against Jerusalem. (Compare Ezek. 24:1-2, 18 with 2 Kgs. 25:1-2.) Ezekiel was commanded by the Lord not to mourn the passing of his wife ("the desire of thine eyes") as an example to the Israelites that they were not to mourn unduly their temporary state of siege and captivity.

The Lord promised Israel through his prophets Jeremiah (Jer. 25:12; 2 Chr. 36:21) and Zechariah (Zech. 1:12; 7:5) that if they endured the captivity well he would deliver them in about seventy years. (See also Dan. 9:2, 24.)

33:1-9 See the commentary for Ezekiel 3:17-19.

33:10-20 See the commentary for Ezekiel 18:14-30.

33:17 This verse could have been translated: "Yet the sons of your people say, The way of the Lord is not fair. But they [and] their way is not fair."

34:1-10 One reason for the apostasy of ancient Israel is that the so-called religious leaders ("the shepherds") did not set a good example for the people ("the flock"), did not "feed [teach]" them, and allowed them to follow the pagan ways of their neighbors ("they were scattered, because there is no shepherd"). Thus, Jehovah states: "I am against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at their hand."

Undoubtedly some of the strong statements of the Lord against "the shepherds" were deleted during the periods when "the shepherds" had control of the scriptures. For example, the Book of Mormon account of Isaiah 49 indicates that this chapter originally began with the following thought: "Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out, because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people." (1 Ne. 21:1; italics added.)

After the record of Isaiah had gone through the hands of "the shepherds," however, the above statement was deleted. Evidently this is one instance of a change in the Bible that came as a result of "designing and corrupt priests." (See TPJS, p. 327.)

34:23-24 The Lord gave several statements to his prophets anciently concerning as shepherd named David whom he would raise up in the last days to feed his flock. "And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them." (See Jer. 23:5; 30:9; 33:15-26; Ps. 89:3-4; Isa. 55:3-4; Ezek. 34:24; 37:22-25.)

Prophets of this dispensation have also spoken and prophesied concerning the spiritual giant named David who will come forth in the last days to be a blessing to gathered Judah.

Just three months before his martyrdom, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught concerning this David: "The throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." (TPJS, p. 339.)

34:29 The first clause could have been translated more literally "And I will raise up for them a planting place of name." Evidently most scholars who prepare cross-referencing systems agree with the idea of the more literal translation, for this verse is usually cross-referenced to Isaiah 61:3, which reads "that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified."

The King James wording would suggest the possibility that a new plant might be developed in modern Israel that would become famous ("of renown"), that would help remove the threat of famine in the land, and would help the reputation of Israel in foreign lands.

36:24-27 One of the conditions among gathered Judah in the last days after being gathered "out of all countries . . . into your own land" is that the people will have "a new spirit."

36:33-38 Another condition of the land of Israel after the return of the descendants of Judah will be that the "desolate land" will "become like the garden of Eden."

Orson Hyde, in dedicating the land of Israel for the return of the Jewish people, pled with the Lord:

"Grant, therefore, O Lord . . . to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the fig-tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful . . . let it again flow with plenty. . . . Let the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply upon the mountains and the hills." (HC 4:457.)

See Part I 82, 195.

37:1-14 The bringing back of apostate Israel ("very dry . . . bones") into covenant Israel with the Lord again is likened in these verses to the resurrection from the dead.

". . . These bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost. . . .

". . . O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel." (Ezek. 37:11-12.) John Taylor has provided the following commentary on these verses:

"The Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward; for all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever." [Genesis 13:14, 15.] What did Stephen say, generations afterwards? That God "gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on; yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child." [Acts 7:5.] Ezekiel's vision of the dry bones explains this seeming contradiction. The Lord said to him, "Son of man, can these bones live? . . ." [Ezekiel 37:3.] Who are they? We are told, in the same chapter, they are the whole house of Israel, and that they shall come out of their graves, bone come to its bone, and sinew to sinew, and flesh come upon them, and they shall become a living army before God, and they shall inherit the land which was given to them and their fathers before them. The measuring line shall again go forth upon those lands, and mark out the possessions belonging to the tribes of Israel. (JD 1:226.)

37:15-19 Several prophets and leaders of the Church in this dispensation have interpreted the "stick of Joseph" to be the Book of Mormon and the "stick of Judah" to be the Bible. Although both the Book of Mormon and the Bible are incomplete at the present time, they are undoubtedly the best examples of these two "sticks [records]" now available to the people.

Concerning the meaning of these terms, LeGrand Richards has written:

In ancient times, in addition to keeping records on metal plates, it was the custom to write upon parchment, which was then rolled upon sticks for preservation. Thus when Ezekiel was commanded by the Lord to "take thee one stick and write upon it, For Judah . . . then take another stick and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim," in our present day language it was the equivalent of commanding the prophet to write one record for Judah and a separate one for Joseph.

It is evident that when this commandment was given to Ezekiel, the Lord did not anticipate that all His promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and to the twelve sons of Jacob, would be recorded in the record of Judah. Recall that at the time this command was given, the house of Joseph had already departed northward into unknown lands, where they had been for some one hundred twenty years. Nevertheless, the Lord wanted all Israel to know that there would be two records kept, one "For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions," and the other "For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions." The Lord made it plain that in His own due time He would "make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand."

Therefore, the earnest seeker after truth should realize that he cannot expect to have all the record of the Lord's hand-dealings with His children if he has but one of these records. Since we have had the record of Judah with us always, we must inquire, "Where is the record of Joseph?" (IDYK, pp. 26-27.)

37:19 This verse refers to "the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim." In Doctrine and Covenants 27:5 the Lord refers to "Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon . . . to whom I have committed the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim."

John Taylor, Joseph Fielding Smith, and Parley P. Pratt have explained further the significance of the "stick of Ephraim":

It is one of those sticks that Ezekiel saw should be written upon, even the stick of Joseph which should be written for Ephraim, and be united with the stick of Judah, and become one stick—one in prophecy, one in revelation, one in doctrine, one in ordinances, one in unfolding the purposes and designs of God, and in leading mankind to a knowledge of the truth, as it was to be introduced in "the times of the restitution of all things spoken of by all the holy Prophets since the world began." (John Taylor, JD 10:126.)

Now if you will carefully analyze this verse, you will discover that it positively states that this "stick" which is the "stick of Joseph," thus covering both tribes, is "in the hand of Ephraim." The record, after its presentation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, was placed in the hand of Ephraim, for Joseph Smith was of Ephraim.

There is no reason for us to attempt a reconciliation. The Book of Mormon is as much the stick of Ephraim as it is of Manasseh, because both Ephraim and Manasseh were the sons of Joseph. The record of Joseph is now in the hand of Ephraim. So far as the fulfilment of the prophecy is concerned, it becomes the record of Ephraim, for the Latter-day Saints are, in the main, of Ephraim. (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ 3:198.)

Now, nothing can be more plain than the above prophecy: [Ezek. 37] there is presented two writings, the one to Ephraim, the other of Judah: that of Ephraim is to be brought forth by the Lord, and put up with that of Judah, and they are to become one in their testimony, and grow together in this manner, in order to bring about the gathering of Israel. (Parley P. Pratt, VW, p. 94.)

Elder Richards then provides the answer to his question: it is the Book of Mormon.

37:21-22 After the time of the judges (which lasted about 330 years) and of the united kingdom (which lasted about 120 years), the tribes of the house divided into two groups: (1) the northern kingdom (the kingdom of Israel) which was ruled over by descendants of Joseph, with headquarters for some time in Samaria, and (2) the southern kingdom (the kingdom of Judah) which was ruled over by descendants of Judah, with headquarters in Jerusalem.

In the last days, however, when the tribes of Israel will be gathered "on every side" and brought "into their own land," there will be only "one nation" and one leader over them all.

LeGrand Richards has provided the following commentary on Ezekiel 37:22:

How could the Lord make a more positive promise that He would bring these two kingdoms together "and they shall be no more two nations"? This promise should cause the descendants of Judah (the Kingdom of Judah) and the descendants of Joseph (the Kingdom of Israel) to realize that until the two kingdoms are brought together that neither can look for the complete fulfillment of the promises of the Lord unto their fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. (IDYK, p. 22.)

37:22-25 See the commentary for Ezekiel 34:23-24 concerning this David.

37:22, 26-27 The covenant with Israel is to be "everlasting"; thus revelation and new scripture must continue, according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

It is clear from this and like predictions by Isaiah, Jeremiah and other prophets, that the Lord never intended that the heavens should be sealed. It is a fallacy that the canon of scripture is full and that since the days of the apostles in the Meridian of Time the Lord decreed that there should be no more revelation or scripture. How can the Lord make a covenant with Israel that will be everlasting without an opening of the heavens and a personal visitation or by divine revelation? (RT, pp. 26-27.)

37:26-28 "Sanctuary" and "tabernacle" have reference to the temple (house of the Lord) that will be erected in Jerusalem in the last days. It will "sanctify Israel" and "be in the midst of them for evermore."

Joseph Fielding Smith has observed concerning these verses:

Through the prophets of old, the Lord has made great promises both to Israel, and the Jews, and concerning Jerusalem and its temple. Jerusalem when Christ comes, is to be a holy city again. Another temple will be built and Israel will be cleansed from all his sins.

Ezekiel prophesied of the gathering of Israel and the building of the temple in Jerusalem after Israel has been gathered and cleansed. In that day the Lord will make an everlasting covenant with them, [Quoted Ezekiel 37:26-28.] After giving the account of the great battle of Gog and Magog and the destruction of the wicked, he gives a detailed description of the glorious temple which shall be built as this sanctuary. (CHMR 2:171.)

38-39 Parley P. Pratt has offered an explanation of the battle of Gog:

Chapters 38 and 39 present us with a view of many nations united under one great head, whom the Lord is pleased to call Gog; and being mounted on horseback, and armed with all sorts of armor, they come up against the mountains of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; their object is to take a prey, to take away silver and gold, and cattle and goods in great abundance.

This is an event which is to transpire after the return of the Jews and the rebuilding of Jerusalem; while the towns and the land of Judea are without walls, having neither bars nor gates. But while they are at the point to swallow up the Jews, and lay waste their country, behold, the Lord's fury comes up in his face, a mighty earthquake is the result, insomuch that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and all the creeping things, and all men upon the face of the earth shall shake at his presence, and every wall shall fall to the ground, and every man's sword shall be turned against his neighbor in this army, and the Lord shall rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him an overflowing rain, great hailstones, fire and brimstone. And thus he will magnify himself and sanctify himself, in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that he is the Lord; thus they shall fall upon the open field, upon the mountains of Israel, even Gog and all his army, horses and horsemen; and the Jews shall go forth and father the weapons of war such as hand staves, spears, shields, bows and arrow; and these weapons shall last the cities of Israel seven years for fuel, so that they shall cut no wood out of the forest, for they shall burn the weapons with the fire; and they shall spoil those that spoiled them; and rob those that robbed them, and they shall gather gold and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.

At this time the fowls of the air and the beasts of the field shall have a great feast; yea, they are to eat fat until they be full, and drink blood until they be drunken. They are to eat the flesh of captains, and kings, and mighty men, and all men of war. But the Jews will have a very serious duty to perform, which will take no less than seven months; namely, the burying of their enemies. They will select a place on the east side of the sea, called the Valley of the Passengers, and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude, and they shall call it the valley of Hamon Gog. And the scent shall go forth, insomuch that it shall stop the noses of the passengers; thus shall they cleanse the land. (VW, pp. 45-46.)

See the commentaries for Ezekiel 38:1-23 and Joel 2:1-11.

See Part I 86, 112.

38:1-23 The battle described here of Gog and Magog against Israel will be "in the latter days" (vs. 8, 16) after the people of Israel have gathered back to their land and "dwelleth safely" (v. 14). In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord reaffirms that the destructions "spoken by the mouth of Ezekiel the prophet" (29:21) will occur "before this great day [the second coming of Christ in power and great glory] shall come." (D&C 29:14.)

A second battle of Gog and Magog against the covenant people of the Lord will occur after the Millennium, according to the Lord as revealed to John the Apostle. (Rev. 20:8.)

For further information on these two battles, see the commentaries for Ezekiel 38-39 and Joel 2:1-11; also Part I 90, 113, 206-13.

38:14-23 In September 1830 the Lord referred to this prophecy of Ezekiel and said that it will all be fulfilled "for abominations shall not reign." (D&C 29:21.)

40-43 The temple described in these chapters is to be built in Jerusalem in the last days, according to Joseph Fielding Smith:

After the Jews have repented and received the Gospel, having acknowledged Jesus Christ as their Redeemer, the temple in Jerusalem will be built according to the prophecy of Ezekiel. The description of this grand edifice is recorded in chapters 40-43. The glory of the Lord will rest upon it and those who officiate in it will be sanctified, holding the divine authority which was given to their fathers. Then will come the true and lawful division of the land, not only for Judah, but for all the tribes of Israel who are to return. (ST, pp. 238-39.)

43:1-4 Ezekiel likened his vision of the Lord coming to the temple to his earlier visions of Jehovah "by the river Chebar." (See Ezek. 1:3; 3:23; 10:15, 20.)

For further information on this temple see Part I 86,112.

44:20 See Part I 25.

47:1-5 One of the miracles associated with the return of the Jewish people to Israel is the springing forth of a river from under the foundation of the temple. The Lord revealed this event to Joel (3:18), Zechariah (14:8), and John the Apostle (Rev. 22:1).

The following verses (Ezek. 47:6-8) mention that the waters of the Dead Sea "shall be healed." The sequence and proximity of these verses would seem to indicate that the rising of the river on the temple mount will be at least one of the causes of the healing of the Dead Sea.

See Part I 87-88.

47:6-12 Another miracle of the last days when Judah returns home is that the waters of the Dead Sea "shall be healed" at least to the extent that "fish of the great sea" can live therein.

At the present time the Dead Sea is approximately 27 percent salt, while the normal seas of the earth are about 5 percent. Although not all the areas around the Dead Sea will be healed ("the marishes thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt"), the sea itself will support fish life, and on the banks of the river "shall grow all trees for meat [food] . . . and the leaf thereof for medicine."

See Part I 87-88.

47:13-23; 48:1-35 The division of the land among the twelve tribes of Israel in the last days will correspond roughly to the division determined in the days of Moses and Joshua. (Josh. 13-21.)

The term "Joseph shall have two portions" (v. 13) reflects the custom that the birthright son should have a double portion of his father's inheritance. (See the commentary for 1 Chr. 5:1-2; see also Part I 11.)

When specific names are assigned to the lands, however, no land in ancient Canaan is identified by the name "Joseph." Rather, two lands are identified by the names of Joseph's two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. (See Part I 53.)

48:30-34 The names assigned to the gates of the city are the names of the twelve sons of Jacob (Israel). Levi and Joseph are both rightfully listed here.
