Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

DANIEL

See "Daniel" and "Daniel, Book of" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 652-53.

1:1 The events listed here indicate that Daniel and his friends were taken captive into Babylon about twenty years before the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar in the eleventh year of the reign of Zedekiah.

1:3-4 "Children" could have been translated "youth" or "young men." Some of the young men who were taken captive were of royal bloodlines ("of the king's seed"). Whether or not Daniel was of royal blood is not known; his genealogy is not given.

1:6-7 The meanings of the old and the new names of Daniel and his three friends are as follows:

Daniel ("God is my judge") became Belteshazzar ("O protect his life").

Hananiah ("Jehovah is gracious") became Shadrach (meaning uncertain).

Mishael ("Who is what God is?") became Meshach (meaning uncertain).

Azariah ("God is my help") became Abednego ("a servant of Nego").

1:10 The last part of this verse could have been translated: "For why should he see your faces worse looking than the boys who are of your age? Then you would forfeit my head to the king."

1:17 God blessed Daniel and his three friends, who observed sound eating habits with "knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams."

The Lord has promised those who keep his health laws (the Word of Wisdom) in the latter days that they "shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures." (D&C 89:19.)

Spencer W. Kimball sees a direct correlation between Daniel's adherence to the laws of health and the additional spiritual powers he received later:

The gospel was Daniel's life. The Word of Wisdom was vital to him. In the king's court, he could be little criticized, but even for a ruler he would not drink the king's wine nor gorge himself with meat and rich foods. His moderation and his purity of faith brought him health and wisdom and knowledge and skill and understanding, and his faith linked him closely to his Father in heaven, and revelations came to him as often as required. His revealing of the dreams of the king and the interpretations thereof brought him honor and acclaim and gifts and high position such as many men would sell their souls to get. "But Daniel sat in the gate of the King" (Daniel 2:49) and reminded him of his transgression. (Mexico Area CR, 1972, p. 31.)

2:4-5 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on these verses:

Note the language mentioned in verse 4; after this verse in the Hebrew Bible, it changes from the Hebrew language to the Aramaic ("Syriac") language. The text returns to Hebrew again in chapter 8. No one knows now the reason for this bilingual composition.

In verse 5 the phrase "is gone from me" should probably read "is certain with me," as the Persian word azda ("sure") is used. Note in verse 9 that the king makes the point that he knows what he dreamt; therefore if the interpreters can tell him the dream, he will know that they know what they are talking about and he will know whether he can have confidence in their interpretation or not! (IOT 2:92.)

2:8 The last clause could have been translated "the thing [word] is assured from me." This translation would also suggest that the king remembered his dream. (See the commentary for Dan. 2:4-5.)

2:28 Daniel attributed the power of seership to God, as did Joseph when he was asked to interpret the dream of Pharoah. (See Gen. 41:16.)

Spencer W. Kimball has commented concerning Daniel's modesty:

He [Daniel] then made known through proper channels that he would reveal the dream and the interpretation thereof, and the great king asked the direct question if he, Daniel, could really do so; to which he answered that the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians and the soothsayers would not be able to ever reveal the dream nor its interpretations: [Daniel 2:28, .

Daniel modestly disclaimed any wisdom but gave credit to the Lord, and then gave in detail the dream with the interpretation. (BYUSY, Nov. 11, 1959, p. 4.)

2:31-44 Spencer W. Kimball has offered the following commentary on these verses:

This is revelation concerning the history of the world, when one world power would supersede another until there would be numerous smaller kingdoms to share the control of the earth.

And it was in the days of these kings that power would not be given to men, but the God of heaven would set up a kingdom—the kingdom of God upon the earth, which should never be destroyed nor left to other people. (CR, Apr. 1976, p. 10.)

2:44 The kingdom of God established in the latter days will stand forever and will "break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms" in the sense that it shall replace all other forms of government at the beginning of the Millennium.

Concerning this kingdom, Brigham Young has stated:

The Lord God Almighty has set up a kingdom that will sway the sceptre of power and authority over all the kingdoms of the world, and will never be destroyed, it is the kingdom that Daniel saw and wrote of. It may be considered treason to say that the kingdom which that Prophet foretold is actually set up; that we cannot help, but we know it is so, and call upon the nations to believe our testimony. The kingdom will continue to increase, to grow, to spread and prosper more and more. Every time its enemies undertake to overthrow it, it will become more extensive and powerful; instead of its decreasing, it will continue to increase, it will spread the more, become more wonderful and conspicuous to the nations, until it fills the whole earth. (JD 1:202-3.)

Wilford Woodruff has added:

And I will say, in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, that "Mormonism" will live and prosper, Zion will flourish, and the Kingdom of God will stand in power and glory and dominion as Daniel saw it, when this nation is broken to pieces as a potter's vessel and laid in the dust, and brought to judgment, or God never spoke by my mouth. (WW, pp. 508-9.)

2:45 In this day the keys of the priesthood have been likened to the stone that "was cut out of the mountain without hands."

"The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth." (D&C 65:2.)

2:49 The term "Daniel sat in the gate of the king" means that he was aware of everything that was brought before the king; in other words, he became a counselor and confidant to the king.

3:1 The golden image would have been approximately ninety feet high and nine feet wide!

3:17-19 The courageous stand of the three young Israelites ("we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up") inspired the following commentaries by Spencer W. Kimball:

Neither the cunning of the deceivers, the conspiring, cunning tricksters, nor the fear of the king and what he could do to them, dissuaded the three courageous young men from their true path of rightness. When the pre-arranged sounds of the cornet, flute, harp and other instruments reverberated through the area and the masses of men and women everywhere filled their homes and the streets with kneeling worshippers of the huge golden image, three men refused to insult their true God. They prayed to God, and when confronted by the raging and furious emperor king, they courageously answered in the face of what could be certain death: [Daniel 3:17-18.]

Though they did not know the will of God, though they did not know for sure if the Lord would save them, it mattered not. Right was right and their faith sustained them. . . . They emerged safely from the furnace heated to seven times its usual temperature. (BYUSY, Feb. 1964, pp. 18-19.)

There were the three Hebrews who prayed to the living God in spite of the laws to the contrary. Their answer was not contingent upon the Lord performing a miracle. They were content to do right and let the consequence follow, be it rescue or death. . . .

Integrity! The promises of eternal life from God supersede all promises of men to greatness, comfort, immunities.

As these brave men were threatened, they did not know that Shakespeare, long centuries later, was to say:

"There is no terror in your threats: for I am armed so strong in honesty that they pass by me as the idle wind, which I respect not." (Julius Caesar, act 4, scene 3.)

Integrity in man should bring inner peace, sureness of purpose, and security in action. Lack of integrity brings disunity, fear, sorrow, unsureness. (Mexico Area CR, 1972, pp. 31-32.)

3:25 Even Nebuchadnezzar, the pagan worshiper of idols, had no difficulty believing that the "Son of God" could have the appearance of a man.

3:29 This statement by Nebuchadnezzar should not be construed to mean that he was instantly and permanently converted to Jehovah. As a worshiper of many gods, Nebuchadnezzar simply wanted to make certain his people did not offend this god who could deliver men unharmed from a "burning fiery furnace."

5:2 The word "father" probably should have been "grandfather."

5:5 An earlier leader (the brother of Jared) had also had the experience of seeing "part of the hand" of a divine messenger. (See Ether 3:6.)

5:11 Daniel was sought as the possible interpreter of the writing upon the wall, for "the spirit of the holy gods" was with him. Spencer W. Kimball recalls others who have shared this gift:

This was a message from another world. Daniel interpreted the solemn warning. . . .

Radioed programs came in great numbers through the ages, faithfully interpreted by the Jeremiahs, the Ezekiels, and the Daniels; by the Nephis, the Moronis, the Benjamins; by the Peters, the Pauls, and the Joseph Smiths. (CR, Apr. 1962, p. 3.)

5:17 True prophets do not accept salaries, gifts, or bribes in doing the work of the Lord. In refusing the proffered gifts of the king ("let thy gifts be to thyself"), Daniel was following a pattern set by Elisha in refusing the gifts of Naaman. (See 2 Kgs. 5:16.)

5:23 Spencer W. Kimball has provided the following commentaries on the teachings of this verse:

O mortal men, deaf and blind! Can we not read the past? For thousands of years, have plowshares been beaten into sword and pruning hooks into spears, yet war persists. Ever since Belshazzar saw the finger writing upon the wall of his palace, the warning reappears. It seems to restate with great forcefulness, Daniel's indictment of an unhumble people:

". . . Blessed be the name of God. . . . he removeth kings, and setteth up kings." (Dan. 5:26-27, 22-23; 2:20-21.)

The answer to all of our problems—personal, national, and international—has been given to us many times by many prophets, ancient to modern. Why must we grovel in the earth when we could be climbing toward heaven! The path is not obscure. Perhaps it is too simple for us to see. We look to foreign programs, summit conferences, land bases. We depend on fortifications, our gods of stone; upon ships and planes and projectiles, our gods of iron—gods which have no ears, no eyes, no hearts. (CR, Apr. 1960, p. 85.)

Few men have ever knowingly and deliberately chosen to reject God and his blessings. Rather, we learn from the scriptures that because the exercise of faith has always appeared to be more difficult than relying on things more immediately at hand, carnal man has tended to transfer his trust in God to material things. Therefore, in all ages when men have fallen under the power of Satan and lost the faith, they have put in its place a hope in the "arm of flesh" and in "gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know" (Dan. 5:23)—that is, in idols. This I find to be a dominant theme in the Old Testament. Whatever thing a man sets his heart and his trust in most is his god; and if his god doesn't also happen to be the true and living God of Israel, that man is laboring in idolatry. (E, June 1976, p. 4.)

5:31 Concerning the capture of Babylon, Spencer W. Kimball has observed:

The prophets pleaded for repentance. But why should Babylon worry? Was not Babylon the ruler of nations? . . .

Was not this city impregnable? Who could scale its walls? Who could crash its gates? But the monster of sin came. Though impenetrable the walls, and numerous the armed defenders, yet all must fall and crumble as sin makes impotent, weak, and fat the people who become slaves to it. (CR, Oct. 1945, pp. 123-24.)

George Albert Smith has commented concerning the downfall and death of Belshazzar:

The king and others felt perfectly secure, feeling that with food and provisions, and a river of water running through the city, not anything could come in to disturb them, and yet on that wall were written the words which, when interpreted, read, "You have been weighed in the balance and found wanting, and your kingdom will be divided among the Medes and the Persians." At that very hour "my servant Cyrus" had diverted the river that went through the city from its channel and his army entered under the wall, which wall was so high that it could not be scaled or destroyed with any means or weapons that they had, and so wide that several chariots could ride abreast on the top. (CR, Oct. 1948, p. 183.)

6:3 The "excellent spirit" that was evident in Daniel was undoubtedly the result of the influence of the Holy Ghost. Pharaoh had detected a similar excellent spirit in faithful Joseph, and when he was considering selecting Joseph as his major governor, the Pharaoh exclaimed: "Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?" (Gen. 41:38.)

6:4-24 The powers and wiles of the earth cannot have power over a person of integrity such as Daniel, according to Spencer W. Kimball:

These vicious men conspired to destroy Daniel. Their clever trick would end his dominion. Knowing the faith and the habits of Daniel, they could not fail. Preying upon the pride and vanity of the emperor, his conceit, his egotism, they persuaded him to sign an unbreakable law—a law which forbade anyone in the ensuing thirty days asking any petition of anyone but Belshazzar. The penalty was to be consigned to the den of lions. Belshazzar signed the decree, not knowing it was leveled at his friend. This unalterable law of the Medes and Persians would have been terrifying to any man, but the faithful Daniel did not flinch. Was there any question what he should do? He could save his life by abandoning his prayers to the Living God. What was he to do? A man of integrity could not fail. Daniel was the soul of integrity. (BYUSY, Feb. 1964, p. 17.)

6:24 The last clause, "or ever they came at the bottom of the den," could have been translated "before they came to the lower part of the den."

6:26 Darius, in accepting "the God of Daniel" as one of the gods acceptable to the Chaldeans (Babylonians), is following the example of Nebuchadnezzar, who accepted the "God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego." (See Dan. 3:29.) In neither case are there indications of real conversion on the part of the kings.

7:1-28 This chapter is a "flashback" and is out of sequence chronologically. The four beasts and the countries represented by them have been identified by most scholars as follows: Lion—Babylon; Bear—Persia; Leopard—Greece; Diverse beast—Rome.

Concerning the use of beasts to represent kingdoms, Joseph Smith has stated:

When God made use of the figure of a beast in visions to the prophets He did it to represent those kingdoms which had degenerated and become corrupt, savage and beast-like in their dispositions, even the degenerate kingdoms of the wicked world; but He never made use of the figure of a beast nor any of the brute kind to represent His kingdom.

Daniel says (ch. 7, v. 16) when he saw the vision of the four beasts, "I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this," the angel interpreted the vision to Daniel; but we find, by the interpretation that the figures of beasts had no allusion to the kingdom of God. You there see that the beasts are spoken of to represent the kingdoms of the world, the inhabitants whereof were beastly and abominable characters; they were murderers, corrupt, carnivorous, and brutal in their dispositions. The lion, the bear, the leopard, and the ten-horned beast represented the kingdoms of the world, says Daniel. . . .

There is a grand difference and distinction between the visions and figures spoken of by the ancient prophets, and those spoken of in the revelations of John. The things which John saw had no allusion to the scenes of the days of Adam, Enoch, Abraham or Jesus, only so far as is plainly represented by John, and clearly set forth by him. John saw that only which was lying in futurity and which was shortly to come to pass. (HC 5:341-42.)

7:9-14 On May 19, 1838, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that the name of the place where this conference shall take place is "Adam-ondi-Ahman, because . . . it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet." (D&C 116:1.)

7:13 The coming of the "Son of man" in the "clouds of heaven" will be at the time of the Second Coming, according to LeGrand Richards:

Christ's coming in the "clouds of heaven" to which Daniel referred was to be at a much later date than "when a child is born" to which Isaiah referred. There was no kingdom prepared for Him when He was born of the virgin Mary. But when He shall come in the "clouds of heaven," the kingdom will already have been prepared for Him. Unless a kingdom is prepared how can it be given to Him? (IDYK, p. 98.)

For further information on this important event, see Part I 93, 114-15, 210.

7:13,22 The "Ancient of days" mentioned in these verses is father Adam, as is clarified in the following quotations by Joseph Smith:

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family.

. . . He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply. The keys were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship, and they to him. (HC 3:386-87.)

In the afternoon I went up the river about half a mile to Wight's Ferry . . . for the purpose of selecting and laying claim to a city plat near said ferry in Daviess County, which the brethren called "Spring Hill," but by the mouth of the Lord it was named Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said He, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet. (HC 3:35.)

See the commentary for Daniel 10:13, 21.

7:21-22 Joseph Smith made the following observation concerning these verses:

The "Horn" made war with the Saints and overcame them, until the Ancient of Days came; judgment was given to the Saints of the Most High from the Ancient of Days; the time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom. This not only makes us ministers here, but in eternity. (HC 3:389.)

Joseph Fielding Smith made it clear that the "saints" mentioned by Daniel are the members of the Church today:

Daniel and John each saw the opposition the little horn made against the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This opposition will continue until the grand council is held at Adam-ondi-Ahman. This "little horn" (Dan. 7:20-22; Rev. 13) is making a renewed and determined effort today to destroy the Church. The Lord has decreed otherwise and while its power will last until Michael comes and the Son of Man receives his rightful place, this great power will endure. It must, however, fall, and according to the scriptures its end will come rather suddenly. (D&C 29:21; 1 Ne. 13:1-9;Rev. chapters 17-18.) (CHMR 4:44.)

7:27 See the commentaries for Daniel 2:44 and 7:21-22.

8:1-27 This chapter follows chapter 7 by two years, but both of them chronologically precede chapters 5 and 6.

Scholars believe the ram (vs. 3-4) represents the Medes and the Persians, while the "he goat" (v. 5) represents Greece.

Parley P. Pratt has provided an interpretation of this vision:

In this vision we have first presented the Medes and Persians, as they were to exist until they were conquered by Alexander the great. Now, it is a fact well known that this empire waxed exceedingly great for some time after the death of Daniel, pushing its conquests westward, northward, and southward, so that none could stand before it; until Alexander, the king of Grecia, came from the west, with a small army of chosen men, and attacked the Persians upon the banks of the river, and plunging his horse in, and his army following, they crossed, and attacked the Persians, who stood to oppose them on the bank, with many times their number; but, notwithstanding their number, and their advantage of the ground, they were totally routed, and the Grecians proceeded to over-run and subdue the country, beating the Persians in a number of pitched battles, until they were entirely subdued.

It is also well known that Alexander, the King of Greece, went forth from nation to nation, subduing the world before him, until, having conquered the world, he died at Babylon, at the age of thirty-two years. And thus, when he had waxed strong, the great horn was broken, and for it came up four notable ones towards the four winds of heaven. His kingdom was divided among four of his generals, who never attained unto his power.

Now, in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgression of the Jewish nation was come to the full, the Roman power destroyed the Jewish nation, took Jerusalem, caused the daily sacrifice to cease, and not only that but afterwards destroyed the mighty and holy people, that is, the apostles and Primitive Christians, who were slain by the authorities of Rome. (VW, p. 26.)

8:23 This verse could have been translated: "And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors have come to the full, a king, strong of face, and skilled at intrigues, shall stand up."

9:21-22 Gabriel, who appeared unto Daniel and "informed . . . and talked with" him, is Noah, as explained in this statement by Joseph Smith:

He [Adam] is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven. (HC 3:386.)

See the commentary for Daniel 10:13, 21.

9:25-26 Although the term Messiah is frequently used by Jewish people to refer to "the Anointed One," the word appears only twice in the entire English version of the Old Testament: Daniel 9:25-26. The Greek form of the same word, Messias, appears only twice in the entire English version of the New Testament: John 1:41 and 4:25. The "Anointed One" of Jewish hope and expectation (the Messiah) is the same person as the "Anointed One" of Christian faith and practice (Jesus the Christ, which literally means Jesus the Messiah).

10:1-21 Most scholars believe this is a prophecy of the conquest of Persia by Alexander the Great.

10:2-15 Spencer W. Kimball has provided the following comments on these verses:

Daniel was worried so much so that he mourned for three weeks and took no pleasant bread nor meat nor wine. Then came his vision which he alone saw: [Quoted Daniel 10:8-10, 15.]

. . . The pattern was established, the chart made, the blue-print drawn. Under special need, at special times, under proper circumstances, God reveals himself to men who are prepared for such manifestations. And since God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, the heavens cannot be closed except as men lock them against themselves with disbelief. (CR, Apr. 1964, p. 97.)

10:7 A person must be attuned to the Spirit of God in order to receive revelation, according to Spencer W. Kimball:

Every moment of every day, there are numerous programs on the air. We hear very few, relatively, for we are engrossed in our day's duties, but with powerful beaming broadcasting stations, we could hear any of the programs if we are tuned in.

For thousands of years there have been constant broadcasts from heaven of vital messages of guidance and timely warnings, and there has been a certain constancy in the broadcasts from the most powerful station. Throughout all those centuries there have been times when there were prophets who tuned in and rebroadcasted to the people. The messages have never ceased.

One such message came to Daniel in the presence of others, and he who was on the proper frequency said: "And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision." (Dan. 10:7.) (CR, Apr. 1970, p. 121.)

10:13, 21 According to Joseph Fielding Smith, the Michael referred to in these verses is Adam, and Noah is the Gabriel mentioned in Daniel 8:16:

The fact that Adam and Noah, long after they were dead, appeared to Daniel as Michael and Gabriel [Daniel 10:13, 21; 8:16] and to Zacharias and Mary [Luke 1:11-19, 26-31 is evidence that they had received the fulness of blessings that entitled them to stand in the presence of God. (AGQ 1:49.)

See the commentaries for Daniel 7:13, 22 and 9:21-22.

11:1-45 If chapter 10 is indeed concerned with the conquest of Persia by Alexander the Great, as believed by most scholars, then chapter 11 foretells the division of Alexander's empire into two parts—the north headed by Seleucus and the south headed by Ptolemy.

11:8 This verse could have been translated: "And he will also bring their gods with their casted images, with vessels of their possessions, silver and gold, into exile [to] Egypt. And he shall stand from the king of the north."

11:14 The clause "the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision" could have been translated "the sons of the violent ones of your people shall lift up to establish [the] vision."

11:31; 12:1 The "abomination of desolation" mentioned here by Daniel is quoted by the Savior himself as a sign of great destruction in and about Jerusalem. (Matt. 24:15; Mark 13:14; JS-M 1:12, 32.)

12:1 The Michael mentioned in this verse has been identified as Adam by Joseph Smith. (See the commentary for Dan. 7:13, 22.)

12:4 Joseph Fielding Smith and Spencer W. Kimball have provided the following commentaries on this verse:

Among the signs of the last days was an increase of learning. Daniel was commanded to [Daniel 12:4.] Are not the people "running to and fro" today as they never did before in the history of the world? Go to the Bureau of Information and ask there how many tourists visit Temple Square each year. Make inquiry at the various national parks, at the bus, railroad, and steamship companies; learn how many are running to Europe, Asia, and all parts of the earth.

Are we not, most of us, running to and fro in our automobiles seeking pleasure? Is not knowledge increased? Was there ever a time in the history of the world when so much knowledge was poured out upon the people? But sad to say, the words of Paul are true—the people are "ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:7.)

Have you ever tried to associate the outpouring of knowledge, the great discoveries and inventions during the past 136 years, with the restoration of the gospel? Do you not think there is some connection? It is not because we are more intelligent than our fathers that we have received this knowledge, but because God has willed it so in our generation! Yet men take the honor unto themselves and fail to recognize the hand of the Almighty in these things. (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, Apr. 1966, pp. 13-14.)

Nineteenth century theologians thought they saw the fulfillment of these predictions in the coming of the steam engine, the sewing machine, the motor car. What they saw was but the dim beginnings of the most spectacular increase of knowledge since men first dwelt upon the earth. Could they emerge from their graves today and behold a giant rocket in flight, a manmade satellite in orbit, and moving pictures of the moon or Mars appearing on a TV set, a famous choir in South Dakota singing to much of the earth through the satellite off in space, they would recognize in all these and numerous other space-age marvels a fulfillment far beyond their expectations but nonetheless valid for all of that.

The works of God are endless. We stand in awe as we see some of the evidences of increased knowledge and we tingle and tingle and tingle. (Spencer W. Kimball, talk given at the dedication of the Language Training Mission, Provo, Utah, Sept. 1976, p. 5.)

12:5-13 These verses have been subject to various interpretations by scholars and students of the scriptures. In reviewing and analyzing these interpretations in the various printed commentaries, it would be well to remember the admonition of Peter:

"Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. [Or, as the Joseph Smith Translation phrases it, "no prophecy of the scriptures is given of any private will of man."] "For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:20-21.)

12:10 Parley P. Pratt has commented on the statement: "None of the wicked shall understand": "Who are more wicked than the wilfully blind leaders of the blind, who tell us we cannot understand the scriptures?" (VW, p. 48.)
