Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

HOSEA

See "Hosea" in the Bible Dictionary, page 705.

1:2 Ellis Rasmussen has written the following commentary on this verse:

The strange symbolic marriage and family of Hosea parallels the strange covenant relationship of wayward Israel with the LORD. It is the prophet's way of telling of his call from the Lord. Whether the "woman of unfaithfulness" was that way when he took her to wife, or whether she became that way later, no one knows. We do know that Israel was once faithful to God, but became unfaithful later. (IOT 2:31.)

1:4-9 The possible symbolic meanings of the names of Hosea's three children have been discussed by Ellis Rasmussen:

The name of the first child, Jezreel, recalls the valley of former King Jehu's bloody purge, and anticipates Israel's overthrow in that strategic valley, next to the pass at Megiddo (N.T. "Armageddon"), famed for crucial battles past and future. "Jezreel" means "God shall sow"—i.e. scatter abroad. It doubtless alludes to the overthrow and scattering of Israel.

The name of the second child, Lo-ruhamah, warned that no mercy from God would overthrow His justice and save northern Israel; the ten tribes would be utterly taken away, and only Judah would be spared.

The name of the third child, Lo-ammi, "Not-my-people," is like a lament over the broken covenant relationship. But the prophecy immediately follows that someday Israel and Judah shall again be gathered together and it shall yet be said unto them "Ye are the sons of the living God." (IOT 2:31-32.)

3:1 The Hebrew words translated as "flagons of wine" could have been translated more literally as "raisin cakes of grapes." Such cakes were used during some of the fertility cult rites during that period.

3:5 Hosea redeems his unfaithful wife (with "fifteen pieces of silver" which was half the price of a slave [Ex. 21:32; Zech. 11:12]), requiring only that she would not "play the harlot" again but would be faithful to him from that time forth. In somewhat the same way, "in the latter days" the wayward children of Israel will return to their true God and recognize David (or a descendant of David—the Messiah) as their king.

4:2 This verse could have been translated: "Lying and swearing, and killing and stealing, and doing adultery increase; and blood touches against blood."

4:12-14 The evidences of Israel's apostasy are idolatry (vs. 12-13) and adultery (vs. 13-14).

5:3, 5 The terms Ephraim and Israel are used rather consistently in these chapters to refer to the northern kingdom of Israel, whereas Judah refers to the southern kingdom of Judah.

6:6 Sacrifice and "burnt offerings" are simply outward symbols of more important things. The Lord prefers mercy and a knowledge of him over the performance of the rituals.

6:7 The Hebrew word Adam can also mean man. In the context of this verse, the proper name of the first man, Adam, probably should have been translated "man" rather than "men."

8:12 Parley P. Pratt has provided the following commentary on this verse:

We are to prove that God revealed himself to the seed of Joseph or Ephraim—their location we have already proved—dwelling in America. For this we quote Hosea 8:12; speaking of Ephraim, he says by the spirit of prophecy, "I have written to him the great things of my law, but they were counted as a strange thing." This is proof positive, and needs no comment, that the great truths of heaven were revealed unto Ephraim, and were counted as a strange thing. (VW, p. 93.)

9:1 This verse could have been translated: "O Israel, do not rejoice for joy, like the peoples. For you have gone lusting away from your God. You have loved a harlot's hire on every threshing floor."

11:1 According to Matthew 2:14-15, this verse contains one of the many prophecies of the coming of the Messiah found in the Old Testament. The last clause is translated in the New Testament: "Out of Egypt have I called my son."

11:10 Parley P. Pratt believed this verse refers to the descendants of Ephraim in modern-day America:

Again, one of the prophets says, in speaking of Ephraim, "When the Lord shall roar, the children of Ephraim shall tremble from the west." Now let us sum up these sayings, [Gen. 49:22-24, 26; Hosea 11:10.] and what have we gained? First, that Ephraim was to grow into a multitude of nations in the midst of the earth; second, Joseph was to be greatly blessed in a large inheritance, as far off America; third, this was to be on the west of Egypt or Jerusalem.

Now, let the world search from pole to pole, and they will not find a multitude of nations in the midst of the earth who can possibly have sprung from Ephraim unless they find them in America; for the midst of all other parts of the earth is inhabited by mixed races, who have sprung from various sources; while here an almost boundless country was selected from the rest of the world, and inhabited by a race of men, evidently of the same origin, although as evidently divided into many nations.

Now, the scriptures cannot be broken; therefore, these scriptures must apply to America, for the plainest of reasons, they can apply to no other place. (VW, p. 93.)

13:3 Brigham Young has drawn the following lessons from this verse:

If mankind could know the object God has in their creation, and what they might obtain by doing right and by applying to the source and fountain of wisdom of information, how quickly they would turn away from every ungodly action and custom. But as the Prophet says, [Quoted Hosea 4:17]. Instead of seeking unto the Lord for wisdom, they seek unto vain philosophy and the deceit and traditions of men, which are after the rudiments of the world and not after Christ. They are led by their own imaginations and by the dictates of their selfish will, which will lead them in the end to miss the object of their pursuit. Were you to inquire of the leading men of the world—of kings, rulers, philosophers and wise men—the end or result of their pursuits, they cannot tell you. This I believe; and I think it is quite evident, according to what I have witnessed. (JD 10:209.)

13:4 Jehovah of the Old Testament, who delivered Israel from the land of Egypt, is also Jesus Christ of the New Testament. As stated here, "there is no saviour beside me."

13:14 The statement "repentance shall be hid from mine eyes" refers to a time after the resurrection when evidently there is no suspended judgment.

13:14 Two types of death were introduced by the fall of Adam and Eve: (1) physical death, which was the result of the law broken in the Garden of Eden and which is symbolized by the grave, and (2) spiritual death, which is spiritual alienation from God, coming upon Adam and Eve during the process of their breaking the law and which is symbolized by death (separation from God). Through his atonement, Jesus Christ ransoms all mankind from the grave by providing for the resurrection of all; he also redeems all those from spiritual death who will repent of their sins and return to him. "O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction."

See the commentary for Genesis 2:17.

14:1 When a person sins, he goes away from God. Thus, when a person returns to God, he repents to God. A Hebrew word frequently translated "repent" has the basic meaning of returning.

See the commentary for Numbers 23:19.

14:9 The word "fall" could have been translated "stumble." The basic meaning of this verse is "The wise shall understand the things of God, and the prudent shall know them; the ways of God are right, and the saints [holy ones] shall walk in his ways, but the transgressors shall stumble in them."
