Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

JOEL

See "Joel" in the Bible Dictionary, page 714

1:4 The four "insects" mentioned here are really four stages in the developmental life cycle of one insect, the locust. This verse could have been translated:

"That which the cutting locust has left, the swarming locust has eaten. And that which the swarming locust has left, the young locust has eaten. And that which the young locust has left, the stripping locust has eaten."

Ellis Rasmussen has prepared the following commentary on this verse:

What will happen according to verse 4 which according to verses 2 and 3 never had happened to the land (or Israel) before? If an 8th Century Jewish Karaite commentator is right—one Jepheth ben Ali—the four insect plagues symbolize four historic invasions. Supposedly they would be the Assyrian, the Babylonian, the Macedonian-Syrian, and the Roman. Do the invasions also seem to be alluded to in the four invitations to lament starting with verses 4, 8, 12, and 15? (IOT 2:35.)

2:1-3 This great army described by Joel is evidently the army of Gog mentioned in Ezekiel 38 and Revelation 20.

See the commentaries for Joel 2:1-11 and Ezekiel 38:1-23; see also Part I 90, 113, 206-13.

2:1-11 Two great armies that will eventually meet and fight each other in "the day of the Lord" can be identified in these verses: (1) the "great people and a strong" who leave "behind them a desolate wilderness" (vs. 2-10), and (2) the army of the Lord "and who can abide it?" (v. 11).

Concerning these armies, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

Here we have a great, terrible army, marching with unbroken ranks and crushing everything before it, finding the garden like Eden before them, leaving the wilderness behind, causing mourning, causing suffering; and so the prophet raises the warning voice, and that voice is to us, . . . that we might turn unto the Lord and rend our hearts. . . . And then . . . the Lord says that He will take that great army in hand, that He also has an army. His army is terrible, just as terrible as the other army, and He will take things in hand. When I say the other army, the Lord's army, do not get an idea He is thinking about England or the United States. He is not. He is not thinking about any earthly army. The Lord's army is not an earthly army, but He has a terrible army; and when that army marches, it will put an end to other armies, no matter how terrible they may be; and so He says in these closing words I have read to you that He would do this thing. He would drive this terrible northern army into the wilderness, barren and desolate, with his face towards the east sea and his hinder part towards the utmost sea. He would do that, and then He would bless His people—having references, of course, to Israel. (ST, pp. 160-61.)

See the commentaries for Ezekiel 38:1-23 and chapters 38-39; see also Part I 90, 113, 206-13.

2:13 The descriptive clause "rend your heart, and not your garments" refers to the custom practiced at least since the days of Jacob of tearing clothes during times of sorrow, grief, or despair. (Gen. 37:34.) The Lord is here counseling men to come before him with a broken heart and a contrite spirit rather than with torn clothing.

They used to rend their garments and sit in sack cloth when they were repentant. So the Lord says, "Rend your heart and not your garments." Humble yourselves. Prepare yourselves, oh Israel, that you may receive My blessings, that you might be protected from this condition that is going to come. (Joseph Fielding Smith, ST, p. 160.)

2:28 A similar promise was made by the Lord through Isaiah (44:3), Ezekiel (39:29), and Zechariah (12:10).

Joseph Fielding Smith has provided the following commentary on this verse:

Moroni has proclaimed that any honest seeker after truth who diligently asks of the Lord, will receive a manifestation of the truth through the Holy Ghost. But once the Holy Ghost has given that manifestation, then the person has no further claim for further manifestations, until he has complied with the law. Now, IF the world cannot receive this gift, then we must conclude that the enlightenment that comes to men in the world—and such enlightenment has come on many occasions—it must be from some other source. When, therefore the Lord said through Joel, that he would pour out his spirit on all flesh it was not the Holy Ghost that was to be given to ALL, only to a few, for, remember, the world cannot receive this Spirit.

On the other hand, the Spirit of Christ (sometimes called the Light of Christ, and Spirit of truth, or Spirit of Jesus Christ) is a spirit that is given to EVERY MAN, no matter who he is or what is his belief. (AGQ 5:134-35.)

The statement "I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh" does not refer to the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, according to Joseph Fielding Smith: This does not have reference to the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, but to the Spirit of Christ, or Light of Truth, which we are informed is given to "every man that cometh into the world." The predictions are made that through the inspiration of this Spirit, wonderful things are to be accomplished in the latter days. (ST, p. 180.)

2:28-32 Joseph Smith mentioned that these verses were quoted to him by the angel Moroni on September 21, 1823, with the commentary "that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in." (JS-H 1:41.)

2:32 Three different aspects of the gathering might be identified in these words. There shall be deliverance (1) in mount Zion, (2) in Jerusalem, and (3) in "the remnant whom the Lord shall call."

Joseph Fielding Smith has differentiated between "Zion" and "Jerusalem":

There are to be two capital cities which will be established when the millennial reign shall come. Zion, the New Jerusalem in America and Jerusalem in Palestine which shall be rebuilt and become a city of magnitude and magnificence. (CHMR 2:172.)

See the commentary for Isaiah 2:2-4; see also Part I 95, 132-33.

3:1 The wording makes it absolutely clear the Lord is talking about the last days just preceding the second coming of the Messiah—"in those days, and in that time" when he will bring Judah and Jerusalem forth from their captivity. The last clause could have been translated "when I will bring again the exiles of Judah and Jerusalem."

3:10 During this time of preparation for war, plowshares will be beaten into swords. During the time of peace which will follow after the beginning of the millennial reign of the Messiah, the opposite will be done—swords will then be beaten into plowshares, as the Lord revealed through his prophets Isaiah (2:4) and Micah (4:3).

See Part I 100, 155-165.

3:12-14 The "valley of decision" in verse 14 is evidently the same place as the valley identified specifically as Jehoshaphat ("valley of Jehovah's judgment") in verse 12.

3:15-16 The darkening of the sun, moon, and stars will likely be a natural result of the great amounts of dust which will be sent into the atmosphere during the great earthquake when "the heavens and the earth shall shake."

3:17 The holy status of Jerusalem after the great battle has been clarified in the 1845 Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles. (See Part I 212-13.)

3:18 The fountain that shall come forth "of the house of the Lord" is evidently the same one discussed in detail in Ezekiel 47:1-12. See the commentary for Ezekiel 47:1-5; see also Part I 87.
