Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

AMOS

See "Amos" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 607-8.

1:1 Amos was of the southern part of the kingdom of Judah.

The Hebrew word chazah, translated here as "saw," refers to "prophetic vision."

1:3, 6, 9, 11, 13 and 2:1 The statement repeated in all these verses ("for three transgressions . . . and for four") means that these nations are overflowing with sin or, as the Lord has said in this dispensation, "the cup of their iniquity is full." (D&C 101:11.)

2:12 One of the vows of the Nazarite was "He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor." (Num. 6:3.)

3:6 The clause "Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it" could have been translated "Is there calamity in a city, has Jehovah not even done [it]?" The basic meaning is that God is aware of all evil and calamities. The Joseph Smith Translation replaces "done" with "known."

Brigham Young has discussed this principle.

Is there anything that passes with the children of men that the Lord does not control to his glory? That is what the Lord wants every man and woman to understand. If there is good, the Lord is there to dictate it. If there is power, has he not power over all the power there is upon the face of the earth? If there is evil, if there is sorrow, if there is trouble, if there are trials for his people, is he not there to dictate those sorrows and troubles? All that passes upon the earth is under his eye; he dictates in the affairs of nations. If a mighty king and kingdom are raised up upon any portion of the earth, the Lord has done it. And when a mighty nation crumbles in its power, the Lord has touched their pride and strength. He raises and casts down; he dictates in the light and in the darkness, at his pleasure; he makes the thick darkness his chariot and rides upon the clouds; and he is also the brightness of the sun. We have the privilege of learning that God dictates, controls, and manages all to his own glory. (JD 6:145-46.)

Is there an evil thing upon the earth that he does not fully understand? There is not. [See Ps. 139.] The Lord understands the evil and the good; why should we not likewise understand them? We should. Why? To know how to choose the good and refuse the evil; which we cannot do, unless we understand the evil as well as the good. I do not wish to convey the idea that it is necessary to commit evil in order to obtain this knowledge. (JD 9:242-43.)

3:7 This is one of the most widely quoted verses from the writings of Amos.

Joseph Smith taught that this principle has been operating on the earth since the beginning:

According to the testimony of the Scriptures in all ages of the world, whenever God was about to bring a judgment upon the world or accomplish any great work, the first thing he did was to raise up a Prophet, and reveal unto him the secret, and send him to warn the people, so that they may be left without excuse. This was the case in the days of Noah and Lot. God was about to bring judgments upon the people, and he raised up those Prophets who warned the people of all yet they gave to them, but rejected their testimony; and the judgments came upon the people, so that they were destroyed, while the Prophets were saved by pursuing the course marked out by the Lord. (HC 6:23.)

George Albert Smith stated that this principle operated to help bring forth the United States and also the Church:

I believe that all down through the ages, as recorded in holy writ, the Lord has vindicated that statement. [Amos 3:7.] The preparation for the ushering in of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in this latter dispensation was indicated in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, and repeated again in the days of the Apostles, and then the foundation was laid for the organization of the government of the United States by men and women who believed in the divine mission of Jesus Christ. The stage was not set hastily; it was preparing through hundreds of years. We who live in this marvelous age may look back and see that throughout the centuries our Heavenly Father has fulfilled his promises to his children, and the people or nation that has observed the laws of God and honored his commandments has been blessed; while those who have been recreant to their opportunity have suffered calamity and in many cases entire destruction. Our Heavenly Father prepared the way for the coming of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which was to precede the second coming of our Lord (CR, Apr. 1930, p. 65.)

Another prophet in our day, Spencer W. Kimball, has taught that this principle is always in force; furthermore, each individual is entitled to receive guidance from the Lord based on personal righteousness:

This postulation to the prophet Amos [3:7] has come down from antiquity. . . .

. . . Many people of our own day expect that revelations will come only in spectacular vision on Sinais accompanied with lightnings and thunderings. . . .

. . . For many it is hard to accept as revelation those numerous ones in Moses' time, in Joseph's time, and in our own year—those revelations which come to prophets as deep, unassailable impressions settling down on the prophet's mind and heart as dew from heaven or as the dawn dissipates the darkness of night.

The burning bushes, the smoking mountains, the sheets of four-footed beasts, the Cumorahs, and the Kirtlands were realities; but they were the exceptions. The great volume of revelation came to Moses and to Joseph and comes to today's prophet in the less spectacular way—that of deep impressions, without spectacle or glamour or dramatic events.

Always expecting the spectacular, many will miss entirely the constant flow of revealed communication.

When in a Thursday temple meeting, after sacred prayer and fasting, important decisions are made: new missions and new stakes created, new patterns and policies initiated, a new temple approved, new officials called to fill vital vacancies in leadership; the information is often taken for granted and possibly thought of as mere human calculations. But to those who sit in the intimate circles and hear the solemn prayers of the prophet and the testimony of this man of God; to those who see the astuteness of his deliberations and the sagacity of his decisions and pronouncements, to them he is verily a prophet. To hear him conclude important new developments with such solemn expressions as "The Lord is pleased," "Our Heavenly Father has spoken" is to know it positively.

From the prophet of the restoration, Joseph Smith, to the prophet of our own year, President Harold B. Lee, the communication line is unbroken, the authority is continuous; the light, brilliant and penetrating, continues to illuminate. The voice of the Lord is a continuous, pleasant sound, a sweet peaceful melody, and a thundering appeal. For nearly a century and a half now there has been no interruption nor stoppage.

When such changes come through the prophet, there is certainty and calm, tranquil assurance; and the peace of heaven settles over the hearts of true believers with a sureness. Great and good men rise to new stature under the mantle of prime authority, and when keys of heaven are closed in their palms, the voice of authority comes from their lips.

Man never stands alone unless his own desires are selfishness, independence, and egotism. Every righteous person may have inspiration in his own limited kingdom. The Lord definitely calls prophets today and reveals his secrets unto them; he did yesterday; he does today, and will do tomorrow—that is the way it is. "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Germany Area CR, 1973, pp. 74-77.)

3:15 The wicked king Ahab had made an ivory house (1 Kgs. 22:39) which apparently had become a symbol of decadence and wickedness by the days of Amos.

4:4 Pagan altars had been erected in the Bethel and Gilgal where the apostates worshiped their idols.

4:6 Even though a famine had come upon the land, the people had not repented of their sins.

God sometimes uses famine as a way of encouraging people to return to him, according to Brigham Young:

That individual, neighbourhood, people, or nation that will not acknowledge the hand of God in all things, but will squander their blessings, and thus pour contempt upon his kind favours, will become desolate and be wasted away. So long as any people live up to the best light they have, the Almighty will multiply blessings upon them by blessing the earth and causing it to bring forth in its strength to fill their storehouses with plenty; but if they become fat, and are lofty, and kick against the Lord, and trample his blessings under their feet in reckless wastefulness, he will cause them to inherit barrenness, and he will give them "cleanness of teeth in all their cities, and want of bread in all their places." The Lord needs only to say to his angel, "Pass over the land and take away the elements of wheat," and that crop ceases to be produced. (JD 9:169.)

The Bible Dictionary (p. 647) indicates that the phrase "cleanness of teeth" is "a unique phrase used by Amos to describe conditions of famine."

5:21 The statement "I will not smell in your solemn assemblies" could have been translated "I will not delight in your solemn assemblies."

6:1 The "mountain of Samaria" referred to here (see also Amos 3:9; 4:1) is mount Gerizim, where the apostates of the northern tribes had worshiped idols.

Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, stated that it is the devil who says, "All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell." (2 Ne. 28:21.)

8:9-10 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on these verses:

It is possible that the eclipse which astronomers now calculate as having occurred on June 15, 763 B.C. was the phenomenon here used as a symbol by Amos of the spiritual darkness and doom coming upon Israel. (IOT 2:31.)

8:11-12 The "famine in the land" which consists of not "hearing the words of the Lord" occurs whenever a prophet is not upon the earth and also when there is a prophet but the people will not "hear."

Harold B. Lee has stated:

In our day, when grave problems are before the nation and the world, men everywhere are seeking panaceas for the ills that afflict mankind and the answers to world problems that remain unanswered.

The ancient prophets seemed to have foreseen our day of complete frustration, when men would be looking for answers in the wrong places and the solutions to their problems in the wrong way. The prophets foresaw the day when there would be [quoted Amos 8:11-12]. (CR, Oct. 1972, p. 59.)

So far as there being prophets on the earth again, the spiritual famine is ended according to Spencer W. Kimball:

After centuries of spiritual darkness, described by Amos and Jeremiah, we solemnly announce to all the world that the spiritual famine is ended, the spiritual drought is spent, the word of the Lord in its purity and totalness is available to all men. One needs not wander from sea to sea nor from the north to the east, seeking the true gospel as Amos predicted, for the everlasting truth is available. (CR, Apr. 1964, pp. 93-94.)

9:9 The word translated here as "sift" has in the Hebrew the basic meaning of "cause to move." Thus, "shake" could be substituted for "sift." The fact that "not the least grain" shall fall upon the earth indicates that they will not be destroyed or allowed to perish, which was also emphasized in verse 8.

9:10 The last clause could have been translated "The evil shall not come near or go before us."

9:13 The weather in certain areas of Israel is so ideal for agriculture that certain crops can be grown the year around. As soon as a field is harvested, it is plowed and prepared for planting. Thus, "the plowman shall overtake the reaper."

9:14-15 The basic meaning of "I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel" is that the Lord will bring forth his chosen people again from captivity. This meaning is made clear in the remainder of the verse and in verse 15.

LeGrand Richards has observed concerning these verses:

The prophets often spoke of the House of Judah and the House of Israel in the same sense as the Prophet Amos in this quotation: "my people of Israel." This prophecy, can only have reference to the latter-day gathering when "they shall no more be pulled up out of their land." (IDYK, p. 204.)
