Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

OBADIAH

See "Obadiah" in the Bible Dictionary, page 739.

1:1-4 These verses are almost identical to Jeremiah 49:9-10, 14-16. It is not clear who was the originator of these writings; it might even have been an earlier writer whose works were available to both Obadiah and Jeremiah.

1:1 The Edomites are descendants of Esau, the older twin brother of Jacob. The enmity that began during the days of their forefathers (Gen. 27:41) apparently continued in their descendants.

1:3 The Edomites were located primarily in the south and east of Judah, in the mountains that were called the mountains of Edom. (See Bible map 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10.) Petra (Sela) was one of the major strongholds of the Edomites. (See Bible map 7 or 10.)

1:15 The eternal law of consequences will eventually come upon the Edomites. As they have looted Israel (v. 13) the Israelites will eventually possess the lands of the Edomites.

1:21 Prophets of this dispensation have provided commentaries on this verse:

But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. (Joseph Smith, HC 6:184.)

It is recorded in the Bible that in the last days the God of heaven will set up a kingdom. Will that kingdom destroy the human family? No: it will save every person that will and can be saved. The doctrines of the Savior reveal and place the believers in possession of principles whereby saviours will come upon Mount Zion to save the house of Esau, which is the Gentile nations, from sin and death,—all except those who have sinned against the Holy Ghost. Men and women will enter into the temples of God, and be, in comparison, pillars there, and officiate year after year for those who have slept thousands of years. (Brigham Young, JD 6:344.)

God is looking upon us, and has called us to be saviors upon Mount Zion. And what does a savior mean? It means a person who saves somebody. Jesus went and preached to the spirits in prison; and he was a savior to that people. When he came to alone for the sins of the world, he was a savior, was he not? Yes. And we are told in the revelations that saviors should stand upon Mount Zion; and the kingdom shall be the Lord's. Would we be saviors if we did not save somebody? I think not. Could we save anyone if we did not build Temples? No, we could not; for God would not accept our offerings and sacrifices. Then we came here to be saviors on Mount Zion, and the kingdom is to be the Lord's. Then what shall we do? We will build Temples. And what then? Administer in them, when we get them done. (John Taylor, JD 22:308.)
