Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

JONAH

See "Jonah" in the Bible Dictionary, page 716.

1-4 Jonah has the distinction of being mentioned in another book of the Old Testament as well as in two books of the New Testament.

2 Kings 14:25 mentions some of the teachings of "Jonah, the son of Amittai, the prophet, which was of Gath-hepher." Evidently these teachings of Jonah have been lost, for the subject matter mentioned in 2 Kings is not discussed in the present book of Jonah.

In New Testament times the Savior referred to some of the experiences of Jonah (Jonas) in the belly of the whale and also at Nineveh; these statements are recorded in Matthew 12:39-41; 16:4 and Luke 11:29-32.

True believers in the Bible should not have any difficulty believing the story of Jonah. Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

Are we to reject it as being an impossibility and say that the Lord could not prepare a fish, or whale, to swallow Jonah? If Mr. Robert Ripley and some of the others are to be believed, a similar occurrence has taken place—perhaps more than once—within the memory of man now living. Surely the Lord sits in the heavens and laughs at the wisdom of the scoffer, and then on a sudden answers his folly by a repetition of the miracle in dispute, or by the presentation of one still greater.

Is it more of a miracle for the Lord to prepare a fish to carry Jonah to shore that he might fill the mission assigned to him, that it is for the President of the United States to speak in an ordinary tone and be heard, under certain conditions, by all people in all parts of the earth? Honestly, which is the greater miracle?

I believe, as did Mr. William J. Bryan, the story of Jonah. My chief reason for so believing is not in the fact that it is recorded in the Bible, or that the incident has been duplicated in our day, but in the fact that Jesus Christ, our Lord, believed it. [Matthew 12:39-40.] (DS 2:314.)

1:2 Spencer W. Kimball has likened this scripture to conditions in the world today:

We have come far in material progress in these centuries. But the sins of the ancients still afflict the hearts of men.

Can we not learn by the experiences of others? Must we also defile our bodies, corrupt our souls, and reap destruction as have peoples and nations before us?

Both sacred scripture and profane history give us the tragic stories of young nations rising in power, then in the luxurious and degenerate years of their glory being replaced by vigorous peoples yet unspoiled by the decay of self-indulgence political intrigue, and immoral shamelessness.

Long centuries ago the Lord commanded the Prophet Jonah: "Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me." (Jonah 1:2.)

That "great city" was the envy of the ancient world in its magnificence and power. Historians describe it as surrounded by walls one hundred feet high and broad enough that three chariots could drive abreast. Fifteen hundred towers held watchmen to note the approach of enemies.

Jonah arrived, and so powerfully preached repentance that the people reformed their lives, and the promised destruction was averted. But Nineveh turned again to sin. (CR, Oct. 1945, p. 122.)

1:2 Nineveh was then the capital of Assyria. It was built on the upper Tigris River and was mentioned as early as Genesis 10:11.

1:3 The exact location of the Tarshish to which Jonah was fleeing is not known, although some scholars believe it was Tartessus in the southwestern part of what is now Spain. It is clear from Jonah's account that Tarshish could be reached most easily by sea and it was not in the direction of Nineveh.

When placed in context, it is easy to understand Jonah's reluctance to go to Nineveh, as it was the capital city of the enemy of Israel.

1:9 Jonah's reference to himself as a Hebrew indicates that he is a descendant of Abraham.

1:12 The meaning of the phrase "for my sake" is "because of me "

1:17 The account in the Old Testament refers to the large sea creature that swallowed Jonah as "a great fish." In the New Testament account, Jesus referred to it as a "whale." (Matt. 12:40.) The Savior also substantiated the claim that Jonah spent "three days and three nights" in the belly of the whale and used this as an analogy of His death and resurrection: "So shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth."

2:1-9 These words of Jonah were obviously recorded by him after the episode with "the great fish" was over and after he had returned to Jerusalem and visited the temple (vs. 7-8.) Evidently while Jonah was in the belly of the fish he had promised the Lord certain things if he were safely delivered. Here he reaffirms that promise: "I will pay that that I have vowed" (v. 9).

3:3 The statement "Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days'journey" means that it took three days to walk through the city.

It may be that the land area around the city carried the same name as the city. This custom was followed during a certain period of the Israelites' history (see Nibley, Lehi in the Desert, p. 5) and also in Book of Mormon times (see Hel. 5:15; 6:10).

3:7-8 Animals not given anything to eat or drink would normally "cry mightily" as indicated here. Herodotus indicates the Persians would clip the hair of some of their animals so that they could participate in mourning. Also, they would even clothe the animals with sackcloth while the animals were fasting, as indicated here in verse 8. (OVBC, p. 577.)

4:2 The meaning of the clause that has been translated "repentest thee of the evil" is that God is sorry or feels remorseful when people do evil.

Note the enlightening Bible footnote on this verse. Jonah was "angry" and feeling sorry for himself because he thought now it might be more difficult for the people to accept him as a prophet.

4:8 The word "vehement" could have been translated "scorching."

4:11 Many of the people in Nineveh had been transgressing the law in ignorance; 120,000 of them were so innocent they didn't even know the difference "between their right hand and their left hand."
