Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

MICAH

See "Micah" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 731-32.

1:5 The capital of the northern kingdom (kingdom of Israel) was Samaria, while the capital of the southern kingdom (kingdom of Judah) was Jerusalem. These two cities, Samaria and Jerusalem, became symbols for the wickedness of the people, in much the same way as Babylon represented the evils of Babylonia and Nineveh the sins and abominations of Assyria.

1:7-9 The people of the kingdom of Israel (Samaria) turned to the worship of idols, which unfaithfulness is comparable to "the hire of an harlot." Also her sins are now being imitated by the people of Judah (Jerusalem) so that "her wound is incurable" for the infection has spread.

2:1-2 People who "work evil upon their beds" spend all night thinking of the evils they can do "when the morning is light" and how they can take advantage of others by coveting fields and oppressing men.

Spencer W. Kimball has provided commentary on these verses:

And to me that means, woe unto them who will rationalize, who will explain away their errors in these matters, who justify their oppressions. Farm hands, domestic help, and unprotected people are often oppressed, when economic circumstances place them in the position where they must accept what is offered or remain unemployed. And we sometimes justify ourselves in underpaying and even boast about it: [Quoted Micah 2:1-2.]

And then there are those of us who require excessive compensation for services and who fail to give "value received" and who give no loyalty with their insufficient and inefficient service.

Scripture writers admonish the employed to obey masters, to please their employers, to work with singleness of heart, to be honest in time spent and service rendered and to avoid purloining.

The Lord knows that we need food, clothes, shelter, and other things. He expects us to earn our living. He commands us to give the necessities to our families. He permits, perhaps, that we may have reasonable luxuries, but not with unclean money. (CR, Oct. 1953, pp. 53-54.)

2:7 It is difficult to make a literal translation from the Hebrew. A possible translation is: "House of Israel, It is said, The Spirit of Jacob is limited, if these are His doings. Do not my words do good with the one walking upright?"

2:11 People are willing to listen to the false prophets who encourage them to continue in their iniquity, but they are not willing to listen and follow the true prophets who warn them to repent of their evil doings.

3:5-7 Because false prophets cause people to err, true prophets will be taken out of their midst: "the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them . . . for there is no answer of God."

Concerning this concept, President Spencer W. Kimball has written:

In the meridian of time, the Son of God, the Light of the World, came and opened the curtains of heaven, and earth and heaven were again in communion.

But when the light of that century went out, the darkness was again impenetrable; the heavens were sealed and the "dark ages" moved in.

I bear witness to the world today that more than a century and a half ago the iron ceiling was shattered; the heavens were once again opened, and since that time revelations have been continuous.

That new day dawned when another soul with passionate yearning prayed for divine guidance. A spot of hidden solitude was found, knees were bent, a heart was humbled, pleadings were voiced, and a light brighter than the noonday sun illuminated the world—the curtain never to be closed again.

A young lad spoken of by some of our brethren today, Joseph Smith, of incomparable faith, broke the spell, shattered the "heavens of iron" and reestablished communication. Heaven kissed the earth, light dissipated the darkness, and God again spoke to man, revealing anew "his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.) A new prophet was in the land and through him God set up his kingdom, never to be destroyed nor left to another people—a kingdom that will stand forever.

The foreverness of this kingdom and the revelations which it brought into existence are absolute realities. Never again will the sun go down; never again will all men prove totally unworthy of communication with their Maker. Never again will God be hidden from his children on the earth. Revelation is here to remain. (E, May 1977, p. 77.)

3:11 Some of the sure signs of apostate churches and religious groups are that "the heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money."

Moroni, a Book of Mormon prophet, also identified the love of money and power as an indication of false religion.

"Yea, it [the Book of Mormon] shall come in a day when the power of God shall be denied, and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts . . . when there shall be churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins. O ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people, why have ye built up churches unto yourselves to get gain? . . . For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted." (Morm. 8:28, 32, 37.)

4:1-2 These verses are almost identical to Isaiah 2:2-4. (See the commentary for Isa. 2:2-4.) Both of these prophets clearly and definitely taught that these events would occur "in the last days."

Harold B. Lee has provided the following commentaries on these verses:

Over the years I have begun to observe at least the beginning of the fulfillment of the ancient prophecy of Micah relating to the establishment of the Lord's house in the tops of the mountains. This prophet said, [Micah 4:1.]

The expression "the mountain of the Lord's house," as here indicated, was undoubtedly to be referred to as a place as well as a definition of a righteous people, because we have the Lord in a revelation saying. [D&C 97:21.]

And then the ancient prophet said, [Micah 4:2.]

With the coming of the pioneers to establish the Church in the tops of the mountains, our early leaders declared this to be the beginning of the fulfillment of that prophecy. Orson Pratt, one of the members of the Twelve delivered an oration on that occasion, in which he declared that this was the beginning of the fulfillment of the prophecy that out of Zion should go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. (England Area CR, 1971, p. 138.)

I have often wondered what the scripture meant to say that says, ". . . for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Micah 4:2.) As I was pondering that one day at the dedicatory services of the Idaho Falls Temple, I heard President George Albert Smith say in the dedicatory prayer:

"We thank thee that thou hast revealed to us that those who gave us our constitutional form of government were men wise in thy sight and that thou didst raise them up for the very purpose of putting forth that sacred document. . . .

"We pray that kings and rulers and the peoples of all nations under heaven may be persuaded of the blessings enjoyed by the people of this land by reason of their freedom under thy guidance and be constrained to adopt similar governmental systems, thus to fulfill the ancient prophecy of Isaiah that '. . . out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'" (Improvement Era, October 1945, p. 564.)

If ever there came into my mind, at a time when I needed it, a definition of what a scripture meant, I heard it from the mouth of a prophet when the Idaho Falls Temple was dedicated. (Ye Are the Light of the World, pp. 340-41.)

4:3 Brigham Young has provided the following commentary on this verse:

If the Christian world would follow the instructions of the New Testament, they would believe the doctrines of the Latter-day Saints: and our swords would be beaten into plough-shares, and our spears into pruning-hooks, and we should hail each other as brethren. All quarrelling upon these plains would come to an end, and all desire to injure each other would cease. The word in each person's mouth would be "Brother, what can I do for you? Have I anything you need, that I can serve you with, which is necessary to administer to your sick wife and children? Are your cattle lost, and shall I help you to find them?" All the weapons of warfare would be buried in the dust, no more to be resurrected, and each man would say, "Come, let us hail each other as brethren, and do each other good instead of evil." (JD 1:245.)

4:7 Modern prophets have identified the remnant of Israel that "halted . . . and . . . was cast far off" and was to become "a strong nation" over whom the Lord shall reign in mount Zion. (See Part I 204, 214-19.)

4:11-13 The resurrected Jesus Christ quoted these verses to the survivors among the Lehites when he appeared to them. (3 Ne. 20:18-19.) He then placed this event in the context of other events in the last days. (See 3 Ne. 20:12-46 and Part I 90, 94, 113, 206-13.)

5:2 This verse from Micah is widely quoted as a "messianic prophecy" of the birth of Jesus Christ. Both Matthew (2:6) and John (7:42) quote Micah 5:2 as one of the many evidences that Old Testament prophets knew a great deal about the birth, life, and mission of the Messiah ("the Anointed One"), Jesus Christ. LeGrand Richards has stated:

It must be more than a coincidence that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who answers all the requirements of the prophecies, should have been born in "Bethlehem Ephratah." How much better could Micah have described Him who was to be "ruler in Israel?" (IDYK, p. 87.)

5:8-15 The "remnant of Jacob" referred to in these verses evidently refers to the descendants of Joseph in America, according to the testimony of the resurrected Jesus Christ. (See 3 Ne. 21:11-29 and Part I 78, 116-19, 204, 214-19, 233-38.)

5:10-15 Each of these verses is quoting the Lord: "I will cut off the cities of thy land," "I will execute vengeance in anger and fury," and soon. Is the Lord really the cause of these destructions?

Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

There are some, even in the Church, unfortunately, who think that such expressions are cruel, and they are not willing to accept them as coming from a "merciful God." However, man brings the punishment upon himself and the judgments of the Almighty are bound to follow. (CHMR 1:144.)

6:8 This verse is widely quoted as containing the essentials of true religion.

6:14 The statement "thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee" could have been translated "your hunger will be in your midst."

6:16 Omri and Ahab were among the most wicked of the kings of Israel. If their "statutes" and "works" continued to be followed, the destruction that would follow would result in desolation and a scattering of the people.
