Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

NAHUM

See "Nahum" in the Bible Dictionary, page 736.

1:1 The "burden" (message of doom) of Nahum was directed primarily against Assyria and its capital city, Nineveh. Some of the same destructive powers that led to the downfall of Nineveh will also be active in the last days as indicated in the chapter heading.

1:11 The "wicked counsellor" was counselling "worthlessness" according to the Hebrew. Evidently a "false prophet" had come forth in Assyria, saying the Assyrians would not be defeated in battle. Yet within a short while the Assyrians were "cut down" (v. 12) as prophesied by the Lord through Nahum.

1:15 Statements similar to the first sentence in this verse are found in several books of the scriptures: "Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace." (Sea Isa. 52:7; Rom. 10:15; 1 Ne. 13:37; Mosiah 12:21; 15:14-18; 27:37; 3 Ne. 20:40.)

The resurrected Jesus Christ quoted Isaiah's wording of this thought (Isa. 52:7) and said it would be repeated in Jerusalem in the last days after the Jews have been redeemed. (3 Ne. 20:29-40.)

One of the best explanations of this expression was provided by the prophet Abinadi in the Book of Mormon.

Yea, and are not the prophets, every one that has opened his mouth to prophesy, that has not fallen into transgression, I mean all the holy prophets ever since the world began? I say unto you that they are his seed.

And these are they who have published peace, who have brought good tidings of good, who have published salvation; and said unto Zion: Thy God reigneth!

And O how beautiful upon the mountains were their feet!

And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that are still publishing peace!

And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those who shall hereafter publish peace, yea, from this time henceforth and forever! (Mosiah 15:13-17.)

2:2 This verse could have been translated: "For Jehovah has turned the glory of Jacob, as the glory of Israel. For the plunderers have plundered them, and have destroyed their vine branches."

2:6 The opening of the sluice gates of the city moats resulted in the capture of Nineveh by the Babylonians, as prophesied in this verse. Once the city was captured, the palace was "dissolved" (literally "melted" or "destroyed").

Concerning the destruction of Nineveh, Spencer W. Kimball has written:

In fulfilment, the river overflowed, inundated the walls for miles, the gates were burned, the king and his concubines and his wealth were consumed with the palaces, and the unconquerable city, now made vulnerable by flood and fire, was taken by the invaders while its boasted defenders lay in drunken stupor and lolled in licentiousness. Today the canals of Nineveh are gone, leaving the country a desolate waste. Sheep and cattle seek scanty pasture among the mounds of the once greatest city.

God cannot be mocked! His laws are immutable. True repentance is rewarded by forgiveness but sin brings the sting of death.

Nineveh is not the only instance. Historians are still puzzled regarding the annihilation of the infamous cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. Whatever happened to these peoples, this we know, that swift destruction came to them. Perhaps the Japanese of Hiroshima were no more completely nor quickly destroyed. At least students agree that there was a devastating holocaust which enveloped the cities, leaving the monuments and the people in utter desolation, never to be rediscovered nor rebuilt. (CR, Oct. 1945, pp. 122-23.)

3:8 Other great and large cities had been destroyed earlier because of their wickedness, including the city of No in Egypt (Hebrew No Amon, believed by many scholars to be Thebes which was destroyed in approximately 667 B.C.).

3:13 Nineveh was captured by diverting the waters of the river which ran under her walls. The Babylonian soldiers were then able to enter the city under the walls and open the huge gates so other Babylonian soldiers could enter. The "gates of thy land" were indeed "set wide open unto" her enemies.

3:19 This verse reveals that the Assyrians had been extremely wicked and cruel and were not repenting of these evils; thus, their destruction was certain.
