Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

HABAKKUK

See "Habakkuk" in the Bible Dictionary, page 697.

1:1-6 The "burden" (message of doom) of Habakkuk included the impending invasion of "the Chaldeans [Babylonians], that bitter and hasty nation." The Hebrew word translated "hasty" could have been translated "impetuous."

1:3-4 One of the problems faced by many of the prophets is that the Lord requires them to preach against wickedness at that moment when the wicked seem to be prospering more than the righteous. This appeared to Habakkuk to be contrary to the principle that happiness results from obedience to law (righteousness), so that he exclaimed, "wrong judgment proceedeth [justice is being perverted]."

The Lord's answer (Hab. 2:2-4) is that at the appointed time or in the end judgment (justice) will surely come; in the meantime the just are to walk by faith.

The punishment (misery) that is the consequence of broken law (sin) does not always come upon the sinner immediately. If it did, then the sinner would soon stop breaking the law for the reason he does not want the punishment to come upon him. The person would then be doing the right thing, but he would be doing it for the wrong reason [to escape the punishment].

Often the major punishment for broken law is delayed in order for the sinner to repent on his own volition. Hopefully, he will stop sinning [breaking the law] because he knows breaking the law is wrong and also because he wants to enjoy the peace and happiness associated with righteousness [obedience to the law]. He is then doing the right thing for the right reasons.

1:11 This verse could have been translated more literally: "Then he sweeps on as the wind, and transgresses and is guilty, attributing his power to his god." The basic idea is that the Babylonians will be swiftly victorious in their battles against the Israelites; but then the Babylonians will wrongly assume it was the power of their idol god that caused the victory, rather than the unrighteousness of the Israelites.

1:15 The old English word angle (from whence derives angler) is used consistently in the King James text as the translation of a Hebrew word meaning "hook."

The word "drag" in this verse could have been translated "fishnet"

2:1 The first "watch" in this verse could have been translated "guard."

2:2 The writings of Habakkuk were to be easy to understand and read (in other words, "put the words in large type!") so that "he may run" who is reading them.

2:3-4 See the commentary for Habakkuk 1:3-4.

2:4 If the righteous ("the just") have sufficient faith in the Lord, they will be willing to wait for the "appointed time" of the Lord when blessings will be bestowed upon the righteous and punishments upon the wicked.

The Hebrew word translated here as "faith" could more literally have been translated as "faithfulness"—that is, "steadfastness" or "firmness."

2:14 A similar expression was used by Isaiah in expressing a condition that would occur in the last days: "The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." (Isa. 11:9.)

2:15 Both ancient and current prophets have warned against strong drink and giving your "neighbor drink." Spencer W. Kimball has observed:

Liquor has been used to neutralize the inhibitions and dull the senses of many a young woman so that her virtue might be more easily taken. [Quoted Hab. 2:15.] . . .

. . . It is reported that American citizens spend of the national income two and one half times as much for liquor as on education. . . .

One of the saddest notes in this business is the blasphemy at Christmas time in social home parties, club socials, and staff Christmas parties where drinks are supplied to employees.

Remember Habakkuk: [Quoted Hab. 2:15.] . . .

Drinking is now considered aristocratic in planes, in cafes, hotels, in airport bars—everywhere. Someone said, "The cocktail parlor is but a saloon in petticoats."

What a frightening responsibility to be an advertiser, dispenser, manufacturer who would go into the living rooms of millions of homes and indoctrinate little children's minds till they accepted liquor as part of acceptable social living. For the dollar today, they would corrupt a generation tomorrow. Someone made a survey and found that 67 percent of the films show drinking as the smart and proper thing to do. (CR, Oct. 1967, pp. 31-33.)

2:18-19 When the crisis comes, those who have placed their trust in idols will be lost. Their wooden idols will not respond, and their stone idols will not be able to tell them what to do.

3:2-19 Habakkuk wanted the Lord to "revive thy work [preserve or give new life to your work]" and then listed some of the great works of the Lord in the past, particularly during the days of Moses and Joshua.

3:3, 9, 13 This entire chapter is a prayer of Habakkuk set in poetic form. The word Selah is inserted to indicate a break in the reading (chanting) at specified points.
