Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

ZEPHANIAH

See "Zephaniah" in the Bible Dictionary, page 792.

1:1 The historical information provided here suggests that Zephaniah may have been contemporary with Jeremiah, Nahum, and Habakkuk. It is not clear where his field of missionary labor was located.

1:12 The punishments for wickedness will come upon all, including the complacent ("that are settled on their less") and those who say, "God is dead" ("The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil").

1:14 The term great day of the Lord is usually reserved by the prophets to refer to the last days or the period immediately preceding the second coming of Jesus Christ in power and glory, which indeed would be a "great day" for the righteous. Evidently many of the prophecies of Zephaniah pertain to events in the last days.

1:18 The term fire of his jealousy used here and in 3:8 indicates the determination or zealousness of the Lord in seeing that justice is administered.

See the commentaries for Exodus 20:5 and 34:14.

2:1 "Desired" could have been translated "ashamed." The meaning of the verse is that the proud, unrepentant nation is preparing itself for destruction.

2:13-15 The major message of these verses is: Just as the great city of Nineveh will be destroyed ["the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly" in her pride], so all the wicked will be destroyed and their cities shall become "a desolation."

3:9 One of the blessings that will result from the destruction of the wicked is that a "pure language" will be restored which will be spoken by everyone. From the days of Adam until the time of the tower of Babel, a single, universal language was on the earth (the "Adamic language"), patterned after the language of God. Since the confusion of languages at Babel, the people have not served the Lord with either "one consent" or one voice.

Brigham Young has suggested that our current languages are inadequate, but when one speaks through the gift of the Holy Ghost he can convey the intelligence of God.

Although the language we now speak is as good as any language that has yet come to our knowledge, still it is very meagre, and limited in its range and power, and though it is a good medium at ordinary times, yet it comes very far short of being such a medium, as man needs to convey thoughts, when he is inspired by the power of God, through the gift of the Holy Ghost, and is full of the revelations of Jesus. It is written [Quoted Zeph. 3:8-9]. When a man rises up to speak in the name of the Lord, and is filled with the light, and the intelligence and power which cometh from God, his countenance alone will convey more, to those who are inspired by the same spirit, than can possibly be conveyed, by the words of any language now used by mankind. (JD 10:353.)

3:16 The Lord is clearly referring to two separate, distinct places here: (1) Jerusalem and (2) Zion. Isaiah also differentiated between the two major cities or locations of the last days when he prophesied: "Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3.)

See the commentaries for Isaiah 2:2-4; Micah 4:1-2; and Joel 2:32; see also Part I 95, 132-33.

3:19 Apparently two different groups are being referred to here by the Lord: (1) "I will save her that halteth" and (2) "[I will] gather her that was driven out."

The April 6, 1845, proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has identified the group referred to as "her that halteth." (See Part I 204, 214-19.)
