Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

ZECHARIAH

See "Zechariah" in the Bible Dictionary, pages 791-92.

1:1 This revelation to Zechariah ("in the eighth month, in the second year of Darius") was received about two months after Haggai received his revelation ("in the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month" [Hag. 1:1]).

1:17 Two separate cities are referred to in this verse: (1) Zion and (2) Jerusalem.

See the commentaries for Isaiah 2:2-4; Micah 4:1-2; and Joel 2:32; see also Part I 95, 132-33.

2:10-13 The prophecy in these verses primarily deals with the gathering of Judah (the Jews) to the Holy Land, including Jerusalem. (See Part I 80-95, 105-15, 177-91, 193-97, 205-13, 223, 228-32, 239-50.)

3:1 The same name translated here as "Joshua" has been translated as "Jeshua" in other references. (As examples, see 2 Chr. 31:15; Ezra 5:2; Neh. 3:19.) Ellis Rasmussen has commented on the significance of this name:

You may see in this vision of Joshua the high priest of the time (called Jeshua in Ezra and Nehemiah—e.g. Ezra 5:2) a prophecy of the cleansing or restoration of the Priesthood, and of the coming of the Messiah (the "BRANCH"); also of the purification of Israel in preparation for the Millennium, which seems to be hinted in verse 10. . . .

The name Jesus is English spelling of the Latin form of the Greek form of the Hebrew name Jeshua, or Yeshua, which means "salvation"! (IOT 2:102.)

4:14 The "two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth" may be the "two witnesses" mentioned by John the Revelator who would be given power of God and would be "standing before the God of the earth." (Rev. 11:3-4.)

The Doctrine and Covenants supplies additional information on the two witnesses mentioned by John.

Q. What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of Revelation?

A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers. (D&C 77:15.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has found meaning in the fact that the two anointed ones are represented by olive trees:

In Revelation 11:4, the Lord speaks of his two witnesses as two olive trees, and in Zechariah 4:11-14 is a similar prophetic parable. So we find through all the prophetic writings that olive trees and olive oil are emblems of sacredness and purity. (AGQ 1:152.)

6:12-15 The BRANCH is mentioned in several scriptures pertaining to the last days, including Isaiah 11:1; Jeremiah 23:5; 33:15; and Zechariah 3:8.

8:3-8 The Lord has made it very plain through his prophets that Jerusalem will be inhabited in the last days by his covenant people, both by "old men and old women" and by "boys and girls playing in the streets thereof."

8:9 The Lord also made it clear through his prophets that a temple will be built in Jerusalem in the last days, prior to his second coming in power and great glory.

9:9 This is one of the most widely quoted messianic prophecies of Zechariah. Matthew (21:1-9) and John (12:12-16) both believed this prophecy was fulfilled when Jesus Christ came riding into Jerusalem seated on "the foal of an ass."

Although the full symbolism of the Savior entering the holy city riding on a donkey may not be known, it would have special meaning to the people of his day. Rome held political power in Judea in the days of Jesus, and the symbol of Roman might and power in warfare was the Roman soldier seated on a prancing stallion. The Savior wanted the world to know he was not coming as a man of war; he was coming as a Man of Peace. Thus, he entered the city not on the back of a prancing horse, but seated on the lowly donkey.

Harold B. Lee has provided the following commentary on the triumphal entry of Jesus Christ into Jerusalem:

My text today is taken from the "Hosanna shout" which sounded from the multitude who jubilantly acclaimed Jesus, the lowly Nazarene as he rode triumphantly into Jerusalem from Bethany on a colt which had been borrowed for that occasion. As the animal upon which he rode had been designated in their literature as the "ancient symbol of Jewish royalty" [Zech. 9:9] and their acquaintanceship with the might of His Messianic power impressed the appropriateness of his kingly right to such an entry, they cast their garments before him and cast palm branches and other foliage in His path as though carpeting the way of a king. What might at first have been but the humble testimony of a faithful few, increased into a mighty chorus of voices as the multitude shouted in harmony: "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna, to the Son of David."

And then perhaps as they remembered the angels' announcement to the shepherds on the night of His birth, they reverently repeated the theme of the angels' song: "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest." And again, probably remembering the charge he had given His disciples to carry on after he would be taken from them, and as a supplication for their Master and those who would carry on after His ascension, as well as in the remembrance of the ancient prophets whom they revered, came the expressions of adulation from the multitude: "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." (CR, Apr. 1955, p. 17.)

10:6-9, 12 Again, two distinct groups are mentioned in regard to the gathering of Israel in the last days: (1) "the house of Judah" and (2) "the house of Joseph." LeGrand Richards has commented concerning this gathering:

From these scriptures [Zech. 10:6-9, it is evident the Lord had definitely in mind that no matter how Israel would be scattered, He would eventually bring them together again. How could His promises to Abraham be fulfilled without accomplishing this objective.

Zechariah called attention to the fact that "Ephraim shall be like a mighty man . . . and I will sow them among the people . . . and they shall remember me in far countries." This prophecy seems to attach importance to the House of Joseph, and to what their prophets might have to say, as recorded in the Stick of Joseph [Book of Mormon] since Jeremiah definitely states that "In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel." (Jeremiah 3:18.) This implies that Israel will point the way to Judah, and that in this accomplishment, the Stick of Joseph would perform a great mission in making plain unto Judah many important matters which they hitherto have not understood. (IDYK, p. 46.)

For further information on the gathering of these two major branches of the house of Israel (Judah and Joseph), see Part I 78-95, 105-19, 177-91, 193-97, 204-19, 223, 228-50.

10:7-9 "They of Ephraim," mentioned in verse 7, are part of "the house of Joseph" referred to in verse 6. Ephraim was the son of Joseph (Gen. 41:52), and so naturally those "of Ephraim" would also be "of Joseph."

11:10 "Beauty" could have been translated "kindness."

11:11 The clause "that waited upon me" could have been translated "who were watching me."

11:12 Fulfillment of this messianic prophecy is recorded in Matthew 26:14-15.

12:6-10; 13:6; 14:1-21 These verses refer to one of the greatest events in the latter days—the appearance of the Messiah (the resurrected Jesus Christ) to the Jewish people at the Mount of Olives, and the great battle that will take place in that area. The following commentary by Parley P. Pratt indicates the significance of these events:

Zechariah . . . has said, in plain words, that the Lord shall come at the very time of the overthrow of that army, yes, in fact, even while they are in the act of taking Jerusalem, and have already succeeded in taking one-half the city, and spoiling their houses, and ravishing their women.

Then, behold their long-expected Messiah, suddenly appearing, shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, a little east of Jerusalem, to fight against those nations and deliver the Jews. Zechariah says the Mount of Olives shall cleave in twain, from east to west, and one-half of the mountain shall remove to the north, while the other half falls off to the south, suddenly forming a very great valley, into which the Jews shall flee for protection from their enemies as they fled from the earthquake in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah; while the Lord cometh and all the saints with him.

Then will the Jews behold that long, long-expected Messiah, coming in power to their deliverance, as they always looked for him. He will destroy their enemies, and deliver them from trouble at the very time they are in the utmost consternation, and about to be swallowed up by their enemies. But what will be their astonishment when they are about to fall at the feet of their Deliverer, and acknowledge him their Messiah! They discover the wounds which were once made in his hands, feet, and side; and on inquiry, at once recognize Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews, the man so long rejected. (VW, p. 40.)

See also Part I 93-94, 114-115, 210.

12:8 Concerning the Lord's promise to "defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem," LeGrand Richards has written:

This clearly has reference to the events which shall precede the second coming of the Messiah, when the Jews shall again be gathered to Jerusalem, for the Lord said: "they shall look upon me whom they have pierced."

Of interest is the following quotation from an article by Arthur U. Michelson which was published in "The Jewish Hope," Issue No. 9, Vol. 22, September, 1950 The article suggests how the Lord may, even now, be fulfilling the prophecy of Zechariah, "In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem . . .":

"On my recent trip to Palestine I saw with my own eyes how God's prophecy is being fulfilled. . . .

"It was marvelous what God did for the Jews, especially in Jerusalem, during the fighting with the Arabs. Though quite a few months had passed since the victory of Israel's army in Israel, they were still talking about what had taken place. Everywhere I went I heard how God had intervened in their behalf, and how He helped them to win the battles. One of the officials told me how much the Jews had to suffer. They had hardly anything with which to resist the heavy attacks of the Arabs, who were well organized and equipped with the latest weapons. Besides, they had neither food nor water because all their supplies were cut off.

"The Arabs, who had a great army in strong position, were determined to destroy the Jews, while the Jews were few in number, without any arms and ammunition. The two or three guns they possessed had to be rushed from one point to another, to give the Arabs the impression they had many of them. The Jews had quite a few tin cans which they beat as they shot the guns, giving the impression of many shots. But as the pressure was too great, they were unable to hold the lines any longer and finally decided to give up the city. At this critical moment God showed them that He was on their side, for He performed one of the greatest miracles that ever happened. The Arabs suddenly threw down their arms and surrendered. When their delegation appeared with the white flag, they asked, 'Where are the three men that led you, and where are all the troops we saw?' The Jews told them that they did not know anything of the three men, for this group was their entire force. The Arabs said that they saw three persons with long beards and flowing white robes, who warned them not to fight any longer, otherwise they would all be killed. They became so frightened that they decided to give up. What an encouragement this was for the Jews, who realized that God was fighting for them." (IDYK, pp. 229-30.)

For other materials on how the Lord will help fight the battles of Judah in the last days, see Part I 83, 94.

12:10 Ezekiel also prophesied that Jehovah would appear to the descendants of Jacob brought forth out of captivity and would not hide his face "any more from them." (Ezek. 39:25-29.)

The Lord has revealed in modern times an even more detailed account of his appearance in the last days to "the inhabitants of Jerusalem":

"And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

"Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

"And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king." (D&C 45:51-53.)

13:1 Joseph Fielding Smith believes this verse refers to baptism:

When John the Baptist came from the wilderness crying repentance and baptizing all who came to him, his act did not seem to create any curiosity as if he were introducing some new and strange doctrine. The repentant Jews took it as an essential ordinance well known among them and so it was. According to many Jewish writers baptism was an ordinance in ancient Israel. Here are a few quotations referring to this fact: "Christian baptism is of uncertain origin. . . . Possibly the baptism of Jewish proselytes furnished the model followed by Christian missionaries." [Encyclopedia of Religion, edited by Virgilius Ferm, p. 53.]

"John stood forth in the spirit of the prophets of old to preach his baptism of repentance symbolized by cleansing with water." (See Jer. 4:14, Ezek. 36:25, Zech. 13:1.) (AGQ 2:67-68.)

13:6 See also the commentary for Zechariah 12:10. Joseph Fielding Smith has observed the following concerning this appearance of the resurrected Messiah to the Jewish people:

The Prophet Zechariah has also prophesied of the Savior's second coming and his appearance to the Jews when they will flee from their enemies and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in twain making a valley in which they shall seek refuge. At that particular time he will appear and they shall say: [Quoted Zechariah 13:6.] Then they will mourn, each family apart, because they had rejected their Lord.

It is true that he also showed these wounds to the Nephites when he visited with them with the same purpose in view, to convince them of his identity, and give to them a witness of his suffering. It can hardly be accepted as a fact that these wounds have remained in his hands, side, and feet all through the centuries from the time of his crucifixion and will remain until his second coming, but they will appear to the Jews as a witness against their fathers and their stubbornness in following the teachings of their fathers. After their weeping and mourning they shall be cleansed. (AGQ 1:45.)

13:7-9 The reference in verse 8 to the "two parts" of Israel who shall "die [be separated]" from the land evidently refers (1) to the ten lost tribes of the northern kingdom taken from the land of Israel by the Assyrians (2 Kgs. 17:6), and (2) to the dispersed of Israel led out of the land by the Lord, such as Lehi, Ishmael, and the colony associated with Mulek. (1 Ne. 1:4; 2:1-2; Omni 1:15; Mosiah 25:2; Hel. 8:21.)

The "third" part that "shall be left therein" evidently refers to the descendants of Judah and the citizens of the kingdom of Judah; these are to be tested "through the fire" and refined "as silver is refined."

14:1-3 The battle mentioned here is evidently the battle of Gog mentioned by Ezekiel (38), Joel (3:2), and John the Revelator (Rev. 11; 16:14). See the commentaries for Joel 2:1-11; Ezekiel 38:1-23 and chapters 38-39; see also Part I 90, 94, 113, 206-13.

14:4-7 The appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ (the Messiah) to the Jews at the Mount of Olives in the last days is mentioned several times in both ancient and modern scriptures.

This appearance of the Savior precedes his second coming in power and great glory.

See the commentary for Zechariah 12:6-10; see also Part I 93, 114-15, 210.

14:8 The "living waters" that shall go out of Jerusalem in the last days are evidently the waters of the river beheld by Ezekiel (47:1-12) and the fountain that "shall come forth of the house of the Lord" seen by Joel (3:18) and John the Revelator (Rev. 22:1).

See the commentary for Ezekiel 47:1-5; see also Part I 87-88.

14:10 The clause "it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place" could have been translated "Jerusalem shall rise and dwell in her place."

14:12 The Lord has warned through his prophets the danger of placing private interpretation on prophecy. (2 Pet. 1:20-21.) Nevertheless it is tempting to point out here the striking similarities between the "plague" that will come upon "all the people that have fought against Jerusalem" and the conditions suffered by the victims of the atomic bombs in Hiroshima and Nagasaki: "their flesh shall consume away"; "their eyes shall consume away in their holes"; "their tongue shall consume away in their mouth."

In September 1830 the Lord described anew one of the plagues of the last days: "Flies . . . shall eat their flesh"; "their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets." (D&C 29:18-19.)

14:16-19 Other prophets also prophesied of the lack of rain upon the earth during a certain period of the last days, including John the Revelator. (Rev. 11:6.)

The proclamation of the Twelve Apostles issued in April 1845 contains a reference to this event. See Part I 212-13.
