Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Old Testament ( 1981)

MALACHI

See "Malachi" in the Bible Dictionary, page 728.

1-4 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following background information on the book of Malachi:

Although no date for the prophecies of Malachi is given, his times are reflected by the above passages. Malachi could have come during and after the days of Ezra and Nehemiah, after the prophets Haggai and Zechariah, and also after the temple had been built. It was evidently a time when some abuses had again appeared. According to scholars and traditions, Malachi was the last of the prophets. You will perhaps be surprised to know that "the Talmud declares that with the death of Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi the Holy Spirit departed from Israel," according to Eli Cashdan, in the Jewish publication, Soncino Books of the Bible, Rev. Dr. A. Cohen, ed.; London: The Soncino Press, 1948 (sixth impression 1966), vol. title: The Twelve Prophets, p. 254. (IOT 2:110.)

1:2-3 Joseph Smith has commented on these verses:

"As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." Where is it written? [Malachi 1:1, 2.] When was it written? About 397 years before Christ, and Esau and Jacob were born about 1,773 years before Christ, (according to the computation of time in Scripture margin), so Esau and Jacob lived about 1,376 years before the Lord spoke by Malachi, saying, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated," as quoted by Paul. This text is often brought forward to prove that God loved Jacob and hated Esau before they were born, or before they had done good or evil; but if God did love one and hate the other before they had done good or evil, He has not seen fit to tell us of it, either in the Old or New Testament, or any other revelation: but this only we learn that 1,376 years after Esau and Jacob were born, God said by Malachi—"Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated;" and surely that was time sufficient to prove their works, and ascertain whether they were worthy to be loved or hated.

And why did He love the one and hate the other? For the same reason that He accepted the offering of Abel and rejected Cain's offering. Because Jacob's works had been righteous, and Esau's wicked. (HC 4:262.)

1:6 God, our Heavenly Father, is the father and master of all mankind. Thus, all should reverence God and be willing to honor and serve him.

1:8 The Lord emphasized to Moses that the animal to be offered in the sacrifice should "be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein." (Lev. 22:21.) The Lord also specifically commanded "ye shall not offer [anything] . . . blind, or broken, or maimed." (Lev. 22:22.)

The animal used in the sacrifice was to be perfect ("without spot or blemish") as it was being offered in similitude of the sacrifice of the perfect, sinless Son of God.

When the Israelites in the days of Malachi were offering "blind . . . lame and sick" animals for sacrifice, it not only destroyed the significance of the spotless sacrifice of the Savior, but it was solemn mockery before God.

1:10 Ellis Rasmussen has provided the following commentary on the first part of this verse:

"This should rather be translated as a wish: 'Oh that there were even one among you that would shut the doors, that ye might not kindle fire on mine altar in vain.' " (IOT 2:110.)

2:10 As brothers and sisters to each other—sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father—we should love and serve each other as well as honor and serve our Father.

2:14-16 God and his prophets have always spoken against divorce, except in certain extreme circumstances. Inasmuch as God has commanded that the husband and wife should become as one, divorce is always the result of sin of one type or another.

3-4 The resurrected Jesus Christ commanded the Book of Mormon prophets to "write the words which the Father had given unto Malachi," which He then gave unto them. (3 Ne. 24:1.) The words then quoted by the Savior were Malachi chapters 3 and 4. (3 Ne. 24:1-18; 25:1-6.)

3:1 Joseph Fielding Smith believes this prophecy was at least partially fulfilled through the events associated with the dedication of the Kirtland Temple:

Malachi predicted that the Savior would come suddenly to his temple with power and authority. It is customary in the Church for the members to still look forward for the coming of this great day, thinking that it is to be fulfilled when the great temple in the city Zion shall be built; but may it not be the case that this predicted coming has already taken place in this wonderful manifestation in the Kirtland Temple? The Savior came suddenly to this temple. . . . Without any question when the temple in Zion and the temple in Jerusalem are built the Lord will come to them, but his coming to the Kirtland Temple carries great weight and is far more significant than some among us have thought it to be. (CHMR 3:79.)

For other materials pertaining to the prophecy that the Lord will come "suddenly to his temple," see Part I 92.

3:2-3 The essential contents of verses 2 and 3 were quoted in an epistle by Joseph Smith September 6, 1842, with the introduction: "Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand." (D&C 128:24.) Obviously these verses refer to the second coming of Jesus Christ, when he shall come in power and great glory. Joseph Fielding Smith has also emphasized this point:

Bible interpreters have declared that this was fulfilled in the days of Christ's ministry; but this is not so. It is very evident, notwithstanding the fact that John the Baptist came in the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time, and was the forerunner of Christ, that this prophecy was not fulfilled at that time, but was to be fulfilled at a later day, or in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. This prophecy declares that (1) Christ was to come suddenly to his temple; as the messenger of the covenant. (2) He was to be like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap, to be a refiner and purifier, to purify the sons of Levi and purge them, that they "may offer unto the Lord, an offering in righteousness." (3) It was to be a day when the offering of Judah and Jerusalem would be pleasant, as in days of old and former years. (4) It was to be a day of judgment and swift witness against the sorcerers and adulterers, false swearers, and those who oppress the widow and the fatherless. Surely these things did not happen in the days of the ministry of our Lord when he dwelt among men. In that day the Levites and the sons of Judah turned against him and brought him to his death; every one abode his coming, and he did not come in that ministry in judgment like a refiner's fire. The sons of Levi were not purged, and they did not offer an offering in righteousness.

No! We must look for a later day for the fulfilment of this prophecy. Much of this prophetic prediction by Malachi is yet future. (AGQ 3:9-10.)

3:1-3 When the angel Moroni first appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith September 21, 1823, he quoted some of the prophecies of the Old Testament. The first scripture quoted by Moroni was "part of the third chapter of Malachi." (JS-H 1:36.) Moroni then quoted "the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy [Malachi]." (JS-H 1:36.)

Although Joseph Smith did not identify exactly which verses Moroni quoted from Malachi chapter 3, some have thought he probably quoted the introductory verses, since these are concerned with the second coming of Jesus Christ, as are the verses in chapter 4 also quoted by Moroni.

3:3 Joseph Smith referred to the "offering in righteousness" of the sons of Levi and then added:

"Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple . . . a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation." (D&C 128:24.)

Spencer W. Kimball has also indicated that acceptable records are necessary:

We have asked the members of the Church to further the work of turning the hearts of the children to the fathers by getting their own sacred family records in order. These records, including especially the "book containing the records of our dead" (D&C 128:24) are a portion of the "offering in righteousness" referred to by Malachi (3:3) which we are to present in His holy temple, and without which we shall not abide the day of his coming. (Genealogical Society Seminar, BYU, Aug. 1977, pp. 34-35.)

However, this offering will also involve the ordinance of sacrifice, as explained by Joseph Smith:

It will be necessary here to make a few observations on the doctrine set forth in the above quotation [Malachi 3:3], and it is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice [i.e., the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus] was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in future: but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the priesthood, or with the Prophets.

The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings.

These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchisedic Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the holy Prophets be brought to pass? It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the Prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what necessity for them since that time? The Priesthood has descended in a regular line from father to son, through their succeeding generations. (HC 4:211-12.)

3:8 Spencer W. Kimball has provided the following observation on this verse:

No honest man would rob his Lord of tithes and offerings. . . .

Would you steal a dollar from your friend? a tire from your neighbor's car? Would you borrow a widow's insurance money with no intent to pay? Do you rob banks? You are shocked at such suggestions. Then, would you rob your God, your Lord, who has made such generous arrangements with you?

Do you have a right to appropriate the funds of your employer with which to pay your debts, to buy a car, to clothe your family, to feed your children, to build your home?

Would you take from your neighbor's funds to send your children to college or on a mission? Would you help relatives or friends with funds not your own? Some people get their standards mixed, their ideals out of line. Would you take tithes to pay your building fund or ward maintenance contribution? Would you supply gifts to the poor with someone else's money? The Lord's money?

The Lord continues to ask: "Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me." (Malachi 3:8.)

And he has said that "today . . . is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people." (D&C 64:23.)

Does not the law of tithing apply to all the children of men, regardless of church or creed? All who believe the Bible really must believe that this is a law of God. (FPM, pp. 289-90.)

3:8-9 Payment of "tithes and offerings" has been an important part of God's plan of growth and progression from the very beginning.

And another great neglect and infringement of the law of God by the children of Israel was in relation to their Tithes and offerings. The law of Tithing was revealed in very early times to the people of God; but they failed to observe it, and the Prophets whom God sent to Israel declared that they had transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant. Covenants were made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but their descendants broke them. They would not observe but they would transgress the laws which God gave unto them, and they continued to do so down to the days of Malachi. The Lord, through this Prophet, declared—"This whole nation have robbed me." I also declare that this whole people, called the Latter-day Saints, are guilty of the same sin—they have robbed the Lord in their Tithes and in their offerings. . . . If the Lord requires one-tenth of my ability to be devoted to building temples, meeting-houses, school-houses, to schooling our children, gathering the poor from the nations of the earth, bringing home the aged, lame, halt and blind, and building houses for them to live in, that they may be comfortable when they reach Zion, and to sustaining the Priesthood, it is not my prerogative to question the authority of the Almighty in this, nor of his servants who have charge of it. If I am required to pay my Tithing, it is my duty to pay it. (Brigham Young, JD 16:111.)

3:10 Spencer W. Kimball has explained the modern meaning of the clause "that there may be meat in mine house":

We will remember our tithing—one tenth of our increase annually. We quote but one holy scripture on this: [Quoted Malachi 3:10-11.]

This is serious, and we must be faithful and honest in meeting this requirement. "That there may be meat in mine house" indicates the need for funds to meet the costs of building numerous branch and stake buildings, temples, furnishing them, missionary work, institute and seminary work, education work, and all the needs of the Saints. It must be remembered that all the tithing goes back to the people for their benefit.

We must remember also that this is a command of the Lord given thousands of years ago and restated in our own day. Fathers, mothers, youth, and children—all should pay their tithing with accuracy and regularity and with a clear conscience. This is expected of the members of the Church. It is the fair way. It is the Lord's way. (Sweden Area CR, 1974, p. 9.)

4:1 This verse appears in several of the standard works of the Church. Although the essential meaning is the same in the various quotations, some differences of wording exist. Compare the King James text with the following:

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. (JS-H 1:37.)

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. (3 Ne. 25:1.)

4:1 Theodore M. Burton has commented on key terms in this verse:

Malachi went on to say they "shall burn as stubble." This means that they shall be destroyed. By whom? Malachi explains, "They that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts."

. . . But what is meant by the expression "that it shall leave them neither root nor branch"? This expression simply means that wicked and indifferent persons who reject the gospel of Jesus Christ will have no family inheritance or patriarchal lineage—neither root (ancestors or progenitors) nor branch (children or posterity). Such persons cannot be received into the celestial kingdom of glory of resurrected beings, but must be content with a lesser blessing. (CR, Sept. 1967, p. 81.)

4:1 Joseph Fielding Smith has provided commentary on the clause "the day that cometh shall burn them up":

Again, it is not a figure of speech that is meaningless, or one not to be taken literally when the Lord speaks of the burning. All through the scriptures we have the word of the Lord that at his coming the wicked and the rebellious will be as stubble and will be consumed. Isaiah has so prophecied. Malachi is very definite when he says: [Quoted Mal. 4:1.] Surely the words of the Lord are not to be received lightly or considered meaningless.

We are all commanded to labor "while it is called today." None shall be spared from this burning who "remain in Babylon." Babylon is the world, those who remain in Babylon are those who follow the practices of the world, and who do not accept in their hearts the word of the Lord. (CHMR 2:11.)

4:5 Joseph Smith has answered the question, "Why send Elijah?"

Elijah was the last prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. "And I will send Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord," etc., etc. [Mal. 4:5-6.] Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness. (HC 4:211.)

4:5-6 When Elijah appeared in the Kirtland Temple April 3, 1836, he acknowledged his appearance was in fulfillment of the prophecy "which was spoken . . . by the mouth of Malachi." (D&C 110:14.) He then mentioned one of the purposes of his coming: "To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse." (D&C 110:15.) Malachi 4:5-6 has been quoted or paraphrased in several other of the standard works of the Church. Compare these with the King James text:

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. . . .

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (JS-H 1:38-39.)

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers.

If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (D&C 2:1-3.)

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord;

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. (3 Ne. 25:5-6.)

The fact this prophecy has been fulfilled has been explained by Joseph Fielding Smith:

We know that this prophecy was fulfilled, for on the third day of April, 1836, Elijah came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple and conferred upon them this sealing authority. Since that day the hearts of the children have turned to their fathers, and without doubt the hearts of the fathers have turned to their children, and this influence is felt throughout the world causing the children to search the records of their dead. This fact is so definitely apparent that it cannot be denied. (AGQ 1:50.)

The power which Elijah restored is the power to seal and bind for eternity. It has to do more particularly with the ordinances of the temple and reaches out and embraces the dead as well as the living in its scope. And this is the real significance of the turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to their fathers. This authority provides the means by which the fathers who are dead, and who died without the privilege of the gospel, may receive the ordinances of the gospel vicariously by their children performing them in the temples. The hearts of the children have turned to their dead fathers, and we believe that the hearts of the dead fathers have turned to their children through the preaching of the gospel to the dead. (RT, p. 173.)

The following commentary on these verses has been provided by Joseph Fielding Smith:

Malachi declared that if the authority held by Elijah was not restored that "the whole earth" would be "smitten with a curse." When the great and dreadful day of the Lord comes, if there had not been restored the sealing power by which the ordinances in the House of the Lord could be performed for both the living and the dead, then the work of the Lord in relation to the salvation of man would fail. The great and dreadful day of the Lord is the day when judgments are poured out upon the wicked and the earth is cleansed of its iniquity. It is not to be a dreadful day to the righteous, but it certainly will be to all that do wickedly, for they will be as stubble and will be burned when the Lord comes in his glory, and they shall be left with "neither root nor branch." (Malachi 4:1.) This sealing power by which family ties are made secure and by which baptism for the dead becomes effective, is absolutely essential and must be exercised, for all those who died without the knowledge of the Gospel and who would have received it if it had been offered them while they were living on the earth before the end of the earth can come. If these keys were not here, then the dreadful day when Christ shall come would be a day of utter confusion, but the Lord, who knows the end from the beginning, revealed this Priesthood so that all who will, whether living or dead, may escape through the ordinances of the Gospel. (CHMR 3:82.)

4:5-6 On September 6, 1841, Joseph Smith quoted these verses of Malachi with the introduction "I will give unto you a quotation from one of the prophets, who had his eye fixed on the restoration of the priesthood, the glories to be revealed in the last days, and in an especial manner this most glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel, namely, the baptism for the dead." (D&C 128:17.)

4:6 Joseph Smith has commented on the significance of this verse:

Now, the word turn here should be translated bind, or seal. But what is the object of this important mission? or how is it to be fulfilled? The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion.

But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all of their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. (HC 6:184.)
