I would like to bear my testimony that the articles in the Liahona are inspired by the Lord, which is why it testifies, changes opinions, and converts people—even members of the Church. I am in the habit of reading the Liahona every day when I wake up. As I sit down to read, I wonder when the crying is going to start. The Spirit is very strong when I read, and He testifies of the truthfulness of the articles.
Evaldo Gomes de Almeida, Brazil

One day, when I had to make a difficult decision, I was so confused that I didn’t know what to feel or think. I knelt down and desperately prayed to my Father in Heaven, when the thought came that I should read the Liahona. At first I had difficulty reading, but after a while I noticed that the Spirit was with me. The articles strengthened my faith. Elder H. Ross Workman (see July 2006 issue) especially gave me new strength to recognize my decision.
Ingelore Penshorn, Germany

I am very grateful for the Liahona in Portuguese. It always has a message especially for me. I particularly liked Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf’s message, “On the Wings of Eagles,” in the July 2006 issue. I am studying physics, and I thought the comparisons he made between aerodynamics and the principles of the gospel were marvelous. The part that speaks of the Holy Ghost as “the wind beneath your wings” especially touched my heart.
Lucimara Moraes, Brazil

On December 1, 2002, I walked into a bookstore and bought a copy of the Book of Mormon. A brochure about the plan of salvation had been placed inside. On the brochure was written, “Sisters Burgey and Sorensen” and their telephone number. In July 2003, I called this number.

By the summer of 2004, I heard the missionary discussions from Elders Swensen, Vernon, and Gregory. Finally, on August 28, 2006, I was baptized. In the September 2006 Liahona, I read the article “Delayed Harvest,” by Rian W. Jones, which reminded me of the small actions that led to my baptism and confirmation.
Nicolai Penchikov, Russia

I am writing to thank you for the article “Modesty Matters,” published in the June 2006 issue. I loved it, and it helped me so much. I was facing a dilemma because my graduation was coming up, and I didn’t know what to wear to the dance. When I went shopping I couldn’t find anything appropriate for the occasion and modest as well. I spent the day thinking about what to wear, and I even thought I wouldn’t go or I would put my standards aside and wear one of the dresses I had seen while shopping. But when I read “Modesty Matters,” I knew that I wasn’t supposed to lower my standards and that I should respect my body, my temple.

I finally decided to wear something pretty that was consistent with my principles and that I would feel good wearing before my Heavenly Father and my Savior. The best part is that my mother ended up making me a beautiful dress with her own hands and with all the love in the world. I love my Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, and I will never lower my standards to be like everyone else.
Stephanie Magaña Talavera, Mexico
