Joseph F. Smith, Hyrum M. Smith, Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons ( 1981)

Preface

He was alone, barely sixteen, three thousand miles from home, and penniless. Surviving on a meager diet of sweet potatoes, prickly pears, and poi, he struggled to learn the language that would enable him to preach the gospel to the natives.

He later recalled, "They had different habits to anything I had before known, and their food, and dress and houses and everything were new and strange. Out among these people at once I was sent alone, to study, and learn if possible (for to me at that time it seemed impossible) their language and their characteristics in order that I might labor for their good. For three months this seclusion from the world continued, but the history of that short period of my life never can be told. I had ample time to feel after the Lord and to draw near to him with my whole soul. It seemed to me as tho' I had no friend but God, although the natives were kind and did what they could in their way to make me happy. Semi-occasionally I would get a letter from some of the brethren or from home, at the sight of which my heart would swell too big for utterance, and I would almost choke with joy from which I could find no relief but in tears and prayers.

"I had no companion and had to bear my joys and griefs in solitude, conscious of the presence of none but God, and at times, I must confess, it seemed to me that even He was a long way off. This three months' seclusion was twice interrupted by the presence for a few days each time of R____, suffering with temporary aberration of mind from which but poor consolation was derived.

"When I had mastered the language, I began to move around, from place to place, in the discharge of my duties, and so occasionally met with some of the Elders, and had the pleasure of their society, and once in six months we would meet in conference, when we would let go all holts, open the floodgates of our pent-up feelings and have fairly a roaring cataract of joy! I know what it is to be away from friends, in a foreign land, among the 'heathen' and 'without hope,' almost, for I have been there."

Thus, Joseph F. Smith's initiation into missionary work was a baptism of fire. But he emerged with an unshakable testimony of the restored gospel and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Like his patriarch father and prophet uncle, Joseph F. devoted his life to the service of others. After his four-year mission to Hawaii, he returned to the Salt Lake Valley for two years before being sent on a three-year mission to England. Home again for just six months, Joseph F. was called upon to help reestablish the Hawaiian mission, which required most of 1864. He presided over the European Mission from 1874 to 1875, and again in 1877.

Between 1895 and 1914, Joseph F. Smith sent twelve sons on missions. He wrote them hundreds of letters filled with love, counsel, anecdotes, and doctrinal discourses. Through the courtesy of the Church Archives, the editors have had access to Joseph F.'s copies of 334 of those letters, for which we express our appreciation. Additional letters are in the possession of Hyrum M. Smith III.

Extracts for this compilation were made on the basis of their relevance to modern missionaries, insight into the development of strong religious character, and glimpses into the father-son relationships of this prophetic family.

Joseph F. Smith often said of his family, "They are all the wealth I have." And to one of his sons he wrote, "When I have passed beyond, I would live in my children, if I could, and although generations may come and go, not one shall be so distant or remote that my interest shall cease in them." So, it is to the descendents of Joseph F. Smith, and missionaries everywhere, that this book is dedicated.
