Joseph F. Smith, Hyrum M. Smith, Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons ( 1981)

Introduction: Missionary Experiences of Joseph F. Smith

Early Life (1838-54)

Joseph F. Smith was only five when his father Hyrum and uncle Joseph were killed at Carthage Jail. His memory of his father was general and impressionistic—a tall, powerfully built man commanding the love and respect of his people; a man of great energy and undying loyalty to his brother and the cause they died for. One memory was indelibly impressed on young Joseph F.: two bodies stretched out in the Mansion House at Nauvoo, Joseph shot in the chest, lower abdomen, and back; Hyrum, in the face, at close range.

Recollections of his mother, Mary Fielding Smith, were more intimate and detailed—the journey across Iowa, the hardships of Winter Quarters, and the three-and-a-half-month trek to the Salt Lake Valley. They arrived in late September 1848, and spent the winter in their wagons—Mary, Joseph F., and his sister Martha Ann, and the children of Hyrum and his deceased wife Jerusha—John, Jerusha, and Sarah. In the spring, the family cleared some land in the foothills, planted grain and potatoes, and began construction of a two-room adobe house. Joseph F. was the herd boy, caring for the livestock that provided milk, meat, and eggs. Crickets devoured most of their first crops, but still it appeared that after years of persecution and tragedy, the family might look forward to peace, if not immediate prosperity. Then, in the summer of 1852, Mary came down with a severe cold. Years of hardship and deprivation proved too great for her. In late September, Joseph F. became an orphan.

At the news of his mother's death, Joseph F. fainted and for some time afterward appeared to be in a state of shock. Through all the trials they had passed, Mary had been the stabilizing force in his life. Joseph F. often referred to her as "my sainted mother," the epitome of true motherhood. To his wife Alice, Joseph F. once wrote, "O! my God, how I love and cherish true Motherhood! Nothing beneath the celestial kingdom can surpass my deathless love for the sweet, true, noble soul who gave me birth. My own, own Mother. O! she was good! She was true! She was indeed a Saint! A royal daughter of God! To her I owe my very existence, as also my success in life, coupled with the favor and mercy of God."

Through example, Mary Fielding instilled in Joseph F. the traits that would characterize his entire life—hard work, self-reliance, devotion to duty, and, above all, loyalty to family and church.

Ironically, it may have been Joseph F.'s sense of family responsibility, coupled with the quick temper of his youth, that led indirectly to his first mission call. One day at school, Joseph F.'s younger sister was about to be physically punished by her teacher. When Joseph F. intervened, the teacher came after him, whereupon Joseph F. administered the teacher a sound thrashing and got himself expelled from school. Church authorities sensed that Joseph F. needed a more constructive outlet for his energies, and Joseph F. was more than willing to prove himself in the mission field.

If one mission aroused the interest of the Saints more than any other during the early 1850s, it was the mission to which Joseph F. was called, the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii). The main body of Saints had barely settled in the Salt Lake Valley when ten missionaries were called to the islands. They landed at Honolulu December 12, 1850, and the next day, according to George Q. Cannon, "we ascended a mountain in the vicinity of the town and erected a small altar of stones, and then bowed ourselves in prayer before the Lord, dedicating those lands to him."

The British and American residents of Honolulu were indifferent to the message the missionaries brought, however, and within three months the mission president and four missionaries had left for other fields or returned home. Five remained, determined to learn the native tongue and deliver their message to the Hawaiian people. Their perseverance was rewarded. Within seven months, George Q. Cannon and his companion had baptized two hundred on Maui alone, and by the spring of 1854 word reached Utah that "upwards of 4000" natives had joined the Church. Just nine days before Joseph F. left Salt Lake City, the Deseret News published extracts of a letter from a missionary on Maui: "Elders are now preaching on all of the islands in the group, and hundreds are flocking to the standard of truth. Over 100 have been baptized on this island since the October conference, and some of the islands have increased at a more rapid rate."

On May 5, 1854, Joseph F. left Salt Lake City and quickly caught up with Brigham Young's party, which had just begun a tour of central and southern Utah. For nearly a year, Ute Indians had attacked Mormon settlements, driving off the livestock and plundering indiscriminately. President Young, with Heber C. Kimball and several of the Twelve, was visiting communities, urging inhabitants to "fort up" and strengthen their defenses. Near Nephi, shortly after Joseph F. joined the company, Chief Walker sent word to Brigham Young that he was sick and wanted him to give him a blessing. President Young blessed the chief and gave him cattle and a wagon of flour and wheat. The next day, at Walker's request, President Young blessed the chief's sick daughter, who immediately recovered. Declaring the healing to be a miracle, the Indians returned stolen cattle and horses, and President Young's party continued on through Fillmore to Cedar City.

On May 21, under the supervision of Parley P. Pratt, Joseph F. and the other twenty-one missionaries destined for the islands left the Young party at Cedar City and struck out for California. Sixteen days later, they arrived at San Bernardino, the southwesternmost colony of the "Mormon Corridor" to the sea. Elder Pratt went directly on to San Francisco to assume his responsibilities as mission president in that city and to arrange passage for the missionaries to Honolulu. Meanwhile, Joseph F. and his companions worked for the Latter-day Saint settlers and sold their wagons and animals to a company of Australian Saints on their way to Zion. Having thus earned their fares, on the Fourth of July the missionaries prevailed upon the San Bernardino Saints to take them to San Pedro, where they boarded a ship for San Francisco.

The increased traffic between the West Coast and Hawaii suggested to mission authorities that the purchase of a sailing vessel might be a good investment. With missionaries en route to and from Hawaii acting as the crew, mission costs could be cut, communication improved, and perhaps some profit made hauling freight. Unfortunately, the ship purchased proved unseaworthy, and the missionaries equally deficient as sailors. The project was quickly abandoned, resulting in the loss of funds earned in San Bernardino. Departure was delayed until September 8, when Joseph F. and eight others were able to sail on board the Vaquaro, the others to follow in November.

Honolulu, a city of ten thousand, was teeming with activity. New schools, churches, hospitals, hotels, and government offices were evidence of a boom in foreign trade. Liberty House sold parisols, silk waistcoats, bird cages, window glass, and iron bedsteads. Taverns abounded. Next to the recently opened Honolulu flour mill stood a three-story custom house built of coral, like the royal palace a few blocks away. Nearly four hundred whaling ships arrived in Hawaiian ports annually, and the sugar cane market had grown so quickly that plantation owners imported Chinese workers to make up the labor shortage. Still, nine-tenths of the city's population was native Hawaiian, most living in the traditional thatched huts.

After a week in the capital, Joseph F. and Silas Smith were assigned to Maui, the island where the mission had experienced such rapid growth under George Q. Cannon. As they neared the port of Lahaina, Joseph F. contracted a high fever. As soon as they landed, word spread like wildfire. The natives were well acquainted with diseases brought by white men. Less than a year and a half before, a smallpox epidemic had broken out in Honolulu that eventually killed thousands. The native population was being ravaged by new diseases. Cholera, venereal diseases, smallpox, and leprosy reduced the population from an estimated three hundred thousand in 1778 to less than forty-five thousand a century later.

Joseph F. was taken to the home of Elder Francis A. Hammond to recover. President and Sister Hammond were the only American LDS missionaries on the island at the time. Silas was immediately assigned to Kula, a region near the central part of the island. "I felt for him," President Hammond confided to his diary, "knowing what he has to undergo in preaching and in residing among the people. Brother Joseph is the son of Hyrum Smith, the martyred prophet. He is not yet 16 years old, but bids fain to make a mighty man in this Kingdom."

Recovering quickly from the fever, Joseph F. accompanied President Hammond and an Elder Karren to the neighboring island of Lanai. Hawaiian law forbade native emigration, but a sympathetic chief on Lanai offered the use of his Lanai land as a temporary gathering place for the native Saints until they would be permitted to emigrate to Zion. A colony named the City of Joseph had only recently been started in the center of the island. President Hammond had been given general jurisdiction over the settlement, and Elder Karren the "temporal" affairs. They were gratified to find that the "pioneers" had raised a small native house for the resident missionary, Elder Green; had planted thirty acres of sweet potatoes, corn, beans, and melons; and had laid out two mile-long main streets and two other intersecting streets, following the pattern prescribed by the Prophet Joseph. Elders Hammond, Karren, and Green dedicated the City of Joseph, and, according to one present, "we felt to prophecy that from that place salvation should go forth to this people."

After several days on Lanai, Joseph F. returned with President Hammond to Lahaina, where they remained until beginning a tour of the island on October 23. The following day, they reached Kula and found that Silas had made rapid progress in the language. Joseph F., like Silas, was to be left in Kula to live alone among the natives in order to acquire the language as quickly as possible. Before leaving, President Hammond gave him a blessing:

The spirit of prophecy and of revelation rested upon me, and great and mighty were the blessings which were pronounced upon his head, even that inasmuch as the Lord had called him to go forth and preach his everlasting gospel, even so he would bear him off triumphant, and a great work should he accomplish on these lands; that his mind should expand, his intellectual power should enlarge, and a mighty man in council should he be, and the spirit of his father Hyrum the martyr should rest upon him.

Before these prophecies were fulfilled, however, Joseph F. was to pass through severe trials. He was able to acquire the language quickly, but, as one of his fellow missionaries noted,

When the gospel was first introduced upon these lands, the people were baptized by scores and hundreds. The elders could hardly walk out into the street but what they would find somebody who wished to be baptized. Such is not the case at the present time. The principal labors of the elders now seem to be to feel after those who have already been baptized, to strengthen them, and to instruct them in their temporal as well as spiritual salvation.

As for temporal conditions, Maui was far from the paradise island now known to travelers. After twenty-one months, Joseph F. wrote:

I have seen many things since I have been on the islands, and some of them are apalling. I have seen whol famelies who ware one sallid wars [?] of scabes (having the itch) and everry stich or rag they had about them or on their premisis, ware alive with the itch. I have slept in these circonstances. I have shaken hands with those whos body and handes ware a scab! I have eaten food mixed up like unto batter with such handes, and I never was so hearty, but I cannot say strong, in my life. . . . I have slept in places where should my hog sleep my stumache would forbid my eating of it. . . . I have slept with my brethren on the same mat with those who wore rotten! and stunk with diseas! and I have seen more than this.

Though the natives were usually willing to share what they had with the missionaries, food was always scarce. It was not at all uncommon to go without food for two or three days at a time, and without any meat for a week or longer. Poi and sweet potatoes were the staples, occasionally enriched with fish, pork, or dog.

Receiving no money from home, Joseph F. frequently suffered for adequate clothing, and conferences frequently included pleas for a shirt, a pair of pants, or shoes for the missionaries. On at least one occasion, Joseph F. and his companion were forced to take turns attending meetings because they had only one set of clothes between them.

Equally trying were the spiritual conditions. Protestant missionaries had been working the islands since 1820, and by the arrival of Joseph F., nearly one-third of the population was Christian. He found that members of the Church were considerably influenced by their former ministers:

Many fear and tremble when they hear the discouraging and mournful tales of destruction which awaits us, as the sectarian priests say, and are continually casting into their faces to try to turn them back to their old path of destruction. I will say that the priests who are here take particular pains to inform those who have come in the Church that they know Joseph Smith to be a thief and a whoremaster and everything else that they can think of. . . . The people are like children; almost any little story will scare them and they are quick to forget the blessings of God, although there are some exceptions.

Nevertheless, in spite of the physical hardship and the tendency of the people to revert to their former traditions, the growth Joseph F. experienced far exceeded the tribulations he suffered, and the love he gained for the Hawaiian people and their love for him bonded them together throughout his life.

Joseph F.'s rapid progress in the language was considered extraordinary. He applied himself diligently, and by Christmas was acknowledged as the most fluent in Hawaiian of the missionaries in his group. When called upon to speak in the local April conference, according to his president, Joseph F. "arose and spoke a few moments by the spirit causing all the saints to rejoice exceedingly. He has only been here six months. The Lord has been with him in getting hold of the language. He spoke very feelingly and I was rejoiced much to hear his voice in the native language."

The missionaries' facility in Hawaiian was crucial, not only for teaching investigators, but also for instructing the members and directing Church functions. George Q. Cannon had returned to San Francisco to begin printing the Book of Mormon in Hawaiian, but during Joseph F.'s mission, very little Church literature was available in the native tongue. Consequently, the Saints were almost totally dependent on the teachings they received verbally from the missionaries.

The demands made on the missionaries were compounded by the fact that the more faithful and prosperous Hawaiian Saints were gathering at the recently established colony on Lanai. Through the sale of produce in Honolulu and other port cities, the colony hoped to finance the entire mission. But until the community became self-sufficient, the enterprise proved to be a severe drain on the resources of members, which, in turn, increased the hardships endured by the missionaries. One Sunday, Joseph F. wrote in his journal, "I tended no meetings as I had no clothes to ware or coat to put on. Brother Simpson begged 25# towards getting me a coat. Heard times. Nearly got the bleues, not quite tho. The saints are poor but I am poorer."

Almost as trying as the lack of means was the loss of native leaders to the colony. The branches were populated by Saints who had but a minimal understanding of the Restoration. Consequently, Joseph F. was required to spend most of his time traveling to the various branches, teaching, encouraging, admonishing, and not infrequently excommunicating unworthy members. One memorable occasion illustrates Joseph F.'s understanding of repentance and forgiveness. As recorded in the journal of his companion, Joseph F. stopped at the branch in Nahuna, Maui, where they found that an Elder M., "having fell into sin, repented and asked the saints to forgive him. Brother Joseph called a vote, all voted to forgive him except one self-righteous old man who would not listen to reason nor could show any for not forgiving him, but informed us that he would leave the church if we did not cut M. off. So to save him of the trouble of leaving, we cut him off."

Joseph F.'s leadership abilities, his devotion to missionary work, and his knowledge of the Hawaiian language were quickly noticed by the presiding authorities. After just six months in the field, he was called to preside over three districts on Maui, and three months later, over the entire island. At the age of sixteen, assisted by two other Utah missionaries, Joseph F. had charge of over twelve hundred Saints in two dozen branches. Eight months later, he was sent to preside over the Hilo conferences, and later the Kohala conferences on Hawaii. A year later, he was appointed to preside over the island of Molokai, where he spent the final five months of his mission.

Joseph F. spent more than three years on the islands during his first mission, three years of proselyting without purse or scrip, of scripture study and earnest prayer, of learning about himself and God. It was perhaps the most formative period of his religious life, for at the conclusion of this mission, Joseph F. emerged with a testimony of the gospel and the Restoration that he would never doubt, a testimony that gave purpose and meaning to the rest of his life.

Shortly before his release, he wrote a lengthy letter to one of his favorite cousins, Josephine Coolbrith Smith. "Ina" and her mother had left the Church and moved to Los Angeles. Joseph F. bore his testimony:

I do not wish to "preach" to you. . . . I wish you to hear to the counsels of your Fathers, and to the word of God thro' them, but when you revile the principals of Mormonism, you place Barriers immense between your own Dear Self and ethereal fruithon! you shut out the Blessings of God from your heart! hear it and beware! do you not know that Mormonism is the foundation upon which I have built? The Life of my soul, the sweetest morsal of my existance, the highth of my pride and ambition? it is! Tuch it, and you tuch the apple of my eye, the fiber of my existance! because i know,—hear it ye worlds!—I KNOW IT IS TRUE! . . . Mormonism I love. Not with that "Boyish love" that lasts for a time, and changes with each new phase, but with the devotion of Man-hood! The deep, true, earnest love of reason and conviction! . . . I do not care for the world, nor its honors, no more than I do for the bubbles that burst upon the bosome of the wave. . . . My testimony of the Truth is great and powerful. I never can deny it. When I turn traitor to my Lord or perfidious to my Trust, may I that moment seas, and sink into oblivion, that I disgrase no further the object of my Being! let me expire in and for the Cause, for which my Fathers died. I love their hallowed names, and cherish in honor the remembrence of their Noble Spirits. let me, when I meet them again look into their honored faces with complacency, and assurance of an unsullied conscience, and recieve that Boon, that thrice welcomed plaudit, Thou hast fought well the Battle of thy Fathers. Thou hast not been ashamed of thy Savior, neither hast thou shrunk in adversity! A radiant smile from the Parants who gave me Birth, will thrice repay me for an hundread deaths!

Events soon provided opportunities for Joseph F. to demonstrate he was literally willing to lay down his life for the Church. On July 24, 1857, word reached Utah that the president of the United States had dispatched two thousand troops to put down a Mormon "uprising" in Utah. Determined to protect his people by force, if necessary, Brigham Young ordered the missionaries home. Borrowing thirty dollars from his cousin Silas, Joseph F. obtained passage in the hold of the Yankee among the cattle, sheep, and poultry. Arriving in late October, the returning missionaries were met in San Francisco by George Q. Cannon, president of the California mission. President Cannon provided overcoats and blankets for the poorly clad elders, who traveled to San Bernardino in search of employment to pay their way to Zion. Joseph F. was engaged as a teamster, driving a wagon across the desert to Salt Lake City.

One day, after the company had camped for the night, a group of drunken men approached, cursing and threatening to kill any Mormons they saw. According to Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr., several of the Saints hid in the brush, but Joseph F. would not be cowed. Returning with the firewood he had been gathering, he was confronted by the pistol-waving leader of the band, who demanded angrily, "Are you a Mormon?"

Without hesitation, Joseph F. answered boldly, "Yes, siree; dyed in the wool; true blue, through and through." Taken back by the youth's bravado, the man shook his hand in bewilderment and said, "Well, you are the _____ _____ pleasantest man I ever met! Shake, young fellow, I am glad to see a man that stands up for his convictions."

The Utah War and Marriage (1858-60)

The rest of the trip was made without incident, and upon arriving in Salt Lake City, Joseph F. immediately reported to Brigham Young. He was ready for duty in "the Utah war," and was ordered to be ready for service in Echo Canyon should the federal troops attempt to force their way into the valley. Fortunately, the Church and government soon reached an agreement. Brigham Young would be replaced as territorial governor, on President Buchanan's orders, by Alfred Cummings, and the troops would be allowed to pass through, though not stop in, Salt Lake City.

Partly to dramatize the injustice of sending troops against a peaceful and law-abiding people, Brigham Young ordered the thirty thousand inhabitants of northern Utah to leave their homes and move to southern Utah until it was clear the government would honor their pledges. The evacuation began two weeks after Joseph F.'s return home and continued for two months. When the troops passed through Salt Lake City, they found a deserted city, except for a handful of young men prepared to burn it to the ground if the troops tried to occupy it. Joseph F. and a thousand others were standing by to protect the Saints from any depredations.

In June a full pardon was granted the Mormon "rebels," and the people returned to their homes. Joseph F., who had been ordained a seventy in the meantime, continued to serve in the Utah Militia. In December, he was appointed sergeant-at-arms of the Utah Legislature.

On April 5, 1859, Joseph F. married Levira Smith, daughter of his deceased uncle Samuel H. Smith. He was twenty, she not quite seventeen. Joseph F. and his brother John farmed the family homestead southwest of the city. In October 1859, he was ordained a high priest and served on the Salt Lake Stake high council until called on a mission to England at the April conference, 1860.

First Mission to England (1860-63)

On April 27, Joseph F. and Levira's brother Samuel H. B. Smith started for England. At Fort Bridger, they waited for Edwin Woolley's wagon train, which had been organized to demonstrate the feasibility of establishing a regular business traffic between Utah and the East. Joseph F. and Samuel H. B. drove Edwin Woolley's mule teams across the plains. On May 10, Apostles Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich, who were to take charge of the British mission, caught up with the wagon train. At Florence, Nebraska (Winter Quarters), Joseph F. met his brother John, who had come east in the fall to bring their sister, Lovina Smith Walker, and her family to Utah. It had been fourteen years since Joseph F. had seen his older sister.

Arriving at St. Louis on June 20, Joseph F. and Samuel H. B. traveled north to Nauvoo, where Joseph F. said, "I could pick out nearly every spot that I had known in childhood." They stopped in front of Hyrum Smith's old home "and looked at the Office, the Barn, and the little Brick Out house where I shut myself up to keep from going to prison as I supposed." At the Prophet Joseph's home they found Joseph Smith III, who "shook us warmly by the hand and I think felt unfeigned pleasure at seeing us. . . . After chatting a few minutes we went over to the mansion, where we found Frederick and Allicksander who greated us cordially as did Joseph. . . . After dinner Frederick took us in to his mother [Emma Smith Bidamon]. She appeared to have forgotten Samuel but me she said she would have known anywhere because I looked so much like father!!" Later, Frederick and Alexander took their Utah cousins to the temple ruins, the old Masonic hall, and the homes of Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young.

One day, after talking over their childhood years, the discussion turned to religion. Joseph III was about to accept a position as head of the church that was to become the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Joseph F. and Samuel H. B. bore their testimonies to him of the truthfulness of the church now headed by Brigham Young before resuming their journey.

On July 14, 1860, Joseph F. and Samuel H. B. Smith set sail from New York with Presidents Lyman and Rich and nine other missionaries bound for Great Britain. They landed at Liverpool thirteen days later. Joseph F. attired himself appropriately as a minister of the gospel in England. "You had ought to see me now," he wrote Levira:

I think you would hardly know whether it was Joseph or not. Let me describe him as he sits. Here he is, hair 'shinggaled,' tall 'stovepipe' hat, stiff collar, and in full English Style, all set and in full trim to go forth a regular English Mormon preacher! and in fact I must confess that I think myself with the rest of the boys appear very respectable, fair examples of the hail, hearty, rugged mountain boys of deseret. . . . We stand quite a show even if they did take us to be wilde beasts and monkeys when we first came.

For three months, Joseph F. had traveled with a dozen other missionaries, often in rather crowded, but economical, conditions. He wrote Levira of his need for time to meditate:

I think when I get away from so much company my mind will have more time for reflection, both upon the dear ones at home and the calling unto which I am called. I hope I shall ever be able to bear in minde the high trust conferred to me, and realize the importance and magnitude of the position which I holde. May God grant, my dear companion, that I may prove myself worthy of his continued love, and approbation and your affection, and the confidence of my Relatives and friends and the blessings of the servants of God.

Much to their pleasure, Joseph F. and his cousin were assigned to the Sheffield district, where Samuel H. B. had labored during his first mission to England. Samuel was able to familiarize Joseph F. with the area and proselyting methods in England, which were quite different than those of Hawaii. For the first time, Joseph F. was exposed to the challenges and rewards of door-to-door tracting and street meetings. As he later told his missionary sons, he never found it easy to begin tracting or initiate a street meeting, but once into it, he quickly warmed up.

As in Hawaii, the missionaries traveled without purse or scrip, depending upon the hospitality of the local Saints for their support. For the most part, the British Saints were rather poor. They were encouraged to pay tithing and save whatever they could to emigrate to Zion.

Many British branches did not own buildings, but met in homes or in the open air. Notices of open air meetings were usually posted, inviting nonmembers to attend. On one such occasion, Joseph F. encountered stiff, vocal opposition. It was an experience that would enable him to give sound advice to his sons who would have to handle similar situations on their missions:

As soon as we had done singing a crowd of ruffians set up a most shameful and heartless succession of assaults, by yelling like demons, throwing sods, pushing each other among us, throwing their caps among us, accosting us with every species of abusive language and exhausting every scheme to provoke us to anger, and disturb our peace. During this time I was addressing the people and dodging the sods, the best I could. I was once pushed off my stand, but got up again without ever noticing what passed. I began to appeal to the lovers of peace. Told them we had come to do good, but that if so be, we were allowed to speak. They were judging us before they had heard us, they did not know what we had to tell them. Scripture said 'Prove all things and hold fast to that which was good.' We had not come to force our doctrines upon any. We had come of our own free will. They had done likewise. If they did not want to hear us, leave peacefully. If they stopped, listened attentively, and if we did not tell them the truth, reject what we said. If we told the truth, they were in duty bound to receive it. At all events we were entitled to respect and protection until we were prove to be imposters, which could never be done, though we were the vilest, if we were not heard. Shame on Englishmen, that would not allow and protect all men in their rights. This was not a heathen land, but a civilized, and enlightened, a religious, a Christian country. We would not disgrace our name and nation, and our enlightenment, by demoralizing, degrading bigotry and religious intolerance. That would be condemned in the dark ages, or in a heathen land! At this, all was quiet. I added a few remarks upon the principles of the gospel and called upon brother Henry Fowler, whom I never heard speak better, or with more power. All listened attentively. At the close of his remarks we closed by singing and prayer, when all hell seemed to be let loose again.

But Joseph F. was not easily discouraged: "We gave out that we would meet again in the afternoon."

On New Year's Eve, after just five months in England, Joseph F. was appointed president of the "Sheffield Pastorate," consisting of the Sheffield, Bradford, Hull, and Lincolnshire conferences. Eleven months later, he reported that the missionaries in his district had baptized 120 new members, and 88 Saints had emigrated to Zion, leaving approximately 900 under his care.

Joseph F. Smith was an indefatigable worker, thoroughly devoted to his duties. But he occasionally found time for relaxation and study. During 1861, as the Civil War raged in the United States, he saw Charles Keen play Hamlet at the Royal Theatre. A few months later, he saw Barry Sullivan play the same role, noting in his journal that though Sullivan gave an excellent performance, he liked Keen better.

In addition to scripture study, Joseph F. enjoyed increasing his vocabulary. In his Hawaiian journals he usually reserved a few pages for new words and their definitions—words like opilation, optimacy, miscreant, and econium. In England, the self-education continued. At one point, he wrote a silly letter to a friend, using all the new words he could:

Humbly, deprecatingly, and appologetically imploring your Extreeam leniency, and benevolent paliation of my unpardonable inadvertancy in procrastinating to such an incuragible extention, my feeble essay to expaciate in acknowledgement of your eloquential [etc.]

Though not perfect, his spelling had improved over the first Hawaiian letters and diary entries. Significantly, though Joseph F. acquired a large working vocabulary, he rarely used it to impress anyone. He much preferred, as he suggested to his sons, to use expressions easily understood by the reader.

Of all the experiences of Joseph F.'s first mission to England, perhaps the most far-reaching was his association with George Q. Cannon. Ordained an Apostle in August 1860, Elder Cannon was sent to assist President Lyman by publishing the Millennial Star and managing the mission's finances. When Presidents Lyman and Rich were released in 1862, Elder Cannon was appointed president. In September, he invited Joseph F. to accompany him and his wife on a tour of the missions in Germany and Denmark. In 1863, Joseph F. was assigned to tour Scotland, meeting with the missionaries and conducting conferences. He was put in charge of the emigration of four thousand Saints who left Europe for Zion that year, a responsibility that required much correspondence with local Church leaders, government officials, and steamship lines. Working closely together, a strong bond grew between Joseph F. Smith and George Q. Cannon that would endure nearly forty years. As his mission neared an end, Joseph F. wrote, "Prest. Cannon has been most kind and fatherly to me, and if ever a brother sought the welfare of another, Bro. Cannon has sought mine. I owe him boundless grattitude, for the unstinted measure of kindness and Fatherly care he has ever shown me."

One of the most trying aspects of Joseph's three-and-a-half-year mission to England was the chronic bad health of his wife Levira. She eagerly awaited news of his release. In March 1862, he wrote hopefully, "Perhaps you will be surprised to learn that I expect to arrive in Great Salt Lake City in about six weeks!" But he was needed to assist in emigration and was asked to stay until fall, then until April, May, and finally June, 1863. The disappointments of each delay were heartrending to Levira, who had been taking in washing and making rag carpets to support herself and her widowed mother.

Finally, on June 24, 1863, Joseph F. and the Cannons set sail for the United States. Stopping to visit relatives in Illinois, Joseph reached Salt Lake City in late August. He arrived with a four-year-old orphan boy he had adopted in England. Levira was desperately ill. For six weeks Joseph F. sat up every night with his wife, until George A. Smith fairly ordered him to get some sleep.

Second Mission to Hawaii (1864)

Through the winter, Joseph F. nursed his sick wife, but her poor health and nervous condition persisted. In late January, Brigham Young called a special company of missionaries to correct irregularities in the Hawaiian Mission. The company was headed by Apostles Ezra T. Benson and Lorenzo Snow, with former Hawaiian missionaries W. W. Cluff, Alma L. Smith, and Joseph F. Smith.

They left Salt Lake City on March 2, 1864, traveling by stage to Sacramento, then by steamer to San Francisco. Sailing on the twelfth, the company reached Honolulu on March 27, where the Saints "were surprised and rejoiced to see us." Two days later, they took a small schooner to Lahaina, the seaport on Maui where Joseph F. had spent the first month of his mission. Not liking the appearance of the ocean currents, Joseph F. refused to join the others and remained on board to watch their belongings, while natives rowed the missionaries to land. Before the landing party reached shore, the boat capsized. The captain, refusing to drop the forty pieces of silver in his hands, drowned. A boat was sent from shore to rescue the rest, but Elder Snow could not be found. Several minutes later, a native was seen swimming toward the boat with the body. Elder Snow was thought dead, but after reaching land, he was revived.

At Lahaina, the missionaries found the Saints dissatisfied with the condition of the mission and the conduct of its presumed leader, Captain Walter Murray Gibson. Gibson was an adventurer who had joined the Church and convinced Brigham Young to send him on a mission to the Pacific in 1860. The Utah missionaries having been withdrawn during the "Utah War" of 1857-58, Gibson found Hawaii ripe for a takeover. Flaunting his missionary certificate, Gibson had the field to himself. He mixed Church teachings with popular native traditions to win over the people, and set himself up as supreme authority of the mission at the Church colony on Lanai.

On Saturday, the missionaries sailed to Lanai, where they were met by Captain Gibson and his daughter. "Captain Gibson looked warm and thoughtful," Joseph F. recorded, "and received us with a cool and measured formality, at the same time bidding us welcome." On Sunday, they attended Gibson's church services, which were laden with pomp and ceremony. Hoping to avoid an open confrontation, the missionaries held their peace and discussed the situation privately with Gibson on Monday and Tuesday. All Church property and flocks, including 3,700 sheep, 700 goats, and 20 or 30 horses, were in Gibson's name. The natives went to work when Gibson rang the bell and quit when he sounded it again. And he would not yield to priesthood authority.

On Wednesday, April 4, the Apostles called a conference at which the General Authorities of the Church were sustained. In the evening, Elder Benson told the Saints that Gibson had no authority to ordain Apostles, bishops, and "priestesses of the temple" as he had done; that he would not accept counsel and would be cut off. Gibson made an impassioned plea to the people, who, said Joseph F., "were carried completely away, and almost everyone present rose up in an instant, in the midst of considerable excitement. At his order they sat down, and were dismissed."

On Thursday, the missionaries returned to Lahaina on Maui, where a number of Saints, including several who had previously stood with Gibson, expressed their support. Gibson was excommunicated, and his influence was broken. On April 10, the missionaries traveled to Honolulu, where Elder Benson and Snow arranged for passage home. Joseph F. remained, as presiding authority, with William Cluff and Alma L. Smith. They rallied the spirits of the members, baptized new converts, and selected the site for a new Church plantation at Laie. In October, Joseph F. was released.

At Home (1865-74)

While Joseph F. was in Hawaii, Levira had gone to stay with relatives in San Francisco. When Joseph F. arrived, she refused to return to Salt Lake City, insisting she needed the attention of her California doctor. So Joseph returned to Utah alone, Levira following in July 1865.

Back in Salt Lake City, Joseph F. began his long career in the Church Historian's Office under the supervision of President George A. Smith. He assisted in keeping historical records and occasionally took minutes at meetings of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve.

In 1865, he was elected to the territorial legislature and served in each succeeding session through 1874. In 1866, he became the recorder and an endowment worker in the Endowment House at three dollars a day. In May, he married Julina Lambson, who had been living in the home of her uncle George A. Smith. Though she had given her consent, Levira was unable to accept polygamy and left her husband, eventually obtaining a divorce in California.

On Sunday afternoon, July 1, 1866, following the regular prayer circle meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve, President Brigham Young suddenly stopped and said, "Hold on. Shall I do as I feel led? I always feel well to do as the spirit constrains me. It is in my mind to ordain brother Joseph F. Smith to the apostleship and to be one of my councilors." Those present expressing unanimous approval, Joseph F. was ordained, though no public announcement was made until October conference, at which time he was sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve.

In 1868, Joseph married Sarah Ellen Richards, daughter of Willard Richards, and in 1871, Julina's sister, Edna. All three wives and their five children lived together in a house just a few blocks from Temple Square and the Historian's Office.

Second Mission to England (1874-75)

At the October 1873 conference, Joseph F. was called to preside over the European Mission, which included Great Britain, Scandinavia, Germany, Switzerland, and Holland. He left for his Liverpool headquarters on February 28, 1874, one week after concluding his responsibilities as a member of the territorial legislature. Traveling by train, he reached Washington, D.C., on March 7, where he visited Utah's delegate to Congress, George Q. Cannon. Elder Cannon introduced him to President Ulysses S. Grant, and gave his fellow Apostle a tour of the nation's capital. On March 10, Joseph F. sailed from New York, arriving in Liverpool on the twenty-first.

In England, Joseph F. enjoyed the association of several men who later played prominent roles in the history of the Church: L. John Nuttall, secretary to the First Presidency; Joseph's consin John Henry Smith, later an Apostle and Counselor in the First Presidency; and Francis M. Lyman, another cousin who became an Apostle and served as President of the Quorum of the Twelve for thirteen years.

During 1874, 513 converts were baptized in England, 94 in the Swiss-German mission, and 935 in Scandinavia. Two thousand Saints emigrated to Utah. But the following year the number of emigrants was cut in half. The Perpetual Emigration Fund had run out of money, and the Saints relied on Joseph F. to help raise funds locally for them to gather in Zion.

Through the summer of 1875, George A. Smith's health was failing. John Henry was released to attend to his father, and on September 2, Joseph F. received a cable notifying him that President George A. Smith had passed away. Joseph F. wrote in his journal:

I cannot tell with what terrible weight this melancholy intelligence fell upon my soul. On no other man in the church did greater responsibility rest. . . . The world has lost a bright light and an honest man, the saints a wise and faithful counsellor, a prophet, seer and revelator, and as true a friend of Christ the Lord. As for myself, I feel as though he were my own father, and my greatest earthly benefactor.

A few days later came word of Joseph F.'s release. He arrived in the Ogden railroad station October 1. On hand to greet him were Orson Pratt, George Q. Cannon, Samuel H. B. Smith, "Aunt Bathsheba" (George A.'s widow), John Henry Smith, Brigham Young, Jr., and others who had come in a special train car to meet him. Arriving in Salt Lake City, Joseph F. reported immediately to Brigham Young and then went home to his family, whom he found "expectantly awaiting my arrival. All as poor and thin as weasles, but in good health, and spent most of the night visiting and examining contents of my trunk and valise in gratification of the universal female characteristic curiosity, after which we retired to rest."

At Home (1875-77)

In keeping with Brigham Young's policy of appointing Apostles to preside over geographic areas of the Church, Joseph F. was given jurisdiction over Davis county, north of Salt Lake county. In addition to his ecclesiastical responsibilities, Joseph F. was made president of the Davis County Cooperative Company, which consisted of several small coops, including a tannery and shoe shop. He consolidated the various small enterprises, with the bishops of Layton, Kaysville, Farmington, Centerville, and Bountiful as the board of directors. Stock was sold to raise capital and make improvements in the tannery and boot shop; open a butchering operation; augment the cooperative's cattle, horse, and sheep herds; and fund other projects. In addition to these duties, Joseph F. continued to work in the Endowment House and at the Historian's Office.

Final Mission to England (1877)

At the April 1877 conference, Joseph F. was called to return to England to preside once again over the European Mission. This time he was permitted to take his wife Sarah and four-year-old son Joseph Richards with him. He was accompanied by Charles W. Nibley, who soon became Joseph F.'s closest friend and later Presiding Bishop of the Church.

Arriving in Liverpool in May 1877, Joseph F. found the British Mission in poor condition. Little, if any, outdoor preaching had been done since he had left in 1875, and financially "the mission is flat as a pancake, broke entirely." There was no money from the Perpetual Emigration Fund to help the Saints emigrate, and tithing had dropped to half of what it had been in 1875. He wrote:

Our meeting rooms are small and generally in unfavorable localities (where we have any) owing to the poverty of the people. But few will go into them, except to interrupt, ridicule or take notes for scandle. But many will listen to us in the streets and squares and byways, though this course subjects us to much clamour and insult, sometimes abuse, generally lead on by religious bigots. . . . Scarcely an individual joins the church but some 'parson,' or scripture-reader follows right up on the track, with his slanders and misrepresentations with a view to disuade the candidate or convert from what they style the perdition of Mormonism.

Traveling throughout the mission, Joseph F. soon contracted the cold that plagued him through all his previous years there, and was intermittently afflicted with lumbago and eyestrain. Nevertheless, he maintained a steady and demanding pace to inspire effective proselyting among the missionaries and faithful among the members.

In August, Orson Pratt arrived to consult with British phoneticists and shorthand experts. Brigham Young had directed Elder Pratt to devise a new phonetic system of spelling and publish the standard works, along with appropriate primers and grammars, in England. Lorus Pratt acted as secretary to his father, who was also dividing the Book of Mormon into verses and adding marginal references.

Near the end of the month, Joseph F. had the recurring premonition that "some great event was about to happen." He thought that perhaps Queen Victoria was about to die. Then, on August 22, Orson Pratt related a dream he had had about Brigham Young the night before:

He saw him riding in his carriage, when suddenly his horses took a fright and dashed down a steep bank into a deep river or stream of water, rushed through the stream and up the abrupt and seemingly impossible declivity on the other side. We all decided, if the dream indicated anything, it meant some sudden difficulty or trouble through which the president would have to pass.

Eight days later, the news of the death of President Young arrived, and Joseph F. was called home to assist in the transition to a new Church administration.

Joseph F. Smith as Missionary

By the time his sons started on their missions, Joseph F. Smith had acquired nine years of invaluable missionary experience. He had traveled to his assignments on horseback, mule team, stage, sailing ships, and steamers. He had lived among the poorest of God's children in Hawaii, sharing their deprivations and rejoicing in their simple but powerful faith. He had overcome a lack of formal education to become a scriptorian and a powerful speaker. Even as a teenager his strong testimony and dedication to hard work were recognized as qualities that would place him as a leader of men many years his senior. In England, he quietted determined hecklers with commanding dignity and appeal to reason. As mission president, he gained vast experience with the diverse problems encountered by missionaries, and their solutions.

Perhaps as important as his missionary experiences was Joseph F.'s intimate acquaintance with the events and people at the roots of the Restoration. He himself had lived in Nauvoo and remembered the martyrdom, Winter Quarters, and the trek to Utah. Brigham Young, George A. Smith, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, and other leading authorities were his advisors and associates. They recognized in Joseph F. Smith a man of boundless energy and devotion to Zion. As a result, at sixteen, he was a missionary; at twenty, a member of the Salt Lake Stake high council; at twenty-seven, an Apostle; and at thirty-five, presiding authority over all missions in Europe, Africa, and Australia.

Many aspects of missionary work have changed over the past hundred years. Missionaries no longer travel without purse or scrip. They are no longer charged with the responsibility of regulating Church activities in their areas. Yet the essential elements of proclaiming the gospel of Jesus Christ remain unchanged, the qualifications for the ministry are constant, and the opportunities for service and personal growth are as great. The advice Joseph F. Smith offered his missionary sons is as valuable for modern missionaries as it was for them.

—Scott G. Kenney
