Joseph F. Smith, Hyrum M. Smith, Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons ( 1981)

Hyrum M.

(1895-98)

The death of Brigham Young brought Joseph F.'s final proselyting mission to an unexpected end. In the intervening years before his first son was called on a mission, much transpired. In 1880, the First Presidency was organized with John Taylor as President and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors. Francis M. Lyman and John Henry Smith were called into the Quorum of the Twelve at the same time.

In 1882, Joseph F.'s colleague from his first Hawaiian mission, John T. Caine, was elected Utah's delegate to Congress, and Joseph F. presided over Utah's 1882 constitutional convention. Instead of admitting Utah to the Union, however, Congress passed legislation making plural marriage a crime and placing the government of Utah in the hands of a five-man committee appointed by the president of the United States.

The following year, on December 6, 1883, Joseph F. married Heber C. Kimball's daughter, Alice Ann, and adopted her three children by a previous marriage. And six weeks later he married John Taylor's niece, Mary Taylor Schwartz.

From September 1884 to September 1891, Joseph F. was "on the underground," avoiding federal marshals who hoped not only to prosecute him for polygamy, but to extract information from him regarding other plural families he knew from his service as recorder in the Endowment House. Visits to his families were infrequent due to the surveillance of the marshals and their spies. But he was able to take Julina with him to Hawaii for most of his exile from January 1885 to July 1887. He returned to Utah just in time to be at President John Taylor's side when he died.

In February 1888, Joseph F. was sent to Washington, D.C., where he was not likely to be recognized, to coordinate Utah's efforts to gain statehood. In the spring of 1889, he returned to be present at the reorganization of the First Presidency: Wilford Woodruff, President, and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, Counselors. President Woodruff issued the Manifesto, declaring an end to plural marriage on September 25, 1890, but it was not until September 7, 1891, that Joseph F. was finally granted a presidential amnesty, which freed him from a life of seclusion and secrecy.

The Manifesto relieved the Church of a great deal of pressure, but the property escheated by the government would not be returned for several years. The years of "the raid" had been costly, and when the panic of 1893 hit Utah, the Church was pushed to the edge of bankruptcy. Small investors, like Joseph F., were nearly wiped out. Since 1884, he had tried to maintain separate households for each of his five wives, and by the time Hyrum M. left on his mission, Joseph F. was supporting thirty-four children. Four more were born during Hyrum's absence. Financially, Joseph F. and the Church were struggling. Joseph F. had to borrow $500 to pay his taxes in 1895, and was forced to sell property in Idaho at a loss to pay his taxes the next year. Still, he managed to send Hyrum M. $10 or $15 every month, and traveled to New York to meet his returning son in February 1898.

Hyrum M., the eldest son of Joseph F. and Edna Lambson Smith, was born March 21, 1872. Hyrum M. married Ida Bowman on November 15, 1895, the day before leaving on his mission. Three weeks later, he was in England, assigned to Leeds, where he was soon given responsibility for the Leeds, Bradford, Hull, Sheffield, and Lincolnshire conferences. A year later, he was transferred to Westoe, just south of the Scottish border. His mission president was Anthon H. Lund, later Joseph F.'s counselor in the First Presidency.

Overcoming Fear of Speaking

Hyrum's first letter from England arrived December 17, 1895. The scenes he described recalled many memories for Joseph F. of his first mission to England. Joseph F. wrote Hyrum of the difficulty he experienced speaking in street meetings and offered good advice to missionaries who experience fear in public speaking.

December 17, 1895

It was in Hunslet-Lane near Leeds where I made my maiden outdoor speech, and arrested the attention of pedestrians after Samuel [first cousin Samuel H. B. Smith] and a native Elder named Woodhead had failed to do it. And when I got through, an old man cried out: "Well! There is nothink bad about that, but my advise (h)is you'd better not 'ave anythink to do with (h)any ov-um!!" And they all seemed to take his advice. At that time nothing I had attempted was so hard for me to do as to try to speak out in the open air, but when I "broke the ice," I was as happy as a bird. It gave me strength, for the Spirit of the Lord helped me. And, so it will you and your companions if you courageously meet obstacles, with a firm determination to do your whole duty. Get in your hearts the Spirit of God, the knowledge of the truth, and determination to do right, and you need not fear the taunts nor ridicule, nor the wisdom or learning of any man. Keep away from toughs and from their haunts and pay attention to study and prayer, always remembering God in humility.

The Importance of Letter Writing

It was the middle of January, and the family had not heard from Hyrum for nearly three weeks. From his own missionary experience, Joseph F. understood the importance of letters from home and wrote to his son regularly, always answering Hyrum's letters immediately and in his own hand. Hyrum had yet to develop these qualities to his father's satisfaction. But rather than chastise, Joseph F. patiently pointed out the problems that might contribute to his neglect, and encouraged his son to a greater awareness of his responsibility.

January 15, 1896

I suppose you have been busy, that your time has been occupied with other duties, and you have not written as often as we would like. There is something of an art in letter writing, which can be acquired only by practice. It is very desirable for you to improve as much as you can in the art of corresponding. You must not allow yourself to be supine. Energy is the vitalizing force which leads on to success and triumph. It is energy which has developed greatness in men, more than natural talent. Many a man with meager ability has made his mark in the world through being energetic and persistent, while many and many a man with superior native talent has completely failed for the sole want of energy. Whatever is worth doing is worth doing well. Whatever you engage in, concentrate your mind and effort upon it and do it as thoroughly as you can. Time is precious, let not a moment be wasted in vain regrets, in discouragement, or fear to try or to begin to do. You have not had to rustle at home to make ends meet, nor to save time and utilize it. You may now find it necessary, therefore, to redouble your vigor and energy to meet the demands of duty. One of those demands . . . is to write good, kind letters to your wife.

Clothes and Character

Hyrum had been in England two months when he sent home a photograph of himself and his companions, all well dressed and wearing top hats, the mark of an English gentleman at the time. Although pleased with his son's striking appearance, Joseph F. reminded Hyrum that fashion is no substitute for character.

February 27, 1896

Two days ago Mamma received two photos of a group of nine Elders including yourself and brother Davis. Mamma was highly elated, and all of us were exceedingly pleased with the picture. Someone remarked it was a "good display of silk hats." For my own part I was pleased to see you each had a "dress" hat, and that you all presented so good an appearance. There is very much, after all, in presentable rainment in the eyes of the world. . . . But the real thing—the substance must lie within. And good clothing, however costly or genteel, can never supply the lack of understanding, good breeding, and a knowledge of true principle. Of this you are fully aware. A man of intelligence will, even in ordinary clothing, always out-strip the fool in soft rainment. While I would always be pleased to see my boys well clad, in goodly rainment, I would much rather see them display meekly and wisely, minds well stored with useful information, and well seasoned with common sense, always tempered with pure and honorable charity and God-like love. . . . My hope in you is built upon your unswerving integrity to the truth, and your unyielding honor before God and man. Remember the old saw:

Honors kings can give,Honor they can'tHonors without honorIs a barren grant!

A Mother's Love

On March 16, word reached Joseph F. that his son Joseph Richards Smith (Buddie) had suffered an acute attack of appendicitis and would have to be operated on immediately to save his life. He wrote:

I hastened home—it was raining, cloudy and dark. I found him lying on blankets and pillows on the floor, in great distress, although under the influence of an opiate. I felt I would give all I had for his life, and I said, "Go ahead!" But before preparation for the "butchery"—as it seemed to all of us—was completed, it was 5 p.m.—still raining and dismal—and as to the necessary light, very unpropitious for so painful and dangerous an operation. However, by the aid of lamps the operation was performed within an hour and three-quarters time, and Buddie was laid on the bed.

Fearful for Buddie's precarious hold on life, Joseph F. and his wife Sarah Ellen Richards remained by his bedside. In his next letter to Hyrum, Joseph F. revealed his sensitivity to the unique love a mother feels for her children, giving support to the great commandment, "Honour thy father and thy mother." (Ex. 20:12.)

March 23, 1896

His mother and I have stuck to him night and day (his mamma both night and day, and I, of night only) since the operation. . . . His mother has thought only of him and faithfully ministered to his needs, and the feeling and sense most stirred in my mind by the example of a devotion which only springs from a mother's love, such as Buddie's mother has shown him, can only be requited, it seems to me, by the truest and most tender regard on the part of children for their mother. The purest and most unselfish love on earth is mother's love! It is typical of and next the pure love of God! The child who would so far forget himself and his highest duty to mortal beings, as to permit him or herself to do an act that would grieve the heart of a mother (without great cause) deserves the keenest punishment. I feel that my children, one and all, are firmly bound by nature's highest law to love and honor, cherish and revere, to nurture and protect, her who bore them into the world.

If my children will never fail to do their whole duty to their mothers, I will guarantee their fidelity to me! For they have known, still know and shall continue in the knowledge of the fact, that I have been, am, and will continue to be, to the extent of my ability, true to them—both to mothers and their children. I need not say to you, "Honor thy father and thy mother," for I believe you do.

The Model of Righteousness

Hyrum's mission president was Anthon H. Lund, later a Counselor in the First Presidency to Joseph F. Smith. In his letters home, Hyrum often referred to President Lund with great respect, fondness, and admiration, prompting this response from Joseph F.

March 23, 1896

I am pleased with your references to President Lund, for I regard him as a choice, spirited, intelligent man. Cultivate the confidence and love, and seek the acquaintance of the pure and good; and try to absorb the best and noblest qualities of the best men. No man can aim higher than to seek to possess himself of the characteristics of Jesus of Nazareth. He was and is the grandest type of Man-hood who was ever clothed in flesh and blood on this earth. The man who succeeds in reaching nearest to his attributes and perfection will get nearest to God! Next to the Son, Himself!! I do not mean that anyone should be self-righteous. Self-righteousness is abhorrant and most UNlike the Son of God. He that doeth righteously, and vaunts not of it, is righteous.

Discerning the Truth

Truth will always appeal to the judgment of a man who is humble, honest, clean, and possessed of the Holy Ghost. And such an one will always be able to detect error and sin. The Spirit of God can and will operate upon the mind which is clean and pure. It is the mind diseased and contaminated with sin or the love of sin, or the love of worldly gains or pleasures, by selfishness or other sordid dross, which cannot discern the truth from error. For the Spirit of Light and Truth cannot affiliate with, nor operate upon, the mind in such condition.

Economy

The panic of 1893 had cut severely into the Mormon economy. The Church was forced to borrow heavily to meet its obligations and help support the industries that provided jobs for its members. As a member of the First Presidency, Joseph F. Smith felt keenly the financial stringency of the times. In just two years the Church would have to sell a million dollars in short-term bonds to meet its obligations.

The hard times were aggravated by a mining disaster in Ogden Canyon that killed five and injured five more. They were, as Joseph F. noted, "Brethren whose families have been suddenly deprived of the winners of their bread, and protectors and companions."

The Smith family also suffered its share of financial strain, including the $300 appendectomy on son Joseph Richards Smith. Hyrum mentioned the cold and damp weather in England and expressed a need to purchase warmer clothing, to which his father replied.

April 9, 1896

I know you will use your means prudently—I want you to put your trust in the Lord, and only use means as you really need. I know what the English climate is, and I want you to be properly clad. A light overcoat may be a necessity to save you from a cold, and possible sickness. Get a good one and have it to use when needed—the same with pants or stockings, or other clothing.

My policy, as you know, has always been to take good care of what the Lord gives me, and so I have never lacked. True, I have never had much, if any, surplus, but always enough for my actual necessities, and some little to give to the poor. I think any man who has provided for a family as large or as numerous as mine has done a good work, and is entitled to some credit for economy, considering the limited resources which have fallen to my lot, at least. But I give God, and my precious companions, all honor and credit for my prosperity and success.

Association with and Work for the Dead

As Hyrum matured in his knowledge of the gospel and continued to preach in England, doctrinal questions occasionally arose in his mind. Who was better qualified than his father to answer them? On April 14, 1896, Hyrum wrote, posing several questions. Two of Joseph F. Smith's responses follow.

May 18, 1896

In reply to your question: "To what extent do our relatives and friends who have died have cognizance of us and our actions?" That will depend on the condition of our departed kindred and friends. All spirits are subject to the laws of the spirit world. For instance, the Prophet Joseph Smith, on October 9, 1843, said: "Spirits can only be revealed in flaming fire or glory. (That is, disembodied spirits.) Angels have advanced further, their light and glory being tabernacled, and hence, they appear in bodily shape. (Angels here referred to are resurrected beings.) The spirits of just men are made ministering servants to those who are sealed unto life eternal, and it is through them that the sealing power comes down. (As in the case of the administrations of John the Baptist in the act of conferring the Aaronic Priesthood, and Peter and James conferring the Melchizedek Priesthood, John not yet having tasted death, and also in the case of Moroni, in restoring the Nephite records, and also as revealed in the Kirtland Temple, by Moses, Elias, Elijah, D&C Section 110.) But Joseph continues: "The spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work; hence they are blessed in their departure to the World of Spirits. Enveloped in flaming fire they are not far from us and know and understand our thoughts and feelings and notions and are often pained therewith." . . . Now, if our departed kindred and friends are just (righteous) spirits, exalted to this greater and more glorious work, they may be very near us, enveloped in flaming glory, taking notes, or observing actions of our thought, feelings, and actions, rejoicing because of our virtues and integrity to the truth, or sorrowing and weeping over our sins and transgressions. And not only so, but able to render assistance, when our spirits are susceptible to the power they wield. You will find in the Pearl of Great Price [Moses 7:28] that God and the heavens wept, and the reasons why. You must bear in mind, my Son, that "all things whatsoever God of His infinite wisdom has seen fit and proper to reveal to us while we are dwelling in mortality, in regard to our mortal bodies, are revealed to us in the abstract, and independent of affinity of this mortal tabernacle, but are revealed to our spirits precisely as though we had no bodies at all, and those revelations which will save our spirits will save our bodies. God reveals them to us in view of no eternal dissolution of the body, or tabernacle." (Compendium, page 284, paragraph 1.) I believe that our departed kindred and loved ones are far more mindful of us and solicitous for our salvation day by day than they ever were in the flesh, because they know more. As you will find in Malachi 4:5-6, "Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet," and etc., . . . "and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children," and etc. And in the D&C, Section 128:18, "We are the children. The fathers have gone before." Joseph says: "The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after the dead." The apostle says, "They without us cannot be made perfect, for it is necessary that the sealing power should be in our hands to seal our children and our dead for the fullness of the dispensation of times, and etc." Compendium, page 284, under heading "All revelations are Spiritual."

Guardian Angels

In reply to your question: "Do we all have guardian angels, and is the Key to Theology authentic on this subject, pages 117 to 119?"

To both of these propositions, I can answer yes, so far as I have been taught and am able to learn. Jesus said (Matthew 18:10): "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you that in Heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven." This is no exception to the rule. The rule applies to all of God's children or little ones. But, the guardian angels of the pure, the innocent "which believe in me," as Jesus said, verse 6, are they which "do always behold the face of my Father." While those guardian angels of the disobedient, and etc., I would infer, cannot always bring up in remembrance before the Father such as are disobedient, and believe not in Christ.

Teaching with Prudence

In May 1896, Joseph F. Smith received a letter from Hyrum, describing an experience recorded in Hyrum's journal on May 1.

It has been a nice, fine day and I have remained indoors nearly all day. Wrote a letter home and this evening Brothers Winder, Brough, Schofield and myself went down town and held an open air meeting, and a meeting it was to be sure, and I received an experience that I will never forget. We took our stand under a lamp on Earl Street off Manchester Road, and commenced singing the hymn, page 143, then prayer, then hymn 343. Quite a crowd gathered and Brother Winder talked to them for over half an hour. He then asked me if I cared to speak. Was not very anxious—he considered it my duty to bear my testimony. I had not been speaking long when I was interrupted by an old man. I made the assertion that no person could be saved, but by obedience to the principles of the gospel, one of which was baptism by immersion. The "thief" was sprung. The old gent was soon quieted on that score. Finally he yelled out, "I know who you are, you're a L.D.S." then to the crowd he said, "that man is a L.D.S. He believes in polygamy and has got a half-dozen wives." With this, an old lady who had been championing us and upbraiding all who interfered or interrupted us exclaimed, "What are you, a L.D.S.? Mormons! Great God!" and with a wild gesture made for the outer edge of the crowd. The devil seemed to enter into the crowd and convert it into a mob, for they closed in upon me, and with shoving and crowding began to jostle me out of the street into Manchester Road. The cry of "hit him," "knock him down," etc. frequently heard. I drew my remarks to a close and after several men and women had been pushed down, managed to get out of the crowd, where I joined my brethren, got my hat and umbrella and together started on a good walk . . . with a large crowd closely following. A small boy or girl occasionally ran up behind us and struck us or threw pebbles at us. As we got out of town, the mob gradually left us, and we got home all right.

This experience stimulated Joseph F.'s memory of a similar experience he had had on his first mission to England in 1860.

May 18, 1896

Your welcome favors of April 14th and April 18th are both before me, and there is another from you at home, the date of which I do not remember, giving an account of your first experience in an English mob. I have seen them perform myself, and I know what it is like. But I never but once was the cause of a disturbance. That was in Sheffield, during my first experience in speaking English. (Previous to that I had been to the Islands.) We had a large audience. William M. Gibson, a great preacher, was present, but I was speaking, and I said that "the authority of the apostles of today was the same as that held by the apostles of Christ's day, and that the word of modern apostles was as good as the word of the ancient apostles!" Somebody in the audience cried out, "Blasphemy!" This was too much for my boyish temper to bear. The proposition I had made seemed so clear, so plain, and so indisputable to my mind, I could not brook a shout of "Blasphemy," and let loose on my opponent upon apostate Christianity, hireling ministers and upon those opposed to the truth in general, in my best licks, and by the time I got through, I had stirred up the emissaries of his Satanic Majesty until they were red hot, and the parrot and monkey show began in good shape! Brother Gibson tried to quell the riot, but the excited mob would not listen to him, would not hear any more, and made for our stand! We slipped through the crowd and made for home. But some of the leaders were aching to get hold of me, and hung round for hours to get a chance. Well, this experience taught me a good lesson. Thereafter, I moderated my fervor, became more diplomatic in the presence of a mixed crowd, and avoided showing any temper when reviled. In fact, I learned to be reviled without reviling back again, to take an insult without retorting, except in meekness and gentlemanly candor. Many times after this I succeeded in quelling excitement and pouring oil upon the troubled waters, but never in exciting violence. I always tried to make my hearers feel that I and my associates were peacemakers, and lovers of peace and good-will, that our mission was to save, and not destroy, to build up and not tear down; to preach and show a better way without referring to the poorer ways until the sympathy of the audience was gained. Still, the Devil was never, and will never, be reconciled to the truth, and there are unreasoning creatures, sightless, deaf, and invulnerable to common sense, who will be content with nothing but malicious opposition to the cause of Zion. From such, turn away! Time and breath spent upon such are time and breath thrown away. They are aptly described by the apostle Peter in his 2nd Epistle, 2nd chapter. Read it carefully. There is an old saying and a true one that honey will catch more flies than vinegar. Kindness will beget friendship and favor, but anger or passion will drive away sympathy. To win one's respect and confidence, approach him mildly, kindly. No friendship was ever gained by an attack upon principle or upon man, but by calm reason and the lowly Spirit of Truth. If you have built for a man a better house than his own, and he is willing to accept yours and forsake his, then, and not till then, should you proceed to tear down the old structure. Rotten though it may be, it will require some time for it to lose all its charms and fond memories of its former occupant. Therefore let him, not you, proceed to tear it away. Kindness and courtesy are the primal elements of gentility. "For politness is to do and say, the kindest things in the kindest way!"

Avoiding Arguments

After a meeting in Bradford, Yorkshire, England, a minister approached Hyrum and asked for a conversation. Hyrum recounted the incident, which developed into quite a contentious discussion. Joseph F. responded with counsel and love, admonishing Hyrum to avoid arguments and describing the proper method of proclaiming the gospel.

May 20, 1896

Your description of the discussion with the minister was particularly impressive to the folks. But, my son, do not waste breath nor time in discussions, arguments, or contentions with any such characters. If anybody asks a question, whether he asks it civilly or not, answer it civilly, but decline to contend. There is a great difference between reasoning, and contention. Discussion nearly always runs into contention, and that is not of the Lord, nor at all wise. I can understand you well, and I know how hard it is to decline a banter to discuss questions. I have been in it myself, and your disposition is much like my own. Experience has taught me that where calm statements of fact and mild reasoning will not prevail or succeed, there is no use to enter into discussions and arguments. Say to the people: "We have not come to contend with you. All men are free to choose their own course and believe what they please, but, that we have that we believe to be truth, eternal truth, and we simply want to tell the people of it." And then leave them to receive or reject it as they choose. You must take care that your earnestness be not carried to the extent, as mine has often been, to be mistaken for anger. Of course, you will have to learn by experience all these things. But put your trust in the Lord. Be calm, truthful and moderate, and fear not the face of man! Nor shrink from any.

June 3, 1896

God bless you my son. Keep Cool before the public. Be calm and passionless in outdoor speaking. Avoid [contention with] all men, that perchance thereby we may bring some few to a knowledge of the truth. A few simple facts, or Gospel Truth, simply but earnestly and calmly told will find their own way into the hearts of the honest, if listened to, while volumes of eloquence will only be wasted upon the comeup and dishonest. God bless my boy.

Confidence and Courtesy

On June 18, 1896, Hyrum described an encounter with a Methodist minister. Again, Joseph F. discussed the incident carefully and with wisdom and love developed a lesson for Hyrum's betterment.

July 31, 1896

In your postscript "from Bradford," you mentioned a conversation you had had with a Methodist preacher, who had studied the Bible for 40 years, and etc. You say "I told him he must have been a dreadfully dull student to have been studying the Bible for 40 years and still to know so little about it."

This statement as you make it is without doubt the naked truth, but, my Son, if you said it in just those words, was it not a little too naked? Objectionable facts should always be clothed in as mild and unobjectionable language as possible.

Perhaps you did this in that way and in relating the matter to us told it bluntly. Again, when he began abusing the Latter-Day Saints you say, "I plainly told him that I would not take such abuse from him nor any other man; he apologized and I bid him good afternoon." I am glad he "apologized," for that would indicate that he had at least a modicum of the elements necessary to the character of a gentleman. Had he been an unmitigated "galute," he would not have made any apology, but might have become violent and undertaken to put you out of his house, as I suppose you were in his house, because of your saying, you were "invited into the house of one man who said he was a local preacher of the Methodist persuasion" and etc. Now, what I want to say to you, my Son, is this: I would not like you to cultivate abrupt manners, nor the use of harsh words even to your, or our, worst enemies. You know what Paul says are the fruits of the spirit, and the spirit is what you must cultivate in order to succeed well. For instance: Ephesians 5:9-10, "for the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth, proving what is acceptable unto the Lord." And again: Galatians 5:22-25, "But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit let us also walk in the Spirit." And etc. James 3:17-18 says: "But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace." Now the fact is, as you have had abundant opportunity to know already, that all opponents of "Mormonism" (so called) possess the spirit of anger, of hatred, strife, contention, bitterness, of false accusation, of wickedness, and of ignorance, and often of murder. All such do the works of the flesh which are these: Galatians 5:19-21, "adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: . . . They which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God." Such as these we should avoid except where duty calls, or where accident, or by design on their part, we might be brought in contact with them. And then we should never, no never, descend to their methods, their spirit, nor their character. Always maintain a calm, peaceable demeanor. Keep cool! Let ignorance expend itself in impotent wrath, but let the truth stand still with patient dignity and calmness, to strike its deliberate, effective blow at just the right moment. Then it will knock its opponent out with scarcely an effort. For "Truth is mighty and will prevail." You have the truth. Use it, defend it by the spirit of truth. You may not know it all, no man does! Any one who assumes to know it all is a fool whose folly will surely manifest itself as if upon the housetop.

Only God knows all things or comprehends all truth. Therefore do not be discouraged for a moment because there is much for you to learn, or because others may know more than you. Our cause is good, and just, and right, and its aim is pure, noble and great! You know this, as well as I—as well as any man can know anything. This you can maintain by your own experience, and by the testimony of God's Spirit in your soul, and by history and by the word of God in the Books.

So far, you know you are right, and you can afford to keep cool and calm over any contention on these points. He is strong who hath the truth, he is "thrice armed" who battles for the right. And he who strives calmly in God's might, and not in his own strength, will be victorious. But while we should always hope and pray for victory, we must not lose sight of the fact that all others are also seeking victory. We should always aim to help them to victory, not to defeat them! Our aim is life eternal, our object to lift up mankind, not debase them. The enemy of the truth always seeks to dishonor and debase the truth and its advocates. The friend of the truth who would pursue a similar course descends to the level of the enemy of truth, at least in his efforts, and, so far, is no wiser nor better than he. Therefore, my Son, (2 Timothy 2:6-7), "The husbandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things." Treat all men courteously. Be kind to the erring. "Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy." If reviled, revile not. If persecuted, put your trust in the Lord. "Love them that hate you." Do to others as you would that they should do to you. For this is the true gospel spirit, it is the law of God, it is the Gospel itself which you are to preach. You must also practice it. What ever other men are, you must be a gentleman and a true man. Nothing can repay you for the loss of manhood and true gentility. A man may be much of a gentleman and know but little, if anything, about the Gospel. But, a man cannot be a true and faithful Latter-Day Saint without being a true gentleman. General Washington took off his hat and bowed to a Negro servant. When remonstrated by a proud officer for such obeisance to a menial, the great Washington replied: "I cannot afford to be less polite than my servant!" We learn to do by doing and doing right makes righteous men. I hope you will receive the foregoing in the good spirit in which it is written.

A Father's Prayer

In a beautiful expression of love and faith, Joseph F. prayed for the well-being and success of his missionary son.

September 4, 1896

Your welcome favor of August 22 came to hand on the 2nd inst. and we were all glad to hear from our absent loved one. We never pray but we remember you and your companions in the missionary field. And our prayer is that God may remember you and all of us better than we remember Him; that He will deal most kindly and lovingly with you, raise up friends in the midst of strangers, soften the hearts of the unbelieving, and open their eyes and unstop their ears that they may see and hear and understand the truth which will make them free; that the merciful Father may shield you and your associates and co-laborers from violence, from malice, from snares and plots, from cold and hunger, from cruel exposures to cruel elements, from all the pleasing wiles of the Tempter, from the sirenizing influence of woman, and from every wrong and from every evil, that the Holy Spirit may dwell in you—inspire you with courage, with hope, with faith, with charity and with pure knowledge, and make you not only valiant for the truth, but wise and prudent. O! God bless my son who is out in Thy vineyard. and all his brothers at home, and his companions and fellow laborers abroad. Make them polished shafts in Thine hand and clothe them with mighty power from on High. Put Thy gracious spirit into their hearts, and stir their souls to the depths with Thy precious love. Make them to utter Thy word in meekness but in the power and demonstration of the Holy Ghost. And keep them always within the sound of the still, small voice of the Spirit which whispers consolation, assurance, peace, and comfort, and warning and admonition to the awakened Soul. O! Bless them and comfort them, and keep them in Thine own good hand; make them to see, and know, and feel that Thou art God with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning, and that they are, indeed, Thy sons! And so keep them in Thy paths all the days of their lives. that they may be faithful into death, and unto endless life, and joy and exaltation in Thy glorious Kingdom. . . .

Oh! May God my Father bless you with life, health, strength, wisdom, knowledge, humility and integrity, that you may never falter nor fail. My son, our Father is good, and we will be true to Him though He may try us. May you prosper now and forever, is my earnest prayer.

In the same letter, Joseph F. commented on the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Only those who are "born again" can "see the kingdom of heaven." And not always are those "born of the water" also "born of the Spirit." In other words, not every one who is baptized receives the Holy Ghost, notwithstanding, the "gift" may be bestowed. You know there is a difference between the Holy Ghost, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Prophet Joseph Smith speaks of this difference as recorded in the Times and Seasons, volume III, page 732, also same volume, page 823, first column. The "gift" is the sacred act of bestowing or conferring, or giving the Holy Ghost by the authority of the Holy Priesthood in the laying on of hands. All saints, having been baptized, who are worthy, receive at once the witness of the Holy Ghost, when this is given by the laying on of hands. Those who are not worthy, or are not prepared in spirit for the reception of the witness, (or the Holy Ghost) may not receive it for days, or months, or perhaps for years, and some never are blessed with the power of the baptism of the Holy Ghost at all, the seed having fallen in thorns, or on stony ground. (See the parable of the sower.) Joseph says: D&C Section 130:23, "A man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not tarry with him." That may be the case with any man, but those who are worthy, true and faithful are at all times entitled to His presence, more especially at times of need, when men are humble, putting their trust in God. When men sin, the Spirit departs from them unless they repent. But, you know all these things.

A Difficult Field of Labor

Late in 1896, Hyrum was transferred to a difficult field of labor, just south of the Scottish border, in Westoe, South Shields. In spite of a bad cold, Hyrum expressed his determination to succeed, to which Joseph F. responded:

November 12, 1896

Well, I am sorry you took such a bad cold just on reaching your new field of labor, but I hope and pray you will, by faith and prudence, soon recover from it entirely. England is a bad place for getting over a cold. I have tried it, and I hope you will never suffer as I have done there with colds. Bad colds were my worst enemies while there. But I can now see wherein I lacked judgment in taking care of myself. A day or two of rest and proper treatment, if taken in time, will often check disease in the bud, which if neglected, or dallied with, becomes serious. . . .

I am glad you feel like taking hold in your new field with courage and determination. There is nothing like a hard field of labor to try the metal and develop the spirit and faith of a young man, provided he trusts in the Lord and does not flinch from duty. Your labors are for your own as well as for others' good. See to it, my Son, that in your case, "One good man and the Lord Almighty are a big majority"—over all obstacles.

A Day in the Office of the First Presidency

On November 12, 1896, Joseph F. wrote Hyrum and included an outline of his day's activities. John T. Caine, who had served in the Sandwich Islands with Joseph F. Smith, had been Utah's delegate to Congress from 1883 to 1893. He was defeated in his bid to become Utah's first Democratic governor in 1895, and at the time of this letter was chairman of the Utah Senate's Committee on Appropriations. John M. Cannon, a grandson of George Q. Cannon, was a Salt Lake City lawyer, having graduated from the University of Michigan in 1890. Simon Bamberger, prominent in the Utah Jewish community, later became governor of Utah. Perry Nebeker, a bodyguard for Brigham Young during the Utah War, had served as mission president of Switzerland, Italy, France, Germany, and Holland (1863-67) and was a member of the state legislature. George C. Parkinson, president of the Oneida Stake in Idaho, was a member of Idaho's Senate. Son of Heber C. Kimball and father of Spencer W. Kimball, Andrew Kimball was released as president of the Indian Missions in 1897 and became president of the St. Joseph Stake (Arizona) the following year.

November 12, 1896

Just for fun I will give you an idea. On reaching the office we found Hon. J. T. Caine, John M. Cannon, Mr. Bamberger and a lady, and Mr. Luce there awaiting us. We listened to each in turn, and disposed of their business. Then came Perry Nebeker, George C. Parkinson, E. A. Kimball of the Southern States, and Andrew Kimball of the Indian Territory Missions. And we listened to each of these in turn and advised in all their matters, the latter two being turned over to me. Then came C. W. Penrose, who with Brother Parkinson have just gone. Each of these people had different matters of interest to them and their various concerns, which took from 15 to 40 minutes each, to state their cases. And we are supposed to listen complacently, consider well, and advise them what to do. Whoever thinks there is nothing but pleasant pastime in all his, is wide of the mark!

Writing Skills

Always alert to find ways of helping his children improve, Joseph F. frequently pointed out spelling and grammatical errors in his sons' letters. He never forgot the disadvantages he experienced as a result of his own lack of formal education and seemed determined that his children would fare better. In his letter of December 17, 1896, Joseph F. acknowledged one of his own literary foibles and encouraged Hyrum to greater awareness of syntax and verbosity.

December 17, 1896

I know of no such word as "incidences." Incidence is all right. I do not attempt to counsel your spelling because I am a good speller myself, but only because I would like you to spell and write better than I. To your diction, too, I might take a little exception, if it would help you to improve in that direction. Let me say, never use two words in one sentence which practically mean the same thing, for that has been, and is one of my own failings in speaking, but not in writing, so much. Always avoid totology.

You say, "The past year has appeared to pass by very rapidly, yet the beginning of it seems a terrible long ways in the distance." Now this sentiment is not quite clear to me. Do you mean, "the year just past appears to have slid by rapidly, yet looking back to the beginning of it, it seemed a long way off (or in the distance)?" Or do you mean that looking to the end of the year from the beginning, it seemed a long way off?

Make your sentences, and paragraphs short and terse. And avoid a profusion of words. One of my worst faults in speaking and writing is that I make my sentences, or paragraphs too lengthy. In so doing it it is hard to get at the chit or substance of the idea. For example, you say, "Were I to compare the difficulties and the troubles and the questions that must be constantly coming up before you brethren who stand at the head of so many people, with those that are continually coming before me in a little bit of a branch of the Church, I wonder how you stand it." Now my son, you see your paragraph is so long that you forgot to say what you would do or not do—"Were" you "to compare the difficulties" &c. &c. I suppose you intended to say, "Were I to compare the difficulties and troubles you have to settle, and answer the questions constantly coming up before you, who stand at the head of so many people, with such difficulties &c., as come before me in a little branch of the Church, my troubles would appear very insignificant to those you have." Well, I do not find any fault. I am only pointing out some small defects which no one more than yourself should desire to avoid. It is common to say "some way or another," "some time or another." But it may be seen at a glance that "some way" means one way or another, or one out of many ways. "Some time," means at one time or at another time, and to add "or another" is superfluous, and in sense totological. "Some way" is equivalent to "one way or another." You will see this at a glance. Some people, and generally acknowledged to be good writers and speakers too, use the double word "subject matter," while the plain truth is that the "subject" is the "matter," and the "matter," is the "subject." Corbitt, the great grammarian, denounces this unwarranted use of two words in one, both meaning the same thing.

Joseph F.'s next letter showed that he was able to accept correction by his son and still had room for improvement.

January 23, 1897

I cheerfully acknowledge the correction in the spelling of "tautology," and can stand any amount of correction from wrong, for I would rather be right than be king. Of course, I think you will not question the fact that the lapsis was due more to thoughtlessness, or haste than to real ignorance, for the instant its incorrectness was called to my attention I knew it was wrong and how it should be spelt.

Dignity in Contention

In his letter of August 17, 1897, Hyrum related an experience that he and his companions had with a heckler at a public meeting. Rather than avoiding the confrontation, Hyrum debated and defended the teachings of the Church, but not without ridicule and harrassment from his opponent. Joseph F. took this opportunity to suggest to Hyrum the appropriate times, and with whom, a gospel discussion should or should not be debated.

September 3, 1897

I do not wish to chide you for having allowed yourself to contend . . . on a public rostrum, but I could not help feeling it was a little undignified on your part. While I approve of your efforts to defend the truth, and commend you in the exercise of vigor and holy zeal in the defense of the truth, allow me to suggest that when you are compelled by a sense of duty to meet the enemy, try and make sure that your "foe is worthy of your steel." The truth is always dignified and her advocates and defenders should carefully maintain a corresponding dignity in the choice of their associates and in yielding to come in contact with those who oppose, but I do not blame you. On the contrary, I know your heart and intentions were good and, therefore, it will be overruled eventually for good. But as far as you can, consistently, avoid street rabbles and noisy contentions, which can never be mistaken by candid people for argument or reason. It is calm reason and cold truth that will weigh in the balance. Seek to convey the truths you utter with moderate voice, without excitement, deliberately, and as well chosen words as you can possibly command. You will then, as Disraeli did, command the attention of your auditors, and not only that, but their respect.

Thoughts of Returning Home

As Hyrum neared the two-year mark of his mission, he began to have thoughts of returning home. He mentioned plans he was making for his return and was understandably looking forward to reunion with his wife and family. Joseph F. wisely counseled his son to work hard to the end and not to anticipate his release from the mission field. Events proved this to be good advice, for Hyrum's call was extended briefly to further assist the mission president.

In one of his last letters to Hyrum on this mission, Joseph F. offered further advice to help his son in the transition to Church service at home.

September 25, 1897

Bro. D ____begins to think that his time in England is drawing very short, and that from this [time] on he would be pardoned for looking towards home. I do not object to this in the least, provided he does not allow his looking toward home to interfere in the least with his continued faithfulness in the ministry, and I would say the same to you. Do not get in a hurry, be patient in your labors and abide your time, and do not make up your mind that the time is set for your release. If you do, and you should not be released at the precise time you expect, it will be a very great disappointment to you, and the time thereafter . . . might drag very heavily on your hands. Rather, make up your mind to remain until the Lord and your brethren are satisfied with your labors, or until your release shall come. You will then be subjected to no disappointments.

November 11, 1897

We will welcome you home anytime, and so far as we are concerned the sooner the better. But I earnestly desire that you will never, through all your life, throw off the armor of the Gospel, or cease to advocate, defend and practice the precepts of the Son of God. I want you to be faithful, to complete your mission, to abide your time, and when God's servants shall say it is enough for this time, to come home with spotless garments and a clear conscience. Nothing could grieve me more than to think you would not do all this, and nothing could give me more joy and satisfaction [than] to know you will come home pure and unspotted from the world. I have all confidence in your integrity. I believe in you with all my heart, and I love you with all my soul. I pray for you always. My thoughts of you in your labors are a constant prayer for your success. I do not believe in flattery. I prize real merit. And, therefore, I am grateful and pleased with every kind word I hear spoken of you by others. I know, as a boy, you possessed good sense and a good share of wisdom. As a man I am sure you cannot but be a man of principle and of noble impulses, a man of true and noble heart and soul. I look to you for counsel and moral support. I rely upon you as my first son—bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh. I cannot forsake you and I ask you to cleave to me and your mother with filial love, and I know you will. Not only so, but should anything happen to me I shall expect you to honor me by impartial consideration of all my family. I believe your nature inclines to judgment and impartial justice, and also to mercy and forgiveness. To have my sons disagree and pull apart would wound me to the core. I want my family to agree to be united and my children to be one. God bless you now and forever and when released honorably, bring you safely home.

December 26, 1897

I am pleased rather than sorry that President R. S. Wells is in no hurry to dispense with your labors and to send you home. I consider this fact the highest compliment he has paid you, and it is an honor, to be thus appreciated, of which both you and I may well be pleased. How much better it is to be in demand, than to be in the way. Or I might better say, how desirable it is so to live and labor in the fields assigned us, that our file-leaders and associates will be satisfied with what we do. I tell Buddie, Alvin and Joseph F. that the thing for them to do is, if possible, to make themselves and their services to their employers, not only desirable but indispensible! Then their prosperity is assured. Of course, we would have been glad to see you sooner but our joy on your return will be none the less for your longer stay, in as much as your labors were longer needed, and at last you return "pure and unspotted from the world." Nor will you lose anything in the end by such detention.
