Joseph F. Smith, Hyrum M. Smith, Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons ( 1981)

Joseph R. and Joseph Fielding

(1899-1901)

While Hyrum M. was laboring in England, Joseph Richards (son of Sarah) and Joseph Fielding, Jr. (son of Julina), were preparing for their missions. Joseph R. (also called "Richards," or "Buddie") worked in the ZCMI drug department, making twenty-five dollars a month. Joseph Fielding attended school, married Louie Shurtliff on April 26, 1898, and began working in the ZCMI grocery department.

In September 1898, Wilford Woodruff passed away, and Lorenzo Snow was sustained as President of the Church with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as Counselors. To relieve the Church's indebtedness, the First Presidency decided to issue a million dollars in bonds, to be redeemed in seven years.

After a prolonged period of intense work, Joseph F. took a two-month vacation to Hawaii with his wife Sarah and two daughters. Two months after their return, Joseph R. and Joseph Fielding left on their missions to Great Britain, arriving in early June 1899.

The year 1900 was particularly strenuous for Joseph F. In January, Elder B. H. Roberts was denied his seat as Utah's elected representative to the U.S. House of Representatives because he was a polygamist. Soon afterward, President Cannon was partially paralyzed, and President Snow was confined to his bed much of the time. Consequently, the burden of the First Presidency fell upon the shoulders of Joseph F., who traveled to Mexico and Canada, visiting recently established colonies there, and often worked late into the night to keep up with his correspondence.

In April 1901, President Cannon passed away. Joseph R. and Joseph Fielding were released from their missions in June, and President Smith traveled to Boston to meet them.

Obtaining a Testimony

Immediately upon arriving in England, Joseph R. wrote his father two letters expressing reservations about his testimony and raising questions about his effectiveness as a missionary. Anxious to bolster his son's faltering faith, Joseph F. responded with an expression of love and reminded him of God's love and every individual's privilege of choice. Finally, he reassured Joseph R. that commensurate with his own dedication and sincerity, the Lord would strengthen his testimony.

June 20, 1899

It was with feelings of great joy mingled with sadness that we received your favors of the 4th and 5th inst. . . . We pray for you earnestly and most sincerely desire that you may humble yourself, obtain the spirit of your calling and of the ministry to which you have been sent, that you may be instrumental in the hands of the Lord of not only convincing yourself of the truths of the Gospel of everlasting life, but that you may be instrumental in bringing others to a knowledge of the same. It is for these reasons you have been called and sent forth, and I esteem the good which may result to you through your obedience to the call, and your effort to fulfill it honorably as being of greater consequence to me and to your mother, and above all, to yourself, than to any other living creature, although you might succeed in bringing many to the knowledge of the Gospel. If you can see, by the prompting of the Holy Spirit, and also by the prompting of your own judgment that the world is in sin and in transgression of the laws of God, then it should follow that the world ought to be warned of the consequences of sin and be taught to return to the laws of God and to works of righteousness, and blessed indeed is he who may be the instrument in the hand of the Lord of bringing even one soul out of darkness into the light, and out of the bonds of iniquity into the marvelous liberty of the Gospel.

Christ rules by the principle of love; God's method of ruling is by that of love, and upon the principle of intelligence he has given us our agency, he has set before us, practically speaking, the tree of knowledge of good and of evil, and in the Gospel he has pointed out to us the glorious consequences of obedience to the laws of righteousness, the partaking of the good fruit of the tree of knowledge, and of the dreadful consequences of partaking of the fruit of evil of its tree. And having pointed out the consequences, he leaves us free as individuals to choose our own course. In the language of the poet, as you will find in the hymn book, "Know this, that every soul is free, to choose his course and what he'll be; for this eternal truth is given, that God will force no man to heaven. He'll call, persuade, direct him right, bless him with wisdom, love and light; in nameless ways be good and kind, but never force the human mind."

I would call your attention to the 82nd section of the Doctrine and Covenants, paragraph four; also paragraphs five to ten, and I pray you to remember these words: "I the Lord am bound when ye do what I say. But when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." It will do no good to fast or pray unless it is with a sincere and earnest desire in the heart to learn the will of the Lord with an unalterable determination to do it. . . .

May God bless you my boy and help you, and preserve you from the fear of the world, and help you to overcome your own timidity and to find out God, to know him, and Jesus Christ whom He hath sent into the world, whom to know is life eternal.

With love and hope, and abiding faith, I am, Affectionately, your father,

Jos. F. Smith

[P.S.] My own Dear Son: I had to close at this point in order to attend a meeting. . . . I know it was and is the will of God, our Heavenly Father that you should take this mission. And it is His will that you should succeed, but it is your duty to see and acknowledge His hand therein and to do your best to meet His will and purpose concerning it. It is also my will, nay more, my earnest desire and my hope, my faith and most fervent prayer to God, my Father, that you shall succeed in this mission. . . . You must not fail! And you will not, no you cannot fail, if you will but do your duty. My God, bless and help my son! Think of us. Ever. Papa.

Various Admonitions and a Promise

It was Joseph F. Smith's practice to write separate letters to both of his missionary sons, usually on the same day. Though the letters often contained the same news of home, they were always personalized for the benefit of each son. Thus, on the day Joseph F. wrote Joseph R. (Buddie), encouraging him to obtain a stronger testimony of the gospel and his mission, he wrote Joseph Fielding a letter containing several admonitions, including a reminder to write his wife Louie, and a promise.

June 20, 1899

I am glad to hear that the people of the ship treated you kindly and that you did not see any occasion to find fault with anything except the slow progress of the voyage. As for scoffing unbelievers, it is not worth your while to waste time or the energy of your thought on them. Let your mind turn as it naturally does upon the duties of your mission and calling. Do not stop to trouble yourself about what the world may think of you, or what enemies may say about you. Of one thing be sure, that is, that you are in fellowship with the Almighty, and have a conscience void of offence towards all men. Do not seek to excel men, only seek to do your duty faithfully and well, leaving all the results in the hands of the Lord. It will then be well with you both in time and in eternity. . . .

There is nothing that could give me more joy and satisfaction than the realization which I have that you possess the spirit of the Gospel and have received the testimony of its truth. God bless you forever in this regard, my son, and cause you to develop in mind and to grow in understanding and in the knowledge of His truth until you shall know as you are known and see as you are seen. And withal, I admonish you to use judgment and cultivate patience and humility; be not censorious or arbitrary, rather be yielding and humble in your spirit and assert the truth by moral suasion and gentle fervor than by dogmatic force. Write as often as you can, not to interfere with your duties. A good letter to me will be one to all the family except Louie, who will expect to have her own correspondence from you. We want her to feel that your home is not broken up. Your rooms are at her service and command at any moment, and she is welcome to come and occupy them whenever and as long as she pleases. . . . She is a good girl, and we confidently expect the Lord will bless her and you so that you both shall accomplish a glorious mission in all its fulness on the earth, and I don't want either of you to feel the least discouraged in any possible way, but to continue to put your trust in the Lord and he will most assuredly open your way. I feel so confident in my spirit in making this promise that I would almost pronounce it an inspired prediction, but never mind, we will trust in the Lord and we feel sure that He will do all things right.

Safety in Companionship

In late September 1899, Joseph F. returned from a trip to Oregon to find a letter from Joseph Fielding. Anti-Mormon sentiment in England was at fever pitch. Malicious rumors and slanders were being circulated that the missionaries were in England to entice British girls away from their homes and ship them off to Utah where they would be coerced into polygamous relations. False and sensational stories spread like wildfire among the gullible, some of whom became so incensed as to resort to violence to oppose the "Mormon menace." Joseph Fielding described one such scene, to which his father responded.

September 27, 1899

I was very sorry that you have been subjected to such an unmerciful siege of mobbing in that boasted land of freedom and equal rights. I hope you will be very cautious to avoid such hornets' nests of anti-Mormonism and hatred and viciousness on the part of the Jarmanites or anybody else. While it is evident the adversary is afraid of some good being done in such places it is well not to invite such treatment if you can reasonably avoid it. I am sincerely thankful that you escaped without injury, and pray that God will always deliver you from the wrath of the wicked. It is always prudent, under such circumstances, and as a general thing, to keep together. One should never travel alone. The Lord has provided that the elders should travel two and two, and there should never be less than two of you together. Mamma was considerably worried after she read your letter for she feels that you are the apple of her eye and if turned loose on those that would molest you she would scarcely leave a grease spot of them.

The Voice of Warning and Testimony

Throughout Joseph F. Smith's life, the most intense and persistent opposition to the Church came from Protestant ministers. Clergymen often led the mobs in Missouri and Illinois. During his missions to Hawaii and England, ministers actively campaigned against the Church, often, through ignorance or malice, spreading false reports about its history and doctrine. During the 1870s and 1880s, Protestant missionary societies established ninety free schools in Utah, hoping to win Latter-day Saint children away from the faith of their parents through "education." In 1898, when Elder B. H. Roberts of the First Council of Seventy was elected Utah's representative to the U.S. House of Representatives, the Salt Lake Ministerial Association protested. Petitions protesting the seating of Roberts were circulated in churches throughout the country, eventually gathering seven million signatures.

On December 8, 1899, Joseph F. wrote Buddie, "I think Congress will oust Hon. B. H. Roberts. But if so, it will be a blot upon the House of Representatives and upon the nation. I'll venture to guess there is not another man in Congress, save it may be Rawlins [Utah's Senator], who is as clean and free from taint of crime as he. If ousted it will be by the force of sectarian cant and hypocrisy, simon pure!" Primarily through the efforts of hostile clergymen, the House denied Roberts his seat within days of the following letter to Joseph Fielding.

In spite of the animosity frequently encountered from ministers of the time, Joseph F. counseled his son to be respectful, and leave his testimony with them. The advice not to tarry long with unresponsive contacts is as relevant today as it was eighty years ago.

January 2, 1900

It gives me pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of your esteemed favors of December 2nd and 18th, the first of which reached me December 19th, and the latter this morning. I am pleased to say that it gives me pleasure to read your letters and to discern as I do between the lines the excellent spirit which pervades your thoughts and accompanies you in your ministrations. I was interested in your communications to the reverend gentleman you name in reference to the principles of the Gospel, and while it is all right to get after those gentlemen in the true spirit of inquiry and of hope of enlightening them, it is always well to be brief and pointed and courteous in such communications, as I think you have been. As a rule, the more you say to such people, the more opportunity is given to them for criticism and fault-finding. It is very seldom that gentlemen of the cloth, whose living depends upon their ecclesiastical position will listen to reason or will yield to the persuasions of the good Spirit. They are blinded by the spirit of the world, and the profits of their calling. Besides they are thoroughly committed to their profession, for it is but a profession with them. Much labor and pains may be bestowed without good effects upon that class of people, still it is consistent and proper that they should receive admonition and warning and the testimony of the servants of the Lord, which should always be given in great humility and then they should be left in the hands of the Lord.

Receiving Praise

On December 21, 1899, Frank J. Cannon, son of President George Q. Cannon and a former senator from Utah, wrote Joseph F. Smith, reporting the favorable impression Joseph Fielding was making as a missionary in England. Joseph F. was, of course, very pleased, and passed the compliment on to his son, taking occasion to teach a valuable lesson on receiving praise.

January 5, 1900

[Quoting Frank J. Cannon's letter to Joseph F.] "The other day while taking lunch with the countess of Warwick, it was a pleasure to hear her speak in the highest terms of your son Joseph, whose labors in Warwickshire have come to her attention. Lady Warwick recounted the facts of a marvelous case of the healing of one of her old dependents, under Joseph's ministrations, and she seems to be quite pleased to have her people investigate our cause. She sent a note inviting Joseph to come to the castle to visit with us, but unfortunately he had left the village for some other part of the conference. Lady Warwick is a good woman who spends her life and her wealth in noble works, and her expressions of regard for your son and his work were quite sincere."

I wrote a few lines to brother Cannon in acknowledgment of his kindly mention of you, and regretted that you had failed to receive the invitation to lunch at the castle with her ladyship and brother and sister Cannon. Of course we are always pleased to hear kind words from friends relative to our boys, and we sincerely hope you and Richards may always merit the kind things said of you, and yet we would have you so live and act without regard to what may be said, that your lives and labors may be worthy of you and of the cause you are called to represent. We must always remember that we are not laboring for the applause of men, nor to gain favors which we do not deserve. We need care nothing for the opinions of others so long as we have a consciousness of well doing. Let our aim always be to do right because it is right and because it is our mission to do good, and leave the result in the hands of the Lord. Still it is pleasant to be kindly thought of and to be held in the esteem of honorable men.

Doctrinal Questions

Joseph Richards continued to be challenged by difficult doctrinal problems and frequently asked his father's opinion. Joseph F. always responded, often at great length. These letters, frequently four or more pages in length, are in Joseph F.'s handwriting, suggesting he spent much time each week writing his missionary sons. He often wrote out scriptural references which are only cited here. In this letter, Joseph F. carefully examined the questions posed by his son and then added a reminder that apparent doctrinal problems are often due more to the approach taken than to actual scriptural inconsistency.

January 6, 1900

[Quoting Richards's question.] "Whether the sons of perdition will be privileged to retain their bodies after the resurrection, or whether they will be resurrected or not?" First, yes. They will doubtless be resurrected. Second, yes. They will without doubt retain their bodies. First see D&C 29:26, 27. This means all the dead shall be raised from the dead. Again see Alma 11:43, 44, Revelation 20:11-15, I Corinthians 15:21-23. Second, Mosiah 16:11, D&C 29:27-28, Alma 11:45, 34:34. . . . I would like you to get clearly into your mind what the Lord has said about the second death, and what the second death is. Some believe it means the dissolution of the spirit and body after resurrection. That is impossible if the Book of Mormon and D&C are true, and I say let them be true, and let God be true though all men prove to be liars. D&C 29:41 tells us precisely what the second death is, viz., banishment from the kingdom and presence of God into outer darkness. [Alma 42:9, D&C 75:28-29, 39 are also quoted.]

It is a good rule to interpret a passage of scripture which is not clear by another or others bearing on the same or a similar subject, which may be clear and pointed. All truth is reasonable, if we can only comprehend it. I judge the things I do not know by those I do know, which bear resemblance, or relationship. To my mind there is no conflict between the command of God, "Thou shalt not kill," and his further command, that "Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed." Both are right and both are just and true. But some people carp about it and condemn the Lord for what seems to them a contradiction. The contradiction is only in their minds.

The Book of Mormon as a Missionary Tool

In March 1900, Joseph Fielding wrote to his father, observing the importance of a knowledge of modern scriptures in the mission field. Joseph F. responded with this letter which emphasizes the role of the Book of Mormon as a missionary tool.

April 3, 1900

I note your remarks in relation to reading the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, and I heartily approve of your views. No man can be an efficient missionary of this church unless he is familiar with these books. And the more familiar he is with them, the more capable will he be to discharge the duties of his ministry. Indeed, I think sometimes that we neglect too much the advocacy of the Book of Mormon. In the early days of the church, it was the preaching of the Book of Mormon and the proof of its existence or coming forth, as found in the Bible, that made converts to the church. It was as necessary then to prove our authority by the Bible as it is now, but it seems to me that to show the world from the Bible that the Book of Mormon, or such a book as it is, was to come forth in the latter days, is a strong argument for our cause. It is a great mistake to set aside or ignore the word of God as revealed in the latter days in preaching this gospel to the world. Of course it is not always wise to feed the people with strong meat at first, but one of the foundation stones of the church in the latter day is the revelation of the Book of Mormon and the restoration of the Gospel it contains, as also the visions and revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. To be ashamed of these is to be ashamed of our ministry, to dodge these facts is to fail in the spirit of our ministry. In my opinion these things should be preached and then substantiated by the accepted version of the old Bible.

Satan and Human Weakness

As he observed human behavior, Joseph Fielding wondered about the nature of evil and its source. He asked his father whether Satan was the sole source of evil and to what extent Satan was restricted from sacred places, such as the temple. An avid student of Church history, even at this early age, Joseph Fielding knew that once, during the apostasy at Kirtland, a number of disgruntled members tried to take over the Church. In a meeting at the Kirtland Temple in late 1837, Brigham Young vigorously defended Joseph Smith. A scuffle ensued, during which some minor damage was done to the temple. Joseph Fielding cited the incident in his question regarding Satan's influence and human agency.

April 3, 1900

You ask, Can a man do any wrong without first being tempted of Satan? All men have their agency, the spirit of Satan leads to error and darkness and wrong doing. If a man does wrong, it is because he yields to the spirit of evil, thereby exercising his agency. If he does good, it is in accordance with the spirit that is of God, and he uses his agency in that as well. Those who overcome evil in this life will be beyond the power of Satan in the life to come. In other words, Satan's power ends in this world so far as the righteous are concerned, for they arise above him and above his influence; and power is not given to him to tempt them in the spirit world, they having overcome him in this. So far then as the righteous are concerned, Satan is effectually bound, whether it is in this life or in the life to come. But as mortality is never free from its own weaknesses there is no perfect safety in this sphere without the presence continually of the influence of the Holy Spirit. Satan can enter any place where he is invited or permitted to enter by man. If wicked men enter the house of God or have dominion in it, Satan will have access there, but where the righteous rule and the righteousness of God prevails, there Satan cannot come, at least with power.

You ask the question, Can a man do wrong in the temple if Satan is not there to urge him on? In the case you cite with reference to the Kirtland Temple it would seem that Satan himself had taken possession of the minds of those men, and if not in the temple in person, his power was certainly manifested through his agents there, who were apostates. I repeat, Satan, by his presence or power, can go anywhere that man can go who invites him or yields to him and his influence. The prevalence of the spirit of apostasy on the occasion you refer to gave the adversary almost full control at that time in the temple, and it is only by the power of righteousness that Satan and his influence was expelled therefrom. As to whether the binding of Satan is a literal binding as with a chain or not, it matters not. I am inclined to believe that the chain spoken of in the Bible, with which Satan is to be bound, is more figurative than real. He will be bound both by the faith of the righteous and the decrees of the Almighty during the Millennial reign and will be cast down into hell, as the prophets have said, and shall not be at liberty to molest the children of men until the end of the thousand years. . . .

As to the agency of man, it is by the light of Christ and the power of God that man by his agency can become exalted through obedience to the laws of God. It is by his agency that he becomes a son of perdition after having received the truth, by yielding again himself to the power of Satan. A man who by his agency conquers Satan, subdues the evil that is in him, and rises above the power of temptation and of all evil, is still as much a free agent as he was when he was subject to temptation, but then he is like God or Christ, beyond the power of evil.

Partakers of the Sacrament

When the missionary presiding over the conference to which Joseph R. had been assigned was released and returned to Utah, he reported to Joseph F. On July 27, 1901, Joseph F. wrote Joseph R. that "he spoke very kindly of you and said that not only he but all the boys in the mission held you in very high esteem." Always endeavoring to strengthen his knowledge and testimony of the gospel, Joseph R. was said to be "a good student" who was always "trying to improve." He continued to carefully examine the scriptures and history of the church. In this case, he discovered an apparent discrepancy regarding partakers of the sacrament. Joseph F. responded.

February 8, 1901

Now, about administering the Sacrament to new converts. If you will read carefully Section 20, paragraph 68, Doctrine and Covenants, I think you will see that you have not quite understood it. The head line, commencing verse 68, viz: "The duty of the members after they are received by baptism" is but a caption to all the verses which follow to the end of the section, and stands apart from the instructions which follow. Read verse 68 without reference to the caption, or head line. "The Elders or Priests (who baptize) are to have a sufficient time to expound all things concerning the Church of Christ to their understanding previous to their partaking of the Sacrament and being confirmed by the laying on of hands etc." "Expound all things." Baptism should be expounded as well as confirmation and partaking of the Sacrament before they (the converts) are either baptized, confirmed, or partake of the Sacrament. Baptism is part of the "all things," which is as necessary to expound to their understanding before they receive it as either of the other ordinances referred to. The Sacrament is for members of the church in good standing. Membership consists of belief and faith, repentance, baptism by immersion by authority, and confirmation and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Jesus did not institute the Sacrament for non-members or unbelievers, nor for mere seekers after the truth but for those "in the covenant." See Matt. 26:26; Mark 14:22; Luke 22:19; 1 Cor. 11:23-31. "This do ye in remembrance of me." See Book of Mormon, 3rd Nephi, 18:11: "And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name, etc." Confirmation follows baptism. Verse 5: "Behold there shall be one ordained among you and to him will I give power, etc." "and bless it, and give it unto the people of my church, unto all those who shall believe and be baptized in my name." They are not of "my church" or members until confirmed. "That ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my flesh unworthily etc." See the whole chapter. . . . The Sacrament is for those who are members of the body of Christ, i.e., members of the church.

The extract from the Prophet's History, published in the Manual 1899-1900, page 53, Note 2, squarely states that the "two sisters" were confirmed after they partook of the Sacrament. If this is true, it was no doubt an error or an oversight. This was done in September 1830, five months after the first organization of the church with six members. Joseph was young in the work and may not then have known or sensed fully the true order of things. It may have been in a measure like the first baptisms for the dead. When that principle was first revealed it was so new and yet so glorious, that without further light the saints rushed into the river at Nauvoo and were baptized, men for women and women for men, i.e., a man would be baptized for his father and mother, his brothers and sisters, etc., and women were baptized for their fathers, mothers, etc. But soon the Lord revealed the principle more fully. (See D&C 127 and 128.) Joseph and the people then learned that baptism for the dead must be performed in the temple in a font prepared and dedicated for that purpose. And men should act for men, and women for women. And thus the church was taught and learned "here a little, and there a little, line upon line, and precept upon precept." But there is an error in the quotation from the history; it says, "Newel Knight and his wife paid us a visit at my place at Harmony, Pennsylvania, and as neither his wife nor himself had been as yet confirmed, etc." Then it says, "After which we confirmed these two sisters," which is a manifest error, for Newel Knight and his wife could not have been "these two sisters." I have taken pains to hunt this up in the Original Manuscript History. And there it reads as follows: "Neither Emma nor Sister Knight had been confirmed," etc. The rest is correctly given. The true order is to administer the Sacrament to members only and not to them if they are unworthy.

Keeping a Journal

From the age of fifteen, when he began his first mission, Joseph F. Smith kept a daily journal. Throughout his life he referred to his journal to obtain valuable information and impressions that would have been lost had he not been so careful to keep a personal record. As recent prophets have done, Joseph F. urged missionaries, including Joseph Fielding, to keep a daily diary.

February 20, 1901

Always take time to eat your meals and post your journal. I have had experience in these matters. A diary is almost worthless unless written daily. We cannot journalize correctly from memory. Keep your diary up.

Death of a Daughter

In February 1901, Joseph R.'s seventeen-year-old sister Alice reached the point of exhaustion after a prolonged period of intense studying. She had often studied into the small hours of the morning. Against her father's advice, she persisted until she became seriously ill. In spite of medical attention and the faith and prayers of the entire family, "Alibo" died on April 29. Joseph F. immediately sent word to his missionary sons and two weeks later expressed his grief to Joseph R. As this letter makes clear, only his faith in the Lord and the knowledge that Alibo would be with them in the resurrection sustained the prophet during this time of great loss. Sarah had previously lost three other children.

May 14, 1901

Your welcome letter of April 30th has just come to hand. Your letter was written just one day after our Darling "Alibo's" death. It came to my hand today. And I suppose my brief note to you of April 29th will have reached you yesterday or today, conveying to you and to Joseph F. the sad news of our irreparable earthly loss. Our hearts are still bowed down in the earth where the remains of our sweet girl and those of her little Brothers and Sisters repose in the dust. The blow was hard upon all of us, but it fell with mighty force upon the frail of her beloved and precious Mother. May the merciful Father sustain and preserve the mortal life of our darling "Mamma." She is not strong at best, and this crucial ordeal has drawn heavily upon the little she had. But we will do the best we can, by the help of the Lord, and from our hearts we feel that our sleeping treasures are all in His holy keeping and will soon awake from dust to immortality and eternal life. But for the precious assurance and hope in the Gospel of Christ, life would not only not be worth the living, but it would be an infamous and damning farce! But, "O, what joy this sentence gives, I know that my Redeemer lives!" Thank God. He is "the resurrection and the life," and his word is true. "He that believeth in me, tho he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."

To Joseph Fielding, Joseph F. wrote:

She knew no sin against God or man. Too good, it seems, to live in this poor sin-cursed world. And so the good Father who gave her to us, has taken her to himself again. We shall meet again "beyond the river where the surges cease to roll." O! what happifying thought! She came to us under the Holy Bond of the New and everlasting Covenant. Whosoever God hath joined together neither man, nor time, nor distance, nor even death can sever. How grateful I am for God's truth and power unto salvation.
