Joseph F. Smith, Hyrum M. Smith, Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons ( 1981)

Alvin F., H. Chase, George C., and Willard R.

(1905-1907)

President Lorenzo Snow passed away October 10, 1901. Seven days later, Joseph F. was set apart as President of the Church, with John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund as counselors. On October 24, Hyrum M. Smith was called to the apostleship and sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve.

One high priority of President Smith's administration was the redemption of the Church's million-dollar bond issue. On New Year's Eve, 1903, the First Presidency celebrated the half-way mark in paying off the bonds. But their satisfaction was restrained by the knowledge that in a few days the U.S. Senate's Committee on Privileges and Elections would begin hearing to consider protests against the seating of Apostle Reed Smoot. Allegations had been made that the Church continued to encourage polygamy and controlled Utah politics, and that Smoot's position as an Apostle had compromised his allegiance to the United States. Subpoenaed to testify, President Smith traveled to Washington and submitted to four days of grueling examination in March 1904. Returning for April conference, he reiterated that the practice of plural marriage had been officially discontinued since 1890 and declared that any members violating the Manifesto would be excommunicated.

As the Smoot hearings continued, newspapers and magazines throughout the country reprinted sensational charges made by the Salt Lake Tribune. Through the inflammatory editorials of George Q. Cannon's disaffected son, Frank J., the Tribune heaped abuse on President Smith, severely trying his Christian spirit.

In the midst of this uproar four of Joseph F.'s sons were sent on missions: Alvin Fielding (son of Edna), Heber Chase (son of Alice), Willard Richards (son of Sarah), and George Carlos (son of Julina). At thirty, Alvin was the oldest, and Willard, nineteen, the youngest. Alvin, George, and Chase left wives and children at home.

They left for England on April 19, 1905, where they received their assignments from European mission president Heber J. Grant: Alvin to London; George to Sundsvall, Sweden; Chase to Cheltenham, England; and Willard to Trondheim, Norway.

In December, Joseph F. and a trainload of Church and state dignitaries traveled to Vermont for the dedication of the Joseph Smith Memorial at the Prophet's birthplace. Apostles John W. Taylor and Matthias F. Cowley had submitted their resignations to the Quorum of the Twelve, confessing they were unable to abide the official interpretation of the Manifesto. But the resignations were not announced until the following April Conference.

During the summer of 1906, Joseph F. and his wife Edna and their close friend Charles W. Nibley made a tour of Europe. It was the first time a President of the Church had visited Europe, and Joseph F. took advantage of the tour to visit with his sons in London. In the fall, Charles W. Penrose replaced Elder Grant as mission president.

In November 1906, the anti-Mormon element in Salt Lake City attracted media attention by charging Joseph F. with a violation of the "unlawful cohabitation" statute, which law enforcement officials had generally ignored. Pleading guilty, Joseph F. was fined three hundred dollars and released. But the hopes of the Mormon-haters were dashed when, on February 20, 1907, the U.S. Senate, after three years of hearings, voted in favor of Reed Smoot retaining his seat. The Church and its leaders had been vindicated. And the Church was free of debt, the last of the bonds being redeemed on December 31, 1906.

In the spring of 1907, the four sons in Europe were released. Joseph F. sent their brothers Joseph Fielding and David A. to meet them in Boston and show them the new memorial in Vermont and other Church history sites on the way home. They arrived in Salt Lake City on June 11, 1907. In December, David A. was called to the Presiding Bishopric as a counselor to Bishop Charles W. Nibley.

Remedy for Homesickness

While Willard was en route to his assignment in Norway, Joseph F. wrote, offering some advice on how best to alleviate the homesickness common to many missionaries at the beginning of their ministry.

May 20, 1905

I hope your voyage across the German ocean was not unpleasant, and that you reached your destination in perfect safety. You must not forget President Grant's recipe for home sickness—"Work, work, WORK!" Pitch in and learn the language. You will find that the Scandinavians are generally a good people. And I know the Saints in those countries will be kind to my boys. We are anxious to hear from you since your arrival at your destination.

Gratitude for Family

Three of the four sons who served missions together left wives and, in some cases, children at home. Joseph F. took a great interest in his daughters-in-law and grandchildren, keeping in close contact with them and passing on family news to the missionaries. In this letter, Joseph F. described his feelings of gratitude for his large and increasing family.

May 26, 1905

The fact is, I think my grandchildren from first to last are among the very nicest and best that were ever born into this world of ours. All perfect, in body, and mind, without a single blemish or spot. Oh! how good and kind the Lord has been to me and mine in this regard! Who can measure the gratitude I feel to Him for all His merciful kindness to me? No tongue can tell or words portray my soul's full gratitude to Him for all I have received from His gracious, loving hand. Good and true children, devoted loving Mothers and wives; enough to eat and drink and wear, and where to lay our heads in peace. My Son, for all of these I thank my Heavenly Father, and rejoice in the glorious Savior of my soul. How can we help but love and be loyal to the giver of so much?

Unpleasant Experiences Are Valuable

Arriving in Norway, Willard R. described some unpleasant experiences he had encountered in lands that were, to him, strange and foreign. Joseph F. wisely and humorously pointed out that even unpleasant experiences are to be valued.

May 26, 1905

So you did not enjoy the smell of paint and bilgewater of the boats, nor the atmosphere of the boxcars of England and the continent. And you never before smelt a smell that smelt like that smell smelt! Well, if you had been in the "hold" or in the forecastle, or stearage, no doubt you would have smelt that smell more profusely than you did. In all of those places I have smelt it intensified many fold by tobacco smoke from sailors, nasty pipes, and the aroma from the stalls of the beef cattle and mutton sheep, and poultry, carried for the use of the passengers. Now they carry all these things in refrigerators, dressed ready for the cook's galley. Things have changed since I was a boy and crossed the seas with the divine message you bear. Experience is better possessed than to be gained. I.e., it is like the hurt of a bruise. It feels better after it quits hurting.

Use of Means

Though he had saved money for his mission, George C.'s funds were limited, particularly since he had left a wife and baby at home. He evidently expressed concern at the financial burden the four missionaries were imposing on their father. Joseph F.'s response revealed the priorities he set for his means.

May 28, 1905

In the first place, I will say, all I have in this world has come to me through the kind providence of the Lord. And such means as I can command for uses outside of the support of my family cannot be better used than for the support of my sons in the mission field.

It is true I have nothing to throw away. I have a very large family to maintain . . . besides many charities I have to meet. But I propose to help my boys to fill honorable missions, and while I have the means, you shall not be left without your actual necessities. Do not fear for the care of your loved ones at home. They will be taken care of, and will not lack for anything that we have the power or means to supply them, to the extent of their needs. If the Lord will bless them with wisdom and health to guard against hurtful exposures, there will be no cause for you to worry one moment about them.

Field of Labor

Now about your going to Sundsvall. I rather think it was a good stroke of policy to send you there. It would not be wise to show one of my boys any preference or favor. You have gone out to do missionary duty, not to hunt "snaps" nor to "see sights." Let everyone stand, or rise or fall upon real merit. Do your duty without a murmur, or a "kick" and show such an example of integrity and true devotion to duty and to the cause of truth, that your light will shine out, undimn'd and untarnished by selfishness or reluctance to meet what comes. I want my boys to avoid, absolutely the manifestation of a feeling or thought expressed in the aphorism, "I am better than thou!" Better is as better does. . . .

Stick to your post. If it is a hard one the more you will enjoy a change to a better one. If my boys shrink from hard work or hard fields, others will have more excuse for doing so. If you take what comes without complaint, you will set a good example to others.

Rewards

He that does well, will not lose his reward, and he who does better than another, or than others, and boasts not of it, nor prides himself on his superior works will surely receive his reward. And it will be a glorious one. Remember our gracious Savior. He excelled all men, in all things good and great. Yet He took not the honor to Himself. The honor, the glory, the power and the dominion He ascribed to God, the Father! He came not to do His own will, but the will of Him that sent Him. He said that while the foxes had holes and birds of the air had nests, He had not where to lay His head. Yet He did not complain nor murmur. He was on His Father's business and He knew from whom and how His reward would come. Remember the battle is not assured to the strong nor the race to the swift, but to him who endures to the end, and is most skillful in the use of his powers. It is the meek who are to inherit the earth. The peacemakers who shall be called the children of God. . . . Be tractable and teachable that you may the better teach others. One who will not be taught or will not learn good things from others is not fit to assume the role of an instructor.

Brevity and Clarity

Anxious for his sons to excel in every undertaking, Joseph F. frequently counseled his sons in the art of letter writing, since a mission was also an opportunity to acquire skills of expression that would help them throughout their lives. In this letter, brevity and clarity were recommended to George C.

May 25, 1905

You will remember the apology so often quoted for long letters, "Excuse this long, rambling letter, for I have not the time to make it shorter." True oratory is nothing more than simple, clear-cut, intelligent expression. Spread-eagle-ism, verbosity, a "diarrhea of words," can never be counted as oratory. The best language, is simple language. The most effective expression is to say what we mean and mean what we say, and as near as possible to the point. The true purpose of language is to convey our real, true meaning, to the understanding of others.

Courage, Seeking the Spirit, and Self-Control

Alvin F.'s recital of his first street meetings reminded Joseph F. of similar trials he experienced in England. He encouraged Alvin to continued effort and counseled him to obtain the Spirit for best results. Candidly admitting that a quick temper was his own worst enemy, Joseph F. advised Alvin to "keep cool in the moment of excitement or trial."

June 8, 1905

You speak of street meetings. I can realize your feelings with regard to that matter, for I have been "thro' the mill." I never did relish the opening or beginning of open air or street meetings, but I faced the music, and when I got well engaged the fear would leave me, and I would rather enjoy it. In Hull, Yorkshire, we used to take our stand by King William's monument, and first attract as many as we could by singing. Then we would open up on the crowd, the best we could. In Sheffield, we would go down by the market. In Leeds at "Hunslets Lane," and other places, and in Liverpool, before St. George's Hall. I have held forth on Glasgow green and many other places. But I never went into the streets, or highways or byways to speak, or try to speak, to moving crowds without feeling that sense of uncertainty and dependence which makes one want a friend, and try to find one in the Lord.

You are right, my precious boy, when you seek after the Lord, in humility and earnest supplication for His spirit to help you, not only before engaging in open air meetings, but in performing any duty. Always be humble, and get as near to the Lord as you can. What I mean by that is this: try to live so that you shall be worthy of the good Father's blessing and help. Never boast of your own strength. Never allow yourself to feel that you can do without God's precious care and protection.

Your disposition is very much like my own. My greatest difficulty has been to guard my temper, to keep cool in the moment of excitement or trial. I have always been too quick to resent a wrong, too impatient, or hasty. I hope you will be very careful, my son, on these points. He who can govern himself is greater than he who ruleth a city.

O, God bless my boys, and give them wisdom, faith and patience, and the living witness of Thy Spirit. O, keep them from all harm, shield them from temptation and sin. Help them to do right, to act prudent, exemplary, and charitably, and make them valiant for Thy truth. This is my constant prayer for you, one and all. We are all usually well.

Contentment

Willard R., who had been sent to the relatively difficult field in Norway, expressed satisfaction with his assignment, which gratified his father.

June 13, 1905

I am pleased to learn that you are satisfied with your field of labor, and that you feel contented. It is a good thing for one who is on a mission, at least, to cultivate the feeling and habit of contentment. You know the story of the "old lady," who struggled for twenty years to get a contented mind and failed, until she concluded to be contented without it. Always make the best of everything.

Indifference

Alvin F. found Londoners indifferent to the gospel message he had come to share. Though an improvement over the sometimes violent opposition Joseph Fielding had encountered in England, the spirit Alvin F. found was not encouraging. Joseph F. remarked that "the world" has always been indifferent or hostile to the gospel of salvation, for it involves sacrifice and righteousness.

June 30, 1905

The great indifference of people generally to the gospel is an unmistakable evidence that the vintage time is either past or has not yet come, and now is the gleaning time. The hatred of the people toward us is due to dense ignorance mostly, and to some extent to willful malice. They would rather accept slander than truth. But it is just as the Savior said to his ancient disciples, "Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves." Matthew 10:16-22. "And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake, but he that endureth to the end shall be saved." It is not so very different now than it was in the days of the Son of God. And if the world hated him and put him to death and his disciples, so will they hate us, for we are on the self same mission and business that they were on—the redemption and salvation of mankind. But the world loves pleasure more than God, and sin more than self-denial and righteousness.

The Rock

Matthew 16:17-18 has always been an important missionary text. The Church of England, like the Roman Catholic Church, interpreted the "rock" on which the church was to be built as being Peter, and believed the Lord's promise that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against it" was proof that the Lord had guaranteed an unbroken continuity of divine authority to the present time. Among the Latter-day Saint missionaries there seemed to be some question as to whether "the rock" referred to revelation or Christ. Joseph F. explained this controversial passage to H. Chase.

July 14, 1905

You ask this question: "Matthew 16:17-18. Does the 'rock' here referred to, mean revelation or Christ, or both?" It means both. The question was, "Whom do men say that I am?" The answer was "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." The response was, "blessed art thou Peter, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father who is in heaven." It was God who revealed to Simon or Peter that Jesus was The Christ, The Son of the Living God."

Now then, it was a revelation from God that made known to mankind, "The Christ," &c. And these two things constituted "The Rock" on which Christ's Church was to be built. Revelation alone is not sufficient. Christ alone would not suffice, for without Revelation from God, men, the world, could not know Christ, but they would still say, as of old, "he is John the Baptist, or 'Elias' or 'Jeremias,' or 'one of the prophets,' or perchance, he is 'Beelzubub,' or a 'deceiver,' &c. &c. But Revelation from God, not only identifies the fact that Jesus is "The Christ, The Son of the Living God," but also that "other foundation can no man lay than that [which] is laid, which is Jesus Christ." I Cor. 3:11. And further, that, "the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner." Matt. 21:42. And also see Ephes. 2:20. "And this is life eternal that they might know thee, the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." John 17:3. The grand object of Revelation is that Christ shall be made known to man, and that man knowing Him, and "the only true God" who sent Him, might through obedience obtain "life eternal." On the foundation of "Christ, The Son of the Living God," and "Revelation from God," is built His church and while the church so remains, "built" and building upon "this rock," the "gates of hell cannot prevail against it."

In a letter to George C., Joseph F. added:

Some have held that revelation alone was the "Rock" referred to. This could not be, because without Christ, revelation would not avail. Some have held it was "Christ alone" that was meant as the "Rock"; but this could not be, because without revelation, not even Simon Bar-jona could know that Jesus was "The Christ, the Son of the Living God," for "flesh and blood" not only did not, but absolutely cannot reveal Christ unto man. The revelation must come from God. Therefore, it may be summed up, that "The Christ," and "Revelation from God" constitute the "Rock" on which Christ built and will build His Church. . . . I know that both Christ and revelation are essential to the salvation of man, and indispensible to the building up of the Church. Both go together; they are inseparable, and one without the other would not avail.

Mercy

At this time, missionaries were often called upon to assume leadership roles in mission branches and conferences. Consequently, Alvin F. became involved in the case of a member who had been found guilty of serious transgression. Joseph F. touched upon the importance of upholding standards while extending mercy and charity to the truly repentant.

July 22, 1905

I was pleased with your letter in every way. You write a beautiful hand, and I approve the generous spirit manifested in it. With reference to the man A___. I have only to say we often have to use greater rigor in matters of that kind than would seem charitable, to avoid the chance for others to take liberties. But in all cases where charity can cover as a mantle a sin, or even a multitude of sins without harm accruing to others, the mantle of charity is the right thing. Your grandfather [Hyrum Smith] won the title of a "merciful man." No man will go farther than I to forgive a truly repentant sinner. See I Corinthians 13:13. Always lean towards mercy, but remember there is no forgiveness or remission of sin without repentance.

Joseph F. Smith's Temperament

On one occasion, Alvin F. urged his father not to work so hard and to secure the services of a stenographer to help with correspondence. George and Willard had helped out in the office before leaving on their missions. Hyrum M. was occupied with his duties as an Apostle, and Joseph Fielding "is giving his mind to Church history, and is becoming an able writer and well posted in his line. He sometimes helps me after regular duty and I call on him now more than ever." Alfred W. Peterson helped out now and then, but the President of the Church continued without permanent help with correspondence for some time.

This letter gives a rare glimpse into the "workaholic" temperament of Joseph F. Smith and George Q. Cannon.

August 10, 1905

In your letter of July 21st answering mine of June 30, you give me a good lecture on taking care of myself and of having a stenographer to assist me in writing my letters, &c. All of which I accept in the loveliest kindness. But my son, I never yet put upon another any burden I was not willing to carry myself. I never asked, never expected anybody else to carry my load or lighten my cares. I never worked with any man who worked longer hours than I did myself. President George Q. Cannon is the only man I ever met to whose capacity for endurance I had to bow, and he possessed one gift—a rare one, too—which I, unfortunately, do not possess. It was this, at night when the toil of the day was done and we laid ourselves down for rest, the moment his head pressed his pillow, he slept and snored, and snored and slept, while I would toss and roll and sigh for sleep and rest, but like the will of the wisp, it would mockingly dance before my o'er wrought nerves, and perhaps for hours when most I needed it, elude me. And then I never failed to hear or sense the slightest sound or stir. I have carried this nervous temperament for more then 66 years and still I live! But it is due to kind providence, and to the mercy and love of God, and not due to any wisdom, caution or power of my own. I shall endure it until He says it is enough, and then I will give up. It seems to me I could endure anything, if only I could feel that all was well with those I love. To see my family true to me, to each other, united, kind, and noncomplaining and acknowledging the hand of the Merciful Father in all things, oh! this would be, and is, the elixor of life to me. I could then meet the contempt and hatred of the world without a sigh. I cannot be a one horse man. My lot compels me to cope with ponderous things. The burden would be too heavy for me to bear alone. But I can do it easily with God and my family on my side!

Temperance

Joseph F. counseled Willard to avoid extremes in all forms, particularly in fasting, a principle frequently abused by over-zealous missionaries, and over-indulgence in mail from home.

August 12, 1905

Be careful not to overload your stomach after fasting, and try to avoid as far as possible, long continued fasting, as I believe it to be hurtful to the system. To fast one day once a month is all the Lord requires, and the extreme that some elders go to in fasting for one, two or three days together, is in my judgment not only hurtful, but entirely unnecessary. Do not permit yourself to be drawn into any manner of extreme. Temperate living, temperate habits, temperate exertion, temperance in all things, is virtually a command of God.

You say that your two weeks' mail consisted of 17 letters. I think this is rather an extreme for a young missionary. While the receipt of letters from home and friends may serve to pass a few hours pleasantly, I scarcely think so many of them in so short a time would be conducive to your speedy acquisition of the language. One of the principle admonitions given to me, when a boy, from my temporal guardian, President George A. Smith, was this: "Joseph, always make short speeches, short prayers and write short letters," to all of which I have not, I am sorry to say, strictly adhered.

Proselyting Methods

In Norway, it was common for missionaries to pass out tracts without disclosing their identity. Not willing to compromise his honesty, Willard asked his father if such methods were consistent with the gospel. Appreciative of his son's integrity and at the same time aware of the need to reach those whose first impulse would be to reject "Mormons," Joseph F. offered this advice:

August 12, 1905

I can see no harm whatever in offering to sell people books of the Church without announcing anything with respect to your standing, or calling, provided they do not ask the questions. If anyone asks you who you are, tell them you are a missionary, or an Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and if they are satisfied with this information, and are willing to buy your books well and good. If they press you further and demand more explicit explanation, simply go straight forward till you confess the whole truth. Never deny the truth, but it is not necessary that it should be told at all times. [I Corinthians 9:22 and II Corinthians 12:16 are quoted.] It seems that Paul felt justified in his effort to save men, to use innocent guile even, for the accomplishment of that purpose. If you desire to get a cow to eat an onion, feed her potatoes or apples. One by one incidentally slip in an onion, and she may eat it; but if you offer her the onion first, she will perhaps refuse to take it and your apples too. The Lord has said, "Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as doves"; but there is nothing that can compensate for the loss of honesty or integrity to the truth, though as I said before, while you always tell the truth, the whole truth need not always be told.

Dealing with Rejection

As Joseph F. well knew, tracting missionaries are not always greeted warmly at the door. When Willard described one incident of verbal abuse, Joseph F. wrote that such mistreatment "can only be accounted for on the ground that they are brutishly ignorant, or perniciously wicked." However, he advised the missionary to be generous in his feelings toward such persons.

January 11, 1906

I would fain give them the benefit of the doubt, and say they were pitiously ignorant! Never mind, my son, for so they treated our Lord and Master, in whom there was no sin. And He, as I hope you will do also, cried out, in the agony of death on the cross, and in the plenitude of His wonderful mercy, "Father forgive them for they know not what they do!" It is easy for me to forgive those who mistreat me, but it is not so easy to forgive those who would mistreat my boy. I like the manly spirit of your letter and the charity it expresses. But I pray you be wise and careful not to put yourself in the way of harm any more than you cannot help. As much as possible, go two and two as the disciples of old were commanded, to protect each other.

Right Hand or Left?

Alvin F. wrote to ask if there were a rule about pouring the oil with the right hand when administering to the sick. Answering the question, Joseph F. took occasion to warn his son against excessive attention to details that tend to obscure the true meaning of the ordinances.

December 16, 1905

The question you ask about anointing seems very simple to me. I think it is the general practice to pour the oil with the right hand. I suppose because most people are right-handed. But there is no law or rule against anointing . . . with the left. We shake with the right hand. In the endowments the signs and tokens are made and given with the right hand. When we lay but one hand on the sick it should be the right. We take the Sacrament with the right hand. The practice makes the rule. But always remember that it is not the rule, or practice, which gives life or force, but the true spirit. There is no good in splitting hairs nor in tickey-technical rules. "The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life."

Short Sermons and Sight-Seeing

Joseph F. counseled brevity in sermons and letters, and, while he recognized the value of sight-seeing, he advised his children to put duty first, as in this letter to George C.

February 17, 1906

You say, "In our meeting last night I spoke to the people for an hour and a half. I took for my text, Ephesians 4th., 5th verse and showed that Abraham's, Isaac's and Jacob's God was Paul's God, Christ's Father, and our God, and the only true One, and showed His character, etc." Of course, relying upon the Scriptures, all this seems to be very plain; but don't you think, George, an hour and a half is going it a little too strong? No matter how often, but be sure never permit yourself to become tedious. I am decidedly pleased with the spirit of your letters, and hope that you may always maintain the same. I am very glad that you concluded not to accompany President Matson on his journey to Rotterdam. I think it is better for you all to remain carefully in your fields of labor, attending to your legitimate duties as you may be called upon until your missions are fulfilled, and when you obtain your honorable release to return home, by the help of the Lord I will assist you what I can to visit some of the most prominent cities and places of interest convenient on your journey homeward. But I would dislike very much to have the idea go out that my boys were sight-seeing while on their missions instead of attending to their regular duty. I say always attend to our duties first and take all the pleasure we can in the performance of them, and then trust to Providence for the pleasures to come after.

Politics

Joseph F. Smith was a well-known and sometimes outspoken Republican. Elder Charles W. Penrose, president of the European Mission in Liverpool during H. Chase's mission was equally well known and outspoken as a Democrat. Thus, when the Republicans won the election of 1906, Joseph F. counseled Chase to be sensitive of his mission president's feelings, noting that partisan politics should not become so entrenched as to divide brethren in the gospel. Indicative of his own behavior in such matters, Joseph F. later selected Elder Penrose to be one of his counselors in the First Presidency.

December 14, 1906

Do not forget that Brother Penrose is a very sensitive Democrat, and his political corns are awful sensitive and tender. I would hate to feel like some of my Democratic brethren feel. I try to keep my politics near the surface. It is bad for them to "strike in."

The Constructive Approach

During the Christmas season, Alvin F. wrote home criticizing various holiday traditions in the different churches. They impressed him as contrary to the true spirit of Christmas. Though Joseph F. also found the celebrations inappropriate, he counseled Alvin to remember that his mission was not to criticize but to convert.

January 15, 1907

It will not do for us, in our capacity of missionaries to so attack sectarianism. We should portray the beautiful gospel building, restored anew to mankind, and invite them kindly to enter it, and leave them to discover by comparison the rapidly crumbling, tottering structure they now inhabit. Honey will capture more flies than vinegar, and will hold them faster when captured. Our mission is to save, not destroy; to build up, not pull down; to win by love, not coerce by fear or threats.

Selling Books

Not all proselyting success can be measured in baptisms, for contacts made and discussions held often prove productive later when the interest has had an opportunity to mature. Literature distributed may eventually reach someone who will be challenged and prepared to receive the missionaries. Such "planting" efforts are important for those who follow later to "harvest." But, as Joseph F. pointed out to George C., a missionary must never lose sight of his primary calling—to reach people, not merely distribute literature.

January 16, 1907

I am glad to note the renewed and increased diligence of the elders in your conference, as reported in your letter. It is doubtless a good thing to distribute tracts, to sell books, to hold meetings, and conversations, &c. &c. This would indicate more or less activity and energy on the part of the elders, but in all such reports we learn very little about the results of sowing the seed. . . . While I was in England and Holland, the only thing I heard . . . was the marvelous figures showing the number of tracts &c. &c. sold, loaned and given away. All of which was good in its place, and I am not disparaging it in the least, but it seems to me the paramount object is to reach the hearts, sympathies, and friendship of the people, rather than the quantity of literature scattered; and the mere distribution of tracts &c. is not sufficient to gain the confidence and secure the affections of good people and remove prejudice and ignorance from the foolish.

Early to Bed

Nearing the end of his mission, George C. became intently involved in his work. Long hours were also demanded of President Smith, who nevertheless recognized the need for sufficient sleep and encouraged his son to be mindful of sensible, healthful routines.

February 17, 1907

You were writing your letter of January 8 after 12 midnight, and you had not "been to bed before 12 midnight for almost a month." I think I might almost say the same of myself. But whether it is I or you, it is all wrong! I know that in this respect I am guilty of transgressing the laws of life and health, and yet it seems as tho' I was impelled by necessity to do it. All day I give my time and effort to public duty, and what I have to do for myself and my five families I must do after working hours. Besides these duties necessary to myself and family, I do all the writing, reading, reviewing of matter for the [Deseret News] press, which I have to do by electric light, generally after everybody except myself (not even excepting the office guard), are wrapped in the arms of Morpheus. Still it is wrong, especially is it not wise when necessity compels one to get up early in the morning after working past midnight. It is wrong even though one sleeps in the morning to make up for lost rest, for it is turning day into night and night into day. In a manner it is consuming artificial light at much cost to the pocket and wasting free natural light, also at more or less cost to health. . . .

The Lord said, "Retire to bed early," and this is wise advice, but we do not heed it. Now let me say, Let us go to bed early, that we may rise early and be refreshed. So far as we can. It is God's plan. He tells us to do it, and we should obey.

Promises and Sacrifice

Realizing he had been somewhat negligent in writing home, Willard R. expressed his regrets and promised to communicate more frequently. Joseph F. noted it is not necessary to make promises. Quietly reforming, without the danger of making promises that cannot be kept, will suffice.

Willard also expressed gratitude for the sacrifices his family had made to support him on his mission. Joseph F. responded, putting in perspective the monetary expenses and the eternal returns.

February 17, 1907

Do not make any more promises than you will surely fulfill. You say you will write oftener &c. Never mind the promise—do not make any and then you will not break any! Two or three promises, if not carefully kept, will go farther towards ruining one's character than months of reticence. If you will only keep well and do your duty, I will ask no pledges.

You speak, my precious boy, of the "sacrifice" I am making in providing for my boys and for my family &c. &c. Do you know what "sacrifice" means? Let me tell you. If after all I am doing or can do for the welfare and happiness of my loved ones, they should turn their backs upon me, should deny the Faith, go to the bad, or bring disgrace or sorrow upon themselves or me or my family, then indeed would my labor of love become a sacrifice. But if my children will continue to love me, be true to themselves and therefore to me and to our God, O! then there is no sacrifice tho' it cost my all of worldly things and my life to boot. It will be all gain, all profit, all reward! I am living for my own salvation now and hereafter. Next to my own comes that of my children and their beloved and precious mothers. Nothing that I can do in the world that will secure this glorious end can be called a sacrifice. It is a labor of love, an aim for life eternal and the fulness of joy. "He that hath eternal life is rich." Eternal life is the greatest gift of God.

Always do your best, my son. Hearken to the voice of the good spirit. Keep yourself unspotted from the world. Shun secret vices, as you would shun the deadliest poison; and neither you nor I can make any sacrifice, though our effort to win the great prize, "eternal life," should cost us all we have of this world. My darling boy, I mean what I say and I am not over-drawing the facts. God my Father, bless you always and keep you pure and free. Mamma and all at home are well.
