Joseph F. Smith, Hyrum M. Smith, Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons ( 1981)

E. Wesley, Franklin R., C. Coulson, Calvin, Andrew K., and Hyrum M.

(1907-16)

For eighteen of the last twenty-three years of his life, Joseph F. supported sons in the mission field. On February 21, 1907, the day after the Senate voted to seat Reed Smoot, Julina's son Elias Wesley left for his mission to Hawaii. Wesley had been born in 1886 at Laie, Oahu while Joseph F. and Julina were on the "underground." His appointment to some of Joseph F.'s former mission areas brought much satisfaction to his father, who enjoyed reminiscing about his Hawaiian days. After more than three years on the islands, Wesley was taken ill with typhoid and returned to Utah. A few years later, he was again called to Hawaii, this time as mission president.

While Wesley was serving his first mission to Hawaii, Franklin Richards, son of Sarah, was called to Great Britain. He served from October 1908 to February 1911 in Birkenhead, Preston, and Leyland.

On April 16, 1909, Charles Coulson (son of Alice) married Manon Lyman. Four days later they were on their way to Hawaii as missionaries. Manon served in the local MIA and assisted her missionary husband, later giving birth to their first child in the islands. They returned in 1911, just as another barrage of anti-Mormon articles began appearing in the nation's press.

A few months later, Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr., was sustained as a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles at the April conference, 1910. Calvin (son of Mary) accepted a call to the Swiss-German mission. Arriving in September 1910, he served in Freiberg, Werdau, Chemnitz, and Hamburg, Germany; and Zurich, Switzerland before returning in February 1913.

Shortly after Coulson and Manon returned from Hawaii, Andrew Kimball (son of Alice) was sent to Calvin's mission. Andrew served in Saxony, Zurich, Leipzig, and Konigsberg from October 1911 to February 1914.

Finally, Hyrum M. was called to preside over the European mission in 1913. When World War I broke out, acting on his father's instructions, Hyrum evacuated the missionaries from all belligerent nations to neutral countries. He remained at his post until released in 1916.

In March 1915, Joseph F.'s wife Sarah passed away Partly to assuage his grief, he took a trip to Hawaii, where in May he felt inspired to dedicate a temple site at Laie.

Sailing Experiences

Soon after he arrived in Hawaii, Wesley sent home photographs of himself and his companions on board the sailing ship that took them to their mission. The pictures reminded Joseph F. of tricks he had seen sailing crews play on unsuspecting passengers.

May 12, 1907

I suppose it is you away up in the rigging. On the Atlantic Ocean, if a "land lubber" goes up the rigging like that, the sailors follow him with cords and lash him to the rigging until he agrees to "treat" them, i.e., the whole crew. You had better look out what you do and where you go on shipboard. It is a rule among sailors, when a "green" passenger goes out onto the "forecastle," or bow of the ship, to draw a chalk line or mark behind him which he must not cross, until he shells out for the crew, i.e., until he "treats." There is nothing that pleases a sailor so much as to catch a minister on forbidden boards in the ship, so that they can make him "shell out" or back down. In the latter case they regard him as a "sky-pilot" of small caliber. Don't you let them play any tricks on you.

Death of a Daughter and Infant

On December 23, 1907, Joseph F.'s daughter Leonora Nelson passed away at the age of thirty-six, having given birth a few days previous to a stillborn daughter. She left a husband and five children and was the fifth child of Joseph F. and Mary Taylor Schwartz Smith to die at an early age. Joseph F. was nearly overcome with grief. Only the assurance of her righteous life on earth and well-deserved reward in the next life could comfort him. This tribute, written to Wesley, expresses both the grief at the loss of one so loved and the joy in the life of one so worthy that Joseph F. felt at the passing of his beloved Leonora.

December 27, 1907

Before this reaches you, through Ina's letter, you will have learned the sad and mournful tidings of our darling Leonora's death. It has been to me one of the severest blows I ever felt. It was so sudden and so unexpected that the first knowledge I received of it stunned me beyond measure.

On Tuesday the 17th inst. she gave birth to a pretty little girl, but it was lifeless when it was born. This was a sad, sad loss to her, and filled us all with sorrow. We buried the little baby on the 18th and we thought dear Nonie was getting along favorably. So sure were we that she was doing nicely, that I did not go to see her after the baby was buried, but contented ourselves with occasional enquiries over the telephone.

On Saturday the 21st I went to Cache Valley to attend the Hyrum Stake conference. Spent Sunday 22nd at Wellsville in conference in the large new meeting house. Monday, 23rd, the Prophet's birthday anniversary, I started home on the Cache Valley train, reaching the City a little after noon. I was met at the station by a friend with the death-laden message that our darling Nonie had left us that morning for a better world. This terrible news almost stifled me. I felt dazed with astonishment and grief. I could not speak to anyone nor get relief from the crushing weight in my heart, until I reached the house, where on seeing Mamma and the children the fountain of my tears broke loose; for once I felt grateful for tears. And still it did not seem possible that our Nonie was gone. I drove at once to her home, and there indeed I found it was all too true! The scene I witnessed was heart-rending. We were all overwhelmed with grief. The little boys were crying and calling for their darling Mamma, and I cried for her too, but for the first time in her precious, lovely life she did not heed our cries nor answer to our calls.

Oh! my precious boy, there never has been and will never be to us but one Nonie! She was a Saint indeed. Her soul was all and only good. No murmurs, no complaints ever passed her lips. Her heart was full of kindness and her soul overflowed with love. If she ever spoke an unkind word of any living being, I never heard of it. She was patient in sickness, and in no case ever found fault. She was one of the best daughters that ever lived. She could not have been better. She was affectionate to her parents and loved them with all her heart. She loved her brothers and sisters, her aunts and her husband and her children. She was bright and intelligent, a good scholar and reader. The best of neighbors and the truest of friends. I never felt anything but the sweetest joy, happiness and satisfaction in her whole precious life. Everybody who knew her loved her, not only so, but admired and honored her.

I feel that she was perfect, as mortal being can be, as daughter, wife, mother and woman!

She loved the Lord and her religion and was true to them to her last breath. She was a pure-minded, white-souled angelic spirit, one out of a thousand. But few people really knew her!

Now, my son, I have shed tears for her loss to me, for her precious, sorrowing, heart-broken mother and sisters, and for her darling little motherless babes, until the fountain of my tears has well nigh dried up. And yet I know that all things are well with her. We do not mourn for her. We only have joy in her. We are all the better for her life's example, and the world is indebted to her for the glorious, shining path she graced by her presence in it. She has left here five lovely children, four boys and a girl. All perfect in mind and limb and joint, and beautiful.

No! we do not weep nor mourn for her. It is for our bereavement, our loss of her for time, that we grieve. We do not mourn as those without hope. We know we shall meet her again, where pain and sickness, death and sorrow will not come again, and where life and love and joy will ever reign. I cannot but feel that my own angel mother, and her own loved mother's mother were nearby with open arms and heavenly love to meet, receive and welcome her to their blessed abode, the paradise of God and the just, "a place of happiness, of rest, of peace, where they rest from all troubles and from all care. (See B. of M., Alma 40, also Alma 11:40-45.) God bless you my boy and comfort you. Be brave and true. Be faithful in your mission. Keep yourself pure and unspotted from the world. God lives. He does all things well. He knows best. He loved Nonie, for she was pure and good. All send love to you.

Redundancy

As Joseph F. had encouraged Wesley's older brothers to brevity and clarity in their letters, he counseled Wesley to avoid redundancy in an effort to improve the quality of his expression.

April 10, 1908

Let me remind you that "loving and affectionate" are two words with almost the same meaning. Beware of tautology. Loving and true, or loving and faithful, or faithful and affectionate, or true and affectionate, are all right. You do not want to say "your loving and loving son," or "your affectionate and affectionate son," which "loving and affectionate" mean.

Leadership Responsibilities

In April, Wesley was called to preside over the Hilo conference, a position his father had held more than fifty years before. Joseph F. reflected on his Hawaiian experience and offered advice on the responsibilities of leader-ship.

April 10, 1908

Your letter from Laie, April 7 was duly received April 18th. I am glad you were honored with a re-appointment to Hilo, and to preside. The responsibility is a little greater, but it is a responsibility that develops experience and character. "The Lord and any one good man is a big majority." Keep close to the Lord in your conduct, and always be humble and unpretentious, and the Lord will bless you. I was placed to preside over the whole Island of Maui when I was much younger than you are now. I only did my best, leaving the rest with the Lord.

Later I was appointed to preside over Northern Hawaii, including Hamakua and Hilo and Kohala. I simply tried to do my best, and truly the Lord helped and blessed me. Several of those who were appointed to labor with me were much older than I was. Among them William W. Cluff, George Spiers, John Brown, and only the Lord made me equal to my tasks. It is true I readily learned the language, and not one got ahead of me in that. Keep your eyes open and be sure you are in good fellowship with the Lord. . . .

One thing I wish to impress upon your mind—i.e., (id est, or that is), in handling church funds or money not your own, be sure to keep a strict account of it, so that you can make an accounting of every cent of it, in a legitimate way. Be very careful not to use any money entrusted to your care for any purpose whatever, except for its legitimate purpose.

Perseverance

Times of discouragement came to Wesley, as they do to every missionary. Joseph F. understood that frustration and disappointment were part of the mission experience and encouraged his son to persevere, adding a few miscellaneous admonitions to better prepare him for the challenges of missionary work.

October 18, 1908

True, as you say, "If it were not the Lord's work, that we are engaged in" and if we were not mighty sure of it, we would all "feel like quitting." But the Lord does not love "quitters." Quitters never win; the battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the swift, but to him that endureth to the end. We are in it for life, and as life never ends we're in it for a long time; and the best of it is, we only begin in this life, and we don't propose to end it at all while life or thought or being lasts, or immortality endures. So make your mind up for a long and a strong fight, and a glorious triumph bye and bye. . . .

I am glad you like the natives and entreat them kindly. Love begets love, and kindness, kindness. One can scarcely expect to reap what he does not sow. Win the confidence of all men by uprightness, in walk and conversation. Always speak the truth and stand by it; never prevaricate, or dodge a responsibility and you will be known in your true light as a soul of honor.

A Sacred Calling

Shortly after Franklin R. left on his mission to England, his father wrote him a thoughtful letter drawing Franklin's attention to the sacred calling he had received, the high standards he was expected to maintain, and the impact his life had on his family.

October 18, 1908

I want you to bear in mind that the mission that you are going out upon is a very sacred matter, that it will not admit of any conduct on the part of any missionary that would not be becoming and respectful, and notwithstanding your youth, and inexperience in the world, I expect you to conduct yourself as a gentleman, courageous and respectful to all men, and above reproach. Let no man have it in his power to point at you justly the finger of scorn. Maintain the standard of truth and honor, no matter where you are, nor the character of any companion in which your lot is cast. Do not indulge in any practice that would be undignified or reprehensible. Remember your prayers and never be ashamed of your religion, nor of your people, and uphold the honor of the name you bear; be careful of your means and as I told you before you left home, never engage in any games of chance and do not condescend to vulgar joking or disrespectful language of any kind, nor engage with anybody in playing tricks upon your associates or anybody else. . . .

Remember that your grandfathers, Hyrum Smith and Willard Richards were among the founders under God, of the great latter-day work, and although both of them were not immediately martyred for the truth's sake, the lives of both of them were often in jeopardy for the test which they bore. You bear their names; for their sake and my sake and your own, and for the sake of the happiness of your precious mother and all my family, hold sacred in your keeping their honor. Remember, my son, that I was left an orphan at the age of six years; that I suffered with a widowed mother the hardships and persecutions incident to the martyrdom of the Prophet and your grandfather Hyrum Smith, and of the frontier life of a pioneer to help to establish the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the world. And nothing could grieve me worse than to have one of my boys turn traitor to the cause of Zion, or deny the faith. Pure and upright men, men who are honest and deal justly are never among those who fall away from the truth and turn enemies to the cause of Zion. I want you to be humble and prayerful, for "pride always goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall."

Avoiding Contention

Knowing that Franklin R. would encounter men and women whose hostility to the Restoration might go beyond reason, Joseph F. counseled forbearance and urged his son to avoid contention whenever possible.

November 23, 1908

Those who are most bitter and wicked in their hearts toward the gospel, and toward the Church are, as a rule, the most ignorant and corrupt. Now and then a naturally good person may be blinded with prejudice thro' ignorance and misunderstand, but such will not be vicious or vindictive. Such persons may be reached thro' kindness and perseverance.

Of one thing be sure. There is no use to argue or contend with a truly wicked, corrupt person. It would be time lost. Never contend anyway. Try to set forth reasons and good thoughts and gospel truths, but don't contend. Be careful not to provoke argument or contention either with "saint or sinner." Avoid it. Remember the admonition of the Savior to his disciples, "Let your communications be yea, yea or nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil."

Miscellaneous Admonitions

Try to learn by study and by ear. Be a good listener, and remember every good thing you hear. Keep a diary, and note down good things to refer to afterward, to refresh your mind. Do not write long letters. Write briefly and oftener if necessary. Postage is cheap now between England and here. I want you to be sociable with those who preside over you. Do not shun nor avoid them, nor keep anything hidden from them. Conduct yourself so that you will have no secrets to keep from them. Be open-hearted, frank and honest toward God and man. And above all things do not compromise yourself with any woman or girl. One of the most deadly sins known is the sin against virtue. Keep yourself pure and unspotted from the world.

Traits of an Effective Missionary

December 27, 1908

My Dear Son Franklin:

Your very interesting letter of December 7, reached me on the 23rd inst., and I read it with deep interest and pleasure in the thought that you are shaping yourself for the labors of the mission in very good form. The very best element for successful missionary labor is humility, coupled with persistence and a determination to do one's whole duty. In order to do this one must be careful not to divide his attentions too much with other things. You have started in to win, and victory will depend upon your integrity to the work you have begun. It will be time enough after you have completed your mission and received an honorable discharge to relax your mind by turning your thoughts into other channels. And yet I sincerely hope that you will never dismiss from your mind an earnest desire to help to build up Zion and live and spread the truth restored to earth through Joseph Smith the Prophet throughout all the rest of your days. Please remember, Frankie, that nothing can compare with honesty, pure and simple in thought and deeds in anything that you undertake. And above all things one must be honest and sincere in the performance of his religious duties. On these lines we are dealing with our conscience and with our God, but in every phase of life strict honesty is the "best policy." Do not forget the Lord and He will not forget you, and you will have claim upon Him for the blessings you most need. When you pray ask for what you need, without a multiplicity of words. We are never heard in our prayers for "much speaking." Do not indulge in too much fun-making, in playing jokes, or unfriendly criticism. In fact, observe the golden rule, "Do unto others as you would like to be done by." . . . You are sent out to teach the truth and to live the truth.

Expressions of Contentment

Joseph F. was gratified to receive a letter from Wesley expressing contentment with his calling. He told Wesley how pleased he was with his attitude. He then cautioned Wesley about making too frequent expression of a righteous feeling, lest it create feelings of self-righteousness.

June 17, 1909

Your very welcome letter of May 4th from Waimea, came to hand on May 24th, the first pages of which was written in Hawaiian and I am very pleased to note that you have made very good improvement in the language since your first attempts to write in the Hawaiian language. I am very glad that you are satisfied with your field of labor. You say, "I am perfectly satisfied and contented with my calling, never have I felt better. Home is the least of my troubles, for I have no desire whatever to return before the proper time. I don't want anybody to interfere with my mission, my mind is made up to remain here just as long as the Priesthood wishes to keep me, and I am going to try hard to do my duty all the time. My appointment could not have been better. I would rather be here than in Honolulu by a long margin. But I am willing to go and do everything that the Spirit of the Lord wishes me to do. And I will be happy all the time, for my faith is in him and I know he will call me where I am needed."

I have quoted the above from your letter and I commend it very highly and congratulate you, my son, on possessing the feeling expressed therein, and while I hope you will continue to possess the same feeling and spirit until it shall be said enough, I do not think it will be necessary for you to repeat the language very often, lest someone will think that you are either parading your virtue or merely talking to hide a suspected desire to the effect that your mission could not end too soon to suit you. Of course, I believe just what you say, and I shall take it for granted that inasmuch as you mean it, you will be true to the sentiment without ever blowing a trumpet about it. I hope you will take this in the spirit in which I intend it, for I have confidence in you and it doesn't matter what you say or how you say it, I shall always believe you are honest in your expressions, but others might put a different construction on your real meaning by often repeating it.

Discretion

When Wesley reported unfavorable impressions of his mission president, Joseph F. responded by challenging not his son's observations, but his wisdom in expressing such critical remarks. Even strictly honest reports need not always be broadcast.

June 17, 1909

In your letter to Mamma of a recent date, you spoke considerably of President W____. You should be very careful about writing sentiments relative to the doings or character of any individual and more especially about your presiding officer. The Prophet Joseph Smith laid down the following rule, "Never permit yourself to write down on paper anything that you would not like to have made public." Of course, when you do speak or write, tell the truth, but you know it is said, even the truth should not be said at all times. It is not lying, nor deceitful, nor is it likely to injure anyone to withhold from speaking unpleasant truths. And be careful never to attempt the difficult task of telling all you know.

Living in the Present

As the end of Wesley's mission neared, Joseph F. was concerned that he not lose sight of his calling and begin to anticipate returning home. He reminded Wesley to live in the present and let the future take care of itself.

June 17, 1909

Your welcome letter of June 3rd reached me on the 16th inst. written from Lihue, again you repeat that so far, your new field of labor has been very good and your treatment by the natives has been of the best. You say your friends are many and you believe with the help of the Lord you will be able to do some good while on that island, that the people seem to be pleased to see you and you are as much pleased to see them; so that you feel that your stay there will prove to be a very pleasant one; that the time is fast flying by, this year will soon be gone, and another round placed in your ladder. Now, some folks might think the last sentence hinted very strongly toward the desire that the end might soon come looking for your release to come home. While I sympathize with you and realize that the desire is natural for you, or for anyone else to reach the end of a journey or a mission, it is not well to lay yourself open to the suspicion that you would like to hasten. No matter about the future, we live in the present, our duty is now, we can do nothing tomorrow, but only today. "Let the future take care of the future, life's troubles come never too late." Let your mind dwell on what you have done and not on what you expect to do, or are looking forward to.

Learning to Write

As Franklin's first letters began to arrive from the mission field, his father recognized many of the errors that characterized his first efforts at writing. He sympathized with Franklin's difficulties and, rather than criticize him directly, noted the similarities to his own first attempts. Important too, is Joseph F.'s readiness to acknowledge some dissatisfaction with his own expressive abilities.

August 12, 1909

Your very welcome letter of June 14th reached me on the 27th inst. I always read your letters with a great deal of interest. One thing that adds to the interest of your letters is that they remind me very much of the character of letters I myself used to write in the days of my boyhood. It is true, I did not know very much about the proper use of words, and the proper application of them in trying to express my thoughts. In later years on looking over some of my earliest letters, they reminded me very much of a little bird just getting its feathers and beginning to learn to fly. The poor little bird makes a very poor out at the beginning in its attempts to soar aloft on its half-fledged wings, but it persists in trying until, at length, by means of full-fledged wings and experience in their use, it becomes master of the air. I have no doubt the little bird is much more entitled to credit for having accomplished its power of flight and perfect use of wings than I, for while I, alas, though still persisting in my effort to clothe the pinions of my thought in fitting words, find that I am still lacking in the accomplishment of my purpose, and I have come to the conclusion that the real object of language is to convey one's thoughts in the simplest form of speech, and not to befog or mystify or conceal one's meaning by a multiplication of similar terms or a superabundance of words. It is said of the great Disraeli, world-famed for his eloquence, that he used only the simplest words to convey his thoughts.

I hope that you, my son, AND I, will reach the point at which we may be able to say all that it is necessary for us to say in the simplest, plainest possible words.

A Father's Concern

Illness struck the Smith family several times in 1909. In July, daughter Donette underwent a serious operation; in September, Martha suffered an attack of appendicitis. Concern for his daughters and the strain of his duties gave Joseph F. a cold, and he wrote Hyrum M., "Yesterday I was so tired and shakey I do not know whether I spelt my own name right or wrong. You know I am not always a success as a spellist anyway."

In October, Joseph F.'s youngest child, Royal, was run over by a horse and buggy "and was considerably bruised." Martha's appendix was removed in November. Then came news that Wesley had contracted typhoid fever in Kauai. He was soon transferred to Honolulu, where Coulson and Manon could nurse him back to health.

Thus, supporting three missionaries, helping Willard financially to build a house, and paying doctor bills and a surprisingly high property tax, Joseph F. wrote Franklin, "I am about drained dry!" Nevertheless, as he made clear to Coulson, his main concern was for the health and welfare of his children.

December 13, 1909

I hope you will do all you can for [Wesley], and that he follows the advice of the physician about eating. Good fresh butter-milk, if it could be obtained, would be wholesome for him. Typhoid fever is a disease of the stomach and bowels, and it sometimes, if not always, leaves the intestines in a most tender and delicate condition. There is much danger of eating too much, and of eating indigestible food, after the disease has spent itself and has left its victim. So be careful that he does not eat too heartily of hearty food for some time after the fever leaves him. I wrote Manon on the 8th and sent you my cheque for $15, and I wrote you on the 10th in acknowledgment of yours of November 30, and sent you a dollar to help out a little on Christmas.

My expenses for doctor bills and nurse bills and hospital fees this year have been terrific. And my taxes, which I have just finished paying have reach[ed] to more than $1000, mostly for our homes from which we derive no income but are a constant expense. Then there is my winter's supply of coal for all my homes which is no bagatelle with coal at $5.25 per ton. But these are the least of my troubles in comparison to sickness. I do not want Wesley to return to Kauai until he is perfectly sound again. I shall anxiously await further word from either of you. God bless my boys, and keep them from harm.

Harmony

When Franklin related a minor disagreement with his mission president, Joseph F. took occasion to teach a lesson about the importance of harmony among the missionaries and their leaders.

February 19, 1910

I am sorry you were not a little more discreet in speaking to President Penrose. Boys on missions should cultivate amity with all, and more especially with their file leaders and presidents. I hope you will keep on the good side of President Penrose, and all of your companions. Missionaries should all be as members of one family and each should strive to make it pleasant for all the rest. Strife, or differences, or any degree of the spirit of disunion existing among them just so much weakens their influence and impairs their usefulness and efficiency. Avoid carefully giving offense to any, but always be ready to show kindness and sympathy.

Love and Encouragement

On February 17, 1909, Manon gave birth to a baby girl. Joseph F.'s wife Julina, a professional midwife, was in attendance. The baby brought great joy to Coulson and Manon, joy shared by Joseph F., as expressed in this letter to Manon.

October 5, 1910

I am glad you enjoy so much your dear little baby girl, and I sincerely hope she will continue to enjoy good health and grow and develop into a good girl who will take as much delight and have as much joy in her mother as her mother is experiencing in her. I like the spirit of your letter and hope you will continue to be buoyant in spirit, and hopeful and never yield to discouragement or obstacles that may be in your way. I hope you will succeed in winning over to duty the young people of Hilo, and that you will have pleasure in the accomplishment of that work. Of course, I am a little sorry that you feel so discouraged about learning the language, but I hope you will keep on trying as long as you shall remain there and get as much knowledge of the language as you can.

Power of the Gospel

Give my aloha nui to sister Napoleon and her husband, and to all the good Latter-day Saints at Hilo. And tell them for me that the gospel which they have embraced is the greatest thing that has ever been revealed from God to mankind, as it contains the fulness of the gospel of salvation for the living and for the dead and reaches the necessities of every soul, living or dead, in all ages of the world. It is, indeed, the power of God unto salvation.

Short Letters

Having been in the mission field only a couple of months, Calvin wrote long weekly letters to his mother, brothers, and sister. Joseph F. gently reminded his son that it is better not to write such long letters that take him away from his missionary duties.

November 11, 1910

I have before me four long interesting letters written by you on the following dates: September 22nd, and 30th, and October 7th, and 16th. All of which I was glad to receive and have read with very much pleasure and interest. I have also read your letters to Mamma and Samuel and James and also to Sister Lucy, all written within a very short period of time. While it is very interesting to get long letters from you, it must be considerable of a labor for you to write so many long letters and keep up with your other labors and duties in the field. I hope you will be prudent and not undertake to do too much, nor overdo yourself. It was a rule of your late kinsman, President George A. Smith, to make short prayers, but fervent ones, short sermons and to the point, and short letters well digested. It is often much more of a labor to write a short letter well composed and digested than a very lengthy rambling one. I think you are a very good letter writer, only that your hand writing appears rather small for so large a boy.

The Burdens of a Prophet

In his 73rd year, Joseph F. Smith was the object of a rash of scurrilous articles published in national magazines. Congress passed legislation aimed at curbing Mormon immigration and launched an investigation into the sugar industry, one of the Church's major business concerns. The issue of prohibition was being raised in Utah, and the Church was attacked both for being too involved and for not being involved at all. It was a trying time for the Church's aging President, as indicated in this letter to Calvin.

March 29, 1911

Our General Conference will begin one week from today. I look forward to it with considerable dread. Conference times are periods of great responsibility for me. I am not so young, nor so strong as I used to be, and the weight of increasing responsibilities wears upon me somewhat more than they did when I was more vigorous. But the Lord has given me strength, so far, to carry my portion of the burden, for which I am most grateful. I feel happy in the good reports from you and Andres [attending Brigham Young University]; and have reason to be proud and hopeful of my sons. Your brothers at home are all good men and boys, and are doing their duty so far as I know. Fielding was ordained a deacon last Sunday. . . .

I have written so few letters when the pen of late, I have almost forgotten how. But I have not forgotten how to sign my name. I do that from ten to two hundred and fifty times daily. I intend to send you and Andres $25 [their monthly allowances] each tomorrow. God bless my boy.

Mission Opportunity

Joseph F. was anxious that his sons make the best possible use of the mission opportunities, for the character traits developed and demonstrated during a mission are indicative of what may be expected throughout the rest of their lives. He urged Calvin to take advantage of every opportunity, as the time would pass quickly.

March 30, 1911

Two or three years is a very short time in which to reach all the people that a missionary should deliver the message of salvation to. A missionary only realizes the opportunities he has missed when it is too late. After your mission has been completed and you are preparing to return home, you will reflect upon the time you have spent in the field and wish you had improved your time even better than you did. At least this is the case with most of us.

The man who is devoted to his work and who is trying to make the best of his time will plan his work so that he will have something to do all the time. When he is not out tracting or holding meetings he will be visiting the Saints or improving his mind by studying the scriptures and preparing himself to teach those who are in darkness in such a way that they will not be left in doubt when he explains the gospel to them, and they will know that he understands what he is trying to teach them, even if they cannot grasp the truth themselves.

Too many of our missionaries spend their time idly, sight-seeing or wandering around in the parks, attending theatres or places of amusement. This should not be. It is all right to go to the theatre once in a while, or to go out in the parks, where it is nice and cool, for recreation, but to lounge around idly during the day or sight-seeing and spending the time that should be devoted to missionary work is not right. Neither is it the proper thing for missionaries to sit up late at nights, and then stay in bed in the mornings when they should be planning the work to be done. Many of the Elders sleep away and idle away the best part of their lives when they should be up and hustling.

The elder who is devoted to his work, who is energetic and who puts his trust in the Lord and is dependent upon Him for his support, is the best missionary. The one who has all the money he desires and spends his time in idleness and sight-seeing and putting on airs with fashionable clothes and cane, who attends theatres when he should be visiting Saints or holding meetings or improving his time, will never be as happy and faithful as the boy who has to make the best of his time and means.

Tithing

Joseph F. explained to Andrew the principle of tithing as it relates to missionaries.

July 12, 1912

I pay my tithing on the means I send my boys. They do not need to tithe it again, but can do so if they desire to. One who is on a mission is not as a rule earning money, but souls. However, if he has an income from flocks, herds, farms, or stocks and bonds or rents, he should pay his tithing on any and all of these (and on gifts). An elder is not expected to give one tenth while on a mission, but the whole of his time and talent.

Duties of a Prophet Father

As President Smith grew older, the demands of his office increased. Time spent with his family gave him great joy, though it seemed hard to come by. He shared his perplexity with Andrew.

November 6, 1912

I often feel sorely condemned for not writing oftener to you and Calvin. But it is hard for me to do it, with all the rest I have to do. It is true I go to the theatre occasionally with the Mammas and children, but whenever I do I cannot help thinking the time would be better spent in writing to my boys or doing some other work. . . . But I have so little time to visit with my family, I try to reconcile my visits occasionally with my families with my duty.

Thoughtful Reading

Joseph F. sent a copy of a general conference report and several other booklets to Andrew. He encouraged him to read them carefully, so that the ideas of the Brethren, like memorized scriptures, might be internalized and become part of him, rather than just passing through his mind.

June 29, 1913

I hope . . . these little books will afford you some useful reading for missionary work, and I hope you will find time between the performances of your arduous duties to peruse them; and let me admonish you, my son, that casual and hasty reading is never as profitable as careful, thoughtful reading. Always weigh matters that you read carefully, and grasp or master the subject. That kind of reading is profitable; I realize, however, that it is not always possible to give proper study to the reading of books when one is crowded with continuous and important other duties, but as the reading of these books will be along the line of qualifying you the better for your mission work, if you have time to read them at all, you can afford to read them well. The reading of the scriptures is never so effective and therefore never so profitable as when the salient points of doctrine are committed to memory. A few good passages of scripture learned by heart are worth more than an entire reading of the Bible without an object in mind other than to read.

Death

In October 1915, Zina, Hyrum's sister, the daughter of Joseph F. and Edna Lambson, passed away. Only months before, Sarah Ellen Richards, Presidents Smith's second wife, had died, and the remorse was almost unbearable to President Smith. He wrote Hyrum and poured out his heart and soul in his grief.

November 3, 1915

I cannot yet dwell on the scenes of the recent past. Our hearts have been tried to the core. Not that the end of mortal life has come to two of the dearest souls on earth to me, so much as at the sufferings of our loved ones, which we were utterly powerless to relieve. Oh! How helpless is mortal man in the face of sickness unto death! We prayed and pled with all our souls for restoration and life, but our prayers and pleadings were in vain. Their times had come—that of my darling "Mamma" S. and my lovely baby girl! Oh! Why should it be? I do not blame the Lord, nor charge Him with being responsible, either for their sufferings or their death. I believe frail human strength and nature are more responsible for moral ailments and short lives than is the will, or the pleasure, or the purpose of God. And yet, we acknowledge the hand of God in that which is, or comes, because He suffers it to be. When we better understand the laws of nature, and of life and health, we will better comprehend the mysteries of pain, disease, and death. Even then, it will be hard to part from those around whom our very heart-strings are wrapped in deathless love! And this will, and should be, so, notwithstanding the glorious hope and assurance which the Gospel gives, that those who die in the Lord shall not taste of death. They are not dead, but live, and we shall meet them again and resume the joys of life and exaltation together beyond the grave, above the power or recurrence of death forever more. I thank God for my loved ones, both on this and on the other side of the veil of what men call death. With all my heart I love those yet here, and, if possible, the cords of love for those who have passed beyond grow stronger day by day. God bless you my son, together with your precious little flock.

Calamity

Difficulties in Europe began as Hyrum and his family arrived in England in 1914 for his second mission, this time as president of the European Mission. By 1916, a full-scale war was underway, and as overseer of the European missionaries, Hyrum had to locate and transfer missionaries in dangerous situations into nonviolent areas and to communicate with their loved ones as to their safety. During this period Hyrum was imprisoned in Germany as an English spy because his initials, HMS, indicated he was in the service of the Crown. After clarification, he was released unharmed. He also related in his diary accounts of the zeppelin attacks on England and the damage and loss of property and life. In receiving this information, his father wrote:

February 19, 1916

I trust and pray that you and all of our people may escape from the terrible raids of the zeppelins that are occasionally made on the defenseless cities and towns of Great Britain. It seems to me that the only object of such raids is the wanton and wicked destruction of property and the taking of defenseless lives. No such thing as that was ever known, so far as my understanding goes, in any so-called civilized country before the present time. It appears that the spirit of murder, the shedding of blood, not only of combatants, but of anyone connected with the enemy's country, seems to have taken possession of the people, or at least the ruling powers in Germany. What they expect to intimidate the people by such actions, and it surely does not diminish the forces of the opposition. By such unnecessary and useless raids in the name of warfare, they are losing the respect of all the nations of the earth. Well, my son, we pray that you and all who are under your direction may escape from these calamities. Preach the Gospel, be faithful, teach the Elders and the Saints to put their faith and trust in the Lord, for indeed these are days of trouble and calamity which have been spoken of by the prophets, and it behooves all men to repent and to turn to the Lord before their day of repentance is past and destruction overtakes them.
