Joseph F. Smith, Hyrum M. Smith, Scott G. Kenney, From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons ( 1981)

Epilogue

Throughout his life, Joseph F. Smith prayed for the success and safety of the missionaries. When Joseph Fielding had been in the mission field for one month, Joseph F. wrote the following prayer, expressing his love and concern for his son and all who are called to missionary labors.

July 18, 1899

Our hearts are full of blessing for you and [Joseph] Richards . . . and together with all your companions we hold you up in remembrance before the Lord whenever we pray. O! God, my Father, bless, comfort, sustain and make efficient my sons, and all thy servants in the mission field. When doors are shut in their faces, give them grace, forbearance and forgiving hearts. When coldly spurned by scornful men, warm them by thy precious love; when cruelly treated and persecuted be thou present to shield them by thy power. Make thy servants to know thou art God, and to feel thy presence. Feed them with spiritual life and with perfect love which casteth out all fear and may all their bodily needs be supplied. Help them to store their minds with useful knowledge, and their memories to retain thy truth as a well filled treasure. May they be humble before thee and meek and lowly as thy glorious Son! Put their trust in thee, in thy word, and in thy gracious promises. And may wisdom and judgment, prudence and presence of mind, discretion, and charity, truth and purity, and honor and dignity characterize their ministry and clothe them as with holy garments. O, God, bless abundantly thy servants with every needed gift and grace, and holy thought, and power to become thy sons in very deed!! And thus we pray for you, and I have this assurance: If you will use good judgment, act wisely, and guard yourselves so far as possible from cunning men and deceitful women, and the wicked devices of the world, all will go well with you. And God will deliver you out of every snare and trouble and help you magnify his name and honor his cause and will bring you home in safety.

For eighty years Joseph F. Smith helped build the kingdom of God. From Nauvoo to the Great Salt Lake Valley, he learned from the prophets and counseled with them. He preached the gospel at home and abroad, and supported twelve sons on missions to foreign lands. He sat in counsel with four Presidents of the Church, beginning with Brigham Young, and, as President himself, presided over the Church in difficult times. He suffered the deaths of both parents at an early age, and throughout his life grieved for the loss of his own wives and children. But his faith in God and his testimony of the gospel never wavered.

In January 1918, his firstborn son, Hyrum, died of a ruptured appendix. Joseph F. was grief-stricken for days, to the point of exhaustion. Eight months later, Hyrum's wife Ida passed away, adding to his grief and further weakening him physically. Though he survived the influenza epidemic of 1918, as World War I drew to a close he contracted pneumonia. He died on November 19, 1918, having just marked his eightieth birthday.
