President Gordon B. Hinckley announced the appointment of Steven C. Wheelwright, respected Harvard Business School professor and administrator, as president of Brigham Young University–Hawaii on June 5, 2007.

“I know President Wheelwright will take BYU–Hawaii to new heights,” President Hinckley said from the Conference Center in Salt Lake City, Utah. “Through his expertise and many associations I’m confident he will expand the influence of BYU–Hawaii and bless the lives of all who come to this illustrious school.”

Following the announcement, President Wheelwright greeted BYU–Hawaii students participating by satellite with an enthusiastic “Aloha” and said it was a great honor to receive such an appointment.

“I believe in BYU–Hawaii and its mission because it combines spiritual with secular learning and focuses on the development of character and understanding in these wonderful young people,” President Wheelwright said.

President Hinckley said that since BYU–Hawaii first opened as a college in 1955, it has become the most international university in the country, with a student body of 2,400 from 70 countries.

President Wheelwright has had extensive experience working with students from many different cultures, including the Asia areas. As the former dean of Harvard Business School’s MBA program, he worked with students from all over the world and helped place many in business positions. Elder Henry B. Eyring of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said this network would benefit BYU–Hawaii students as they return to their native countries after graduation.

After graduating from Stanford with an MBA and Ph.D, President Wheelwright spent a year on the faculty of INSEAD, an international business school in Fontainebleau, France, then spent the remainder of his academic career at Harvard and Stanford.

It was at Harvard that he crossed paths nearly 30 years ago with the former dean of Harvard Business School and current president of BYU–Idaho, Kim Clark. President Clark said President Wheelwright has a great optimistic spirit and is a man who loves the Lord and is steadfast and immoveable in his commitment to the Lord.

“He knows heaven and will inspire tremendous trust because of faith,” President Clark said.

Prior to President Wheelwright’s retirement from Harvard in the fall of 2006, he was the Edsel Bryant Ford Professor of Business Administration, a Baker Foundation professor, a senior associate dean, and the director of Harvard Business School Publication Activities. He was also the Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield and Byers Professor of Management at the Stanford University Graduate School of Business.

As a young man, President Wheelwright served the Church as a missionary in Scotland. He also served as president of the England London Mission from 2000 to 2003. He has served as counselor in a stake presidency, high councilor, and bishop. Since leaving Harvard, he and his wife have been service missionaries at BYU–Idaho.

President Wheelwright grew up in Salt Lake City and owned a cattle ranch in Star Valley, Wyoming. He and his wife are the parents of 5 children and have 15 grandchildren.

President Wheelwright succeeds Eric B. Shumway, who is retiring from BYU–Hawaii after having served in several capacities since 1966 and as president since 1994.
