A Relationship with God God’s Attributes as a Window Attributes that Only God Has

God created humanity for relationships: relationships with each other, with Knowing who God is, his character and his nature, can be discovered through nature, and with God. However, human sin separated us from God, turning learning about his attributes. One way to think about God’s attributes is what should have been a loving relationship into one fi lled with hate and by distinguishing between the attributes that belong only to God and the While being one, God is triune. It’s easy to see that these two attributes exist

disobedience (Rom. 5:10). Yet, God has reached down to us to deliver us attributes that we also share with him—we share these attributes with in tension with each other. We know both are correct, but it’s not easy to from sin and death because he wants to have a relationship with us. In God because he made us in his image. The fi rst kind of attributes is called understand how they exist together.

Christ, God has built a bridge that allows us to relate to him.

Deep, meaningful relationships require knowledge of the other person. The incommunicable, while the second kind is called communicable. In God, no • God is more we know God, the more our love can grow and mature. Also, our attribute is more important than the others are. All of them, in conjunction, (Deut. 6:4). God is one in two ways: There is no other being like God.

make God who he is.

And God is the only real God. Because God is one, he is the only being

obedience and service will spring forth from this knowledge and love of God.

worthy of praise.

Then, how do we get to know God? Our relationship with God begins Incommunicable Communicable • God is

and ends with Jesus. We get to know God as we know Jesus. His death and that only God has) (the attributes (the attributes we share with God) Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit are three separate persons, resurrection have given us direct access to God. We now know Jesus and

but they all share the same divine being. This unity of persons is called

God in two ways:

the “Godhead.” God is a person who desires to relate to his creation

(Matt. 28:19; 2 Cor. 13:14; Eph. 4:4–6; Titus 3:4–6): “As soon as Jesus

was baptized, he went up out of the water. At that moment heaven was

opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting

on him. And a voice from heaven said, ‘This is my Son, whom I love; with

him I am well pleased’” (Matt. 3:16–17). We have a model for healthy

personal relationships in the way the persons of the Trinity relate to

“This is what the LORD says: ‘Let not the wise boast of their 6. Creator

each other.

wisdom or the strong boast of their strength or the rich boast 7. Omnipresent

of their riches, but let the one who boasts boast about this: that 8. Immutable

they have the understanding to know me, that I am the LORD,

who exercises kindness, justice and righteousness on earth, for

in these I delight,’ declares the LORD.” —Jeremiah 9:23–24

“Now this is eternal life: that they know you, the only true God,

and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent.” —John 17:3

The attributes of God provide us with a window through which we can

It is good for us to be near unto God. It is eternity to know contemplate who God is. As we contemplate and learn about God’s

him intimately in our daily lives... That’s the mark of believers. character, we begin to grasp the glorious, loving, awe-inspiring, and holy REFLECTION person that is the only one worthy of our allegiance. Jesus modeled these

They know what joy there is in being near unto God, and they characteristics in his life and ministry. By learning what they mean and how

want nothing else. —Abraham Kuyper, Near Unto God they apply to our lives, we can grow in our faith by being imitators of God.

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet Attributes of God ISBN 9781596364844. The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on

1

pamphlet gives 20 key traits of God. Each attribute of God comes with an explanation, application, Bible references, and questions for 2 the internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose

reflection and study. Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Names of God

The bestselling Names of God pamphlet is a wonderful

tool for understanding God’s character and personal

attributes. The 21 names of God found throughout the

Old Testament will build your faith and enrich the time you

spend in his presence. Each name of God holds a special

blessing or promise for those who believe in God.

Pamphlet ............ 9781890947507 ...........$3.99

Also available as PDF, Wall Chart, eBook, Spanish, and

PowerPoint®.

Names of Jesus

Knowing and understanding the names of Jesus will

enrich your time of personal devotion and prayer, and

will help you build faith and trust in the Lord. In this

easy-to-follow pamphlet, each of Jesus’ names and its

meaning is listed, along with the Bible reference and

special insights.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596360594 ...........$3.99

Attributes of God

Also available as PDF, Wall Chart, Spanish, eBook, and

PowerPoint®.

Rose Publishing’s Attributes of God, a full-color, 14-page pamphlet,

explains 20 traits of God in an easy-to-reference chart. This easy–to–

understand pamphlet explains each attribute, and provides probing

Rose Book of Bible Charts, Maps, Time

questions and devotion–based activities to help you apply the insights to

Lines, Vol. 1

your personal walk.

Rose Book of Bible Charts, Maps & Time Lines has

more than 180 pages of full-color reproducible Bible

Experience the relief, joy, and hope that comes from deepening your

charts, maps, and time lines. This book contains

understanding of God’s identity with Rose publishing’s Attributes of God.

thousands of facts to enrich one’s Bible study,

understanding, and teaching of God’s word.

Pamphlet ....................9781596364844 ................$3.99

Also available as a PDF. Quantity discounts available.

Book ................... 9781596360228 ...........$29.99

Also available as a PDF.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
