E Spurious Materials in Circulation Updated August 31, 2015

Publication Caution: A Greater Tomorrow: My Journey Beyond the Veil

Additional Information: [August 31, 2015] In 2014, Spring Creek Book Company published A Greater Tomorrow: My Journey Beyond the Veil by Julie Rowe (see shaded box for Amazon’s description of the book). Although Sister Rowe is an active member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, her book is not endorsed by the Church and should not be recommended to students or used as a resource in teaching them. The experiences she shares are her own personal experiences and do not necessarily reflect Church doctrine or they may distort Church doctrine.

Rumor: Sister Missionary Quote Attributed to President Gordon B. Hinckley

Additional Information: [March 10, 2014] The following is being circulated in some locations as a statement President Gordon B. Hinckley made in relation to young women serving missions:

“Many young women are serving missions. Many are preparing to serve, not because they aren’t married or have nothing else to do, but because they have a desire to serve and therefore are being called to the work. The reason so many are going is because in the next generation, Heavenly Father will be sending his Priesthood Army to the earth. And He wants to send them to mothers who have been properly trained and taught in the gospel. And what better training can a young woman have than that of serving a mission!”

This statement is without foundation and should not be perpetuated. If you have seen it (or anything similar to it), do not quote or pass it along.

Rumor: Missionary Calls to China

Additional Information: [December 10, 2012] Recently several rumors regarding missionary calls to China have been circulating throughout the Church. These rumors are without foundation and should not be perpetuated. If you are made aware of such rumors, please help dispel them. We continue to ask S&I personnel to treat all hearsay as suspect.

Rumor: Increased Persecution to the Church if Mitt Romney Wins Republican Nomination

Additional Information: [April 9, 2012] The following statements are being attributed to Elder David A. Bednar about what he purportedly said would happen if Mitt Romney wins the Republican nomination:

• That persecution to the Church would increase and be more intense than any yet experienced in our

lifetime.

• That sacred elements of the Church would be disparaged.

• That our testimonies would be tested.

These statements are distorted and inaccurate and should not be used, repeated, or passed on to others. Kindly inform those who use them or send them to you that they are spurious.

Rumor: Rome Italy Temple

Additional Information: [December 7, 2009] Recently some inaccurate information began circulating in relation to the proposed temple in Rome Italy. It inaccurately indicated support for the temple by a Catholic Cardinal in Rome as a result of the Proposition 8 efforts of Church members in California last year. While some of the information is accurate, some is not. Although this topic is of general interest to members, inaccurate and speculative information can be harmful to the interests of the Church. Therefore, this information should be discarded and not used or taught in any way if received. Furthermore, we

© 2009 by Intellectual Reserve, Inc. All rights reserved. For Seminaries and Institutes of Religion use only. encourage personnel to inform those who teach or distribute it, as appropriate to the circumstance, that it is misleading and should not be shared.

Note: In relation to the document circulating, the Church’s legal counsel in Europe stated the following:

“Please keep in mind that our efforts to obtain the necessary building permissions within the

Rome City Administration have not come to full fruition and remain at a delicate stage.

Consequently, we need to be cautious and judicious when we discuss what is happening there and

should take care not to spread incorrect information.”

Rumor: Statements on Self Reliance and Food Storage

Additional Information: Several statements are being circulated and used regarding self reliance, preparedness, and impending doom. One such statement purports that President Boyd K. Packer told a group of leaders at a stake priesthood leadership meeting in 2006 that President Gordon B. Hinckley instructed the Brethren to no longer discuss preparedness since members had been counseled about it for over a hundred years. Another purported statement attributed to President Packer in 2006 relates to him telling his family that something serious was coming and that they should have their storage and preparedness items ready and be prepared to leave their homes. Please consider these statements spurious and do not use them.

Rumor: No Foundation to China Rumor

Additional Information: A rumor has been circulating that select members are being called on missions to China. The rumor claims that someone in a relative’s ward, or in a friend’s ward, received a letter extending a mission call but the field of service was left blank.

According to the rumor, the individual was instructed to call a phone number and then was “patched through to President Gordon B. Hinckley,” who then asked if the prospective missionary would be willing to serve a three-year mission to mainland China, the first year consisting only of humanitarian service.

The Church News had been advised that this rumor has no foundation. No such mission calls have been extended (Church News, 23 Dec. 2006, 13).

Rumor: Mormon Tabernacle Choir England Tour Cancellation

Additional Information: It was purported that the tour of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, schedule to be in England at the time of the June 2005 terrorist bombings, was cancelled in December 2004 by President Gordon B. Hinckley and that had President Hinckley not cancelled the tour, the Tabernacle Choir would have been in the King’s Cross train tunnel that was bombed. In reality, 1) the cancellation of the choir trip was made some time after April 2004 general conference, not in December 2004, 2) the itinerary for the tour would have placed the choir in London on 17 July 2005 and not on the 7 July 2005 bombing date, and 3) the choir would not have been at the King’s Cross Station or anywhere near it—they would have been traveling by bus to Scotland (Memo to area directors, 12 August 2005).

Rumor: Utah National Guard Unit in Iraq

Additional Information: There is a spurious e-mail document circulating regarding the involvement of a Utah National Guard unit in the Iraq conflict. One of its titles is “Modern Day Stripling Warriors.” Although some of the events in the document have a thread of accuracy to them, the document in general is false and should not be used in CES classrooms or otherwise distributed by or among CES personnel. A battalion chaplain with this particular Utah National Guard unit has called the document “grossly misleading” (Memo to area directors, 19 November 2004).

Rumor: Generals in the War in Heaven

Additional Information: The following quote attributed to President Boyd K. Packer and other General Authorities continues to be circulated throughout the Church:

“You were once generals in the

war in heaven and one day, when Church Leader Refutes Quote you are again in the spirit world, President Boyd K. Packer, acting president of the Quorum you will be enthralled with those of the Twelve, has released the following concerning a whom you will associate with. statement he is said to have made: You will ask someone in which “We continue to receive reports of the distribution of a time period they lived and you quote attributed to me which begins, ‘The youth of the might hear, ‘I was with Moses Church today were generals in the war in heaven,’ and ends when he parted the Red Sea,’ or with the statement that when they return to heaven ‘all in ‘I helped build the pyramids,’ or attendance will bow in your presence.’ ‘I fought with Captain Moroni.’ “I did not make that statement. I do not believe that As you are standing there in statement.

amazement someone will turn to “The statement, on occasion, has been attributed to others you and ask, ‘which of the of the First Presidency and the Twelve. None of the Brethren prophets’ time did you live in?’ made that statement.”

When you say, ‘Gordon B. President Packer has sent a letter to mission presidents Hinckley’s . . . ,’ a hush will fall requesting their help in clarifying this matter among over every hall and corridor in missionaries and members, and has had posted on some heaven and all in attendance will Internet sites carrying the statement a notice that he did not bow at your presence. You were make this declaration (Church News, 28 April 2001, 5). held back 6000 years because

you were the most talented, the most obedient, the most courageous, and the most righteous. Are you still?”

On 12 February 2001, President Boyd K. Packer sent a letter to mission presidents refuting the quote. In the 28 April 2001 edition of the Church News President Packer again refuted the quote (the shaded box contains the Church News article). Please continue to do all you can to put a stop to this spurious quote. (Memo to area directors, 4 May 2001).
