B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

THIS work has been written for the purpose of instructing the youth of Zion in the first principles of the Gospel.

For the most part our parents have been converted to the Gospel while living in the various States of this country, or in foreign lands, by the preaching of the servants of God sent forth of him to proclaim the ushering in of the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times, and to call mankind to repentance. They carefully and thoroughly examined every principle advanced by them; for notwithstanding the doctrines taught by the Elders were older than the earth, and in various dispensations have been expounded by prophets and apostles whose testimony is recorded in the Bible, yet something in the spirit by which they were proclaimed, and the manner in which they were combined, made them to the world a new Gospel—a new religion.

Not only did our parents hear the public discourses of the servants of God, but in the home circle—to which they invited the teachers of the seemingly new faith—the Gospel, the harmony and beauty of its principles, the consistent blending in it of justice and mercy, its sanctifying influence upon the human character, its spirit and powers were all common topics of their conversation; until they not only intellectually assented to it as a grand system of truth, but also became imbued with its spirit, and felt and enjoyed its powers.

With the youth of Zion it has been different. Being largely removed from the errors of the sectarian world, it has been thought they would accept the Gospel as a matter of course. It may be stated as a general truth, that too much in this respect has been taken for granted; and in too many instances our youth have not been instructed so thoroughly in the things of God as they ought to have been. Many have grown up in lamentable ignorance of even the first principles of the Gospel—which ignorance is often confounded with unbelief, or mistaken for infidelity.

To such the Gospel has only to be presented intelligently, and in its native simplicity, to be accepted. "Whoever examined our religion," said one of the fathers of the early Christian church, "but what he accepted it?" So now: the Gospel has only to be understood to be admired and believed.

It is to place within their reach a brief and simple exposition of the first principles of the Gospel that this work has been prepared, and is now presented to the youth of Zion: and it is the earnest hope of the author that by a patient perusal of these pages those who now believe the Gospel will find their faith strengthened and confirmed; and those who do not believe it will be convinced of its truth.

It is but fair to the writer to say that the work has been written amid the busy scenes of missionary life in a foreign land. Its preparation has been frequently interrupted by travel, and the performance of many other duties requiring the writer's attention. If this work, therefore, in point of excellence shall fall below what was desired by the general superintendency of the Mutual Improvement Associations, at whose instigation it was written, it is hoped these circumstances will in some degree excuse it.

THE AUTHOR.

Liverpool, England, 1888.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

I HAD determined in the second edition of this work to very much alter its general plan and enlarge it; but a number of friends who have used "The Gospel" as a text-book in our Church schools, in improvement associations and theological classes, persuaded me not to materially change or too much enlarge it. Their experience in using the little work as a text-book gives weight to their opinions, and I have so far yielded to their judgment that I have made but few changes, and those merely verbal, in this edition of the book.

I have, however, added as a supplement, a series of articles originally written for The Contributor, on "Man's Relationship to Deity." Those articles were intended in the first place to be supplemental to "The Gospel;" the theme has a close relation to the subject of which this work treats, and I thought it would increase the interest in the whole subject to publish them in this edition.

THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

THE third edition of "The Gospel" in type and size of page is made uniform with the current editions of the author's other works, "Outlines of Ecclesiastical History," "New Witnesses for God," etc. Also in this edition there has been a rearrangement of chapters, a little different grouping of subject matter, which will be more harmonious and, in stricter keeping with related subjects.

Only three changes of importance, however, are made in the nature of the work itself. The first alteration is chiefly in a matter of argument. In former editions much stress was laid upon the agency of man not being involved in Adam's transgression in the Garden of Eden; that is, in the Fall; and hence free redemption was provided from its consequences. Since those editions were published, however, I have thought much upon the pre-existence of man's spirit, and the influence of that pre-existence on his present life, especially has my mind been influenced by this saying of the prophet Joseph Smith:

"At the first organization in heaven we were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed, and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it."

Accepting this doctrine as true, it is questionable if it can be said with the strictest accuracy that man's agency was not involved in the Fall. The matter stands thus: The earth-life of man being necessary to his progress in that eternal existence which undoubtedly is his; and the conditions under which that earth-life must be passed being possible only by means of the Fall, the Fall itself became part of the divine plan, and as essential as any other part connected with God's purposes relating to man's existence in the earth. The whole purpose of God with reference to man's earth-life being made known to men in the spirit world, and the spirits of men accepting the plan marked out for their progress, makes them parties to that plan—to the Fall as well as to the rest of it. The changes necessary to meet this idea are made in this edition.

The second alteration relates to that part of the work treating of the Holy Ghost. In some of the writings of the early Elders of The Church, the fact of the personality of the Holy Ghost was not sufficiently emphasized. In some passages of their writings, indeed, it would almost seem that the Holy Ghost was not regarded as a personage at all; but, mistaking the manifestation of his universal influence for himself, they speak of him as a universally diffused substance, such as electricity or ether. Following these writings too closely both in quotations and in my own composition, on that point, led me into the same error of speech. The Holy Ghost, however, according to the word of God is a personage of spirit, and as such has the limitations of all persons or individuals; but he is possessed of an influence universally diffused and operates as the very power of God. Such changes in phraseology as are needful to meet this idea are made in this edition.

The third change simply consists in adding to the chapter on "Authority," a few pages of remarks on The Church as the depository of the divine authority; and as an institution for carrying out the purposes of God with reference to the promulgations of the truth and the instruction of the Saints. All other changes are merely verbal.

It is thirteen years since this little work was first published, and it has now reached its third edition. That fact alone, when the limited population in which there is a demand for it is taken into account, shows the esteem in which it is held. It is now my intention to make no further alterations in this work should there be demands for future editions of it. No one, I believe, can be more aware than I am of its limitations as an exposition of the first principles of the Gospel, the theme of which is so large that if all things pertaining to it were treated in written thought—everyone—"I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written." But such as it is, a simple, primary treatise on the subject of its title, I leave it to the youth of The Church, for whom it was originally written, with a prayer that it shall live to accomplish yet much more good in teaching the first principles of that religion in which alone I am fully persuaded there is hope of everlasting felicity in this life and in that which is to come.

Salt Lake City, July 1, 1901. THE AUTHOR.

Fourth and Fifth Editions are identical with the third, save for a few letter and verbal corrections.

April 6, 1924. THE AUTHOR.

The eighth edition is the same as the sixth and seventh.

THE PUBLISHER.

THE GOSPEL
