B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

CHAPTER II.

GENERAL SALVATION.

HAVING defined what the Gospel is, it is my purpose now, for convenience, to separate the subject into two grand divisions. These I shall call respectively: General Salvation and Individual Salvation.

By General Salvation, I mean a salvation that is as universal as the race of man; that will extend to the sinner as well as to the saint; to the unbeliever, as well as to him who believes; to the impenitent, as well as to the penitent; in short, a salvation that is secured to every son and daughter of Adam, irrespective of his or her belief or unbelief, obedience or disobedience.

By Individual Salvation, I mean a salvation from certain consequences that result from transgressing one or more of God's holy laws; a salvation secured by complying with certain conditions specified in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and which can only be secured to those who fulfil said conditions.

First then, as to General Salvation: Whatever mystery may hang over man's existence, he is conscious of these two facts; first, that he does exist; and second, judging from all human experience, as well as by the decrees of God, the time will come when he will die. No matter how strong the body, how perfect the health, or how buoyant the spirit, man knows that sooner or later time will sap the vital forces, unbend the body's strength, and in a few years the all-beholding sun shall see him no more in all his course.

The experience of the race proves that man is dust, and to dust he must return. It is true that a few, for the time being, have escaped this fate, through being translated by the special providence of God; as in the case of Enoch and many of his people; [^1] the prophet Elijah; [^2] the three Nephite apostles, [^3] and also John, the Apostle. [^4] But even those who have attained this peculiar privilege, will doubtless yet have to go through the mysterious change we call death, in order that the decree of God may be fulfilled. This at least apparent calamity of death, then, falls upon all mankind. Adam transgressed the commandments given to him by his God; and through that act, became mortal, sowed the seeds of death, and his progeny inherited as a legacy that mortality; and so death passed upon all mankind. The Fall brought to pass through the transgression of Adam made necessary some means of redemption if man was not to remain eternally under the effect of a broken law—remain eternally lost.

Such redemption was wrought out through the Atonement of Jesus Christ; and in proof that that redemption from the consequences of Adam's transgression is universal, extending alike to the righteous and unrighteous, I cite the following scripture:

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. [^5]

From this it appears that not only the righteous—those who are worthy of everlasting life—are to come forth from their graves, but also the wicked—those worthy only of shame and everlasting contempt. To this agrees the testimony of Jesus:

For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son, to have life in himself. * * * Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth; they that have done good unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation. [^6]

Or, as the last two clauses were given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, by inspiration:

They who have done good in the resurrection of the just, and they who have done evil in the resurrection of the unjust. [^7]

This, too, is in harmony with Paul's teaching, pronounced on the occasion of his defense before Felix:

After the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the law and in the prophets; and have hope towards God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. [^8]

If it were necessary to add anything more to this array of testimony, it would be found in the words of John the Revelator. In the twentieth chapter of Revelation is given an account, first of the resurrection of the just, and their reign of peace upon the earth for a thousand years; and then follows a description of the general resurrection, in which the writer says:

And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God. * * * And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man according to his works. [^9]

It is certain, then, that the resurrection of the dead is universal, extending alike to all classes and races of men, and thus there is a general salvation from the consequences of Adam's fall.

For as by the offense of one [Adam] judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one [Christ] the free gift came upon all men to the justification of life. [^10]

And again,

Since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. [^11]

The reader will observe that the redemption is as universal as the Fall. If it were possible, still more explicit is the testimony of the Book of Mormon on this subject of man's redemption, as will be seen from the following passages:

And he [Christ] shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else; therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be to the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

Now there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death: the spirit and the body shall be re-united again in its perfect form; both limb and joint will be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt. Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but all things shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil. [^12]

Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you, that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me; and my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me; that as I have been lifted up by men, even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil. And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father, I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works. [^13]

Behold, he [God] created Adam, and by Adam, came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man, came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ, came the redemption of man. And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God. when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death. [^14]

Still, some of skeptical inclination, will refuse to admit that justice has its perfection development in this scheme of redemption through Christ's Atonement. They will insist that the sin of Adam should not be visited upon his posterity even for a moment. Why should man die? How is it that through the sacrifice of one who is innocent, salvation may be purchased for those under the dominion of death?

In answer to these questions I may say that however difficult it may be to comprehend fully all things connected with man's Fall, and God's plan for his redemption, we may be assured that the Fall was not a blunder, nor was it an accident. The Prophet Lehi when giving his last testimony and instructions to his son Jacob, said:

Behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things. Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. [^15]

All that has befallen man, we may rest assured, is essential to his eternal and perfect happiness. From our limited experience, we know that men learn to appreciate the joys of prosperity by drinking of the cup of adversity; they learn to prize the boon of health, by languishing upon the bed of affliction; they learn the value of wealth, by experiencing want and poverty; the sweets of life are rendered still more sweet by the draughts of bitterness men are compelled to drink; and the ever intermittent gleams of sunshine are made more bright by the renewing storms which darken the sky; and thus—

'Tis sorrow builds the shining ladder up, Whose golden rounds are our calamities.

As it is with these things I have mentioned, so it is in respect of the greatest blessing Deity can bestow upon man—the gift of eternal life. How great that gift, it is difficult for us to understand. It is not to live merely three score years, nor a thousand years, nor ten thousand years, but ETERNALLY; and while

The stars shall fade away, the sun himself Grow dim with age, and nature sink in years; Man shall flourish in immortal youth, Unhurt amid the war of elements, The wreck of matter and the crash of worlds.

But in order that his children might know how to prize the greatest of all his gifts, Deity has ordained that they should pass through the dark valley of death; and in the meantime, by passing through this probation we call life, they might have the opportunity of demonstrating before the heavens their integrity to principles of righteousness and truth; and by coming in contact with evil, they might forever prize that which is pure and good; that vice might ever be hideous to them, and virtue lovely—and thus the eternal happiness of man be made secure. Thus with death, as with many other things, that which at times is considered our greatest calamity, turns out to be our greatest good.

As to the second question—How is it that through the sacrifice of one who is innocent salvation may be purchased for those under the dominion of death,—I will observe, in passing that what should most concern us is, not so much how it is that such is the case, but is it a fact? Is it true that God has established such a scheme of redemption? is what should concern us most.

To that question the blood sprinkled upon a thousand Jewish altars, and the smoke that darkened the heavens for ages from burnt offerings, answer yes. For those sacrifices, and that sprinkled blood were but typical of the great sacrifice to be made by the Messiah.

Even the mythology of the heathen nations retains the idea of an atonement that either has been, or is to be made for mankind. Fantastic, distorted, confused; buried under the rubbish of savage superstition it may be, but it nevertheless exists. So easily traced, so distinct is this feature of heathen mythology, that some writers have endeavored to prove that the Gospel plan of redemption was derived from heathen mythology. [^16] Whereas the fact that the Gospel was understood and extensively preached in the earliest ages; [^17] men retained in their tradition a knowledge of those principles or parts of them, and however much they may have been distorted, traces of them may still be found in nearly all the mythologies of the world.

The prophets of the Jewish scriptures answer the foregoing question in the affirmative. The writers of the New Testament make Christ's Atonement the principal theme of their discourses and epistles. The Book of Mormon, speaking as the voice of an entire continent of people, whose prophets and righteous men sought and found God, testifies to the same great fact. The revelations of God as given through the Prophet Joseph Smith are replete with passages confirming this doctrine, and lastly, the Saints who have received this doctrine and walked in obedience to the laws of heaven, bear testimony that the Spirit of God has borne record to their spirits that the Atonement of Christ is a grand reality.

The evidence here indicated is more than sufficient, it seems to me, to establish the fact of the Atonement beyond the possibility of a doubt; and if there are some things in it not yet within the scope of our comprehension, still there is sufficient foundation for our glorious hope of eternal life through its power; for the evidence proving the fact of that Atonement is sufficient, wanting nothing, either in quality or quantity.

Nor is the Atonement the only fact which man accepts without being able to comprehend it. Such facts exist all about us. For example, here stands a row of trees, here is the plum tree, the peach, pear, apple, cherry, and apricot. They send their roots down into the same soil; their fibres become interlaced in it; they send up their branches into the same atmosphere and their leaves are kissed by the same sunlight; and yet each tree has the mysterious power to draw from the same soil and atmosphere the substances which produce its own peculiar fruit. So it is throughout the vegetable kingdom. But how it is that the peach tree produces the peach, while the plum tree, from the same soil and atmosphere produces the plum; or how one plant produces wheat, while another at its side produces barley, we cannot tell. But there is the fact; and how stupid would he be considered who rejected the fact, because, forsooth, he cannot understand the mysterious powers or forces which produce it!

As Bishop Watson remarks to Sir Edward Gibbon, in the letters which comprise his Apology for Christianity:

In physics you cannot comprehend the primary cause of anything; not of the light by which you see; nor of the elasticity of the air by which you hear; nor of the fire by which you are warmed. In physiology you cannot tell what first gave motion to the heart nor what continues it nor why its motion is less voluntary than the lungs; nor why you are able to move your arms to the right or left by a simple volition; * * * nor comprehend the principle by which your body was at first formed, nor by which it is sustained, nor by which it will be reduced to earth.

The list might be indefinitely extended, for the facts in nature which are incomprehensible are more numerous than those of revelation. And yet those who insist that all the facts connected with revelation should be of such a character that they are perfectly comprehended, refuse not to accept the facts in nature because they are incomprehensible. Why cannot they treat with equal fairness the fact of revelation, and leave it to time and further revelation to make that clear which is now obscure? Even as they are content to leave many incomprehensible facts of nature for further research and the development of knowledge?

Unbelievers delight to represent God, the great Law Giver as unspeakably cruel in permitting such a Fall of man and demanding such an Atonement as Christ made for the salvation of men from the effects of that Fall. I have already indicated [^18] that the purpose of man's existence in the earth was to obtain a body and acquire that experience in this probation which will enable him to appreciate God's greatest gift to man, viz., the gift of eternal life; and to learn by actual contact with evil in this life, and by becoming acquainted with its effects—to flee from it and to love that which is good and pure and virtuous. These lessons involved the necessity of death, the existence of evil and sin. Otherwise man could not acquire the lessons it was intended he should learn in this probation; and without those lessons he could not attain to that exaltation and eternal weight of glory that God has designed for his offspring—man. And though the experience of man in this life's probation may be and often is severe, still it is but as a moment of time as compared with eternity—nay, not so much—not a moment; and the results in eternity will vindicate the wisdom of giving to man his earth life—his probation in earthly mortality.

Then, too, it is far more than probable, that the spirit of man in that existence which he had with God before the earth was formed was a party to this whole plan of the Fall and the subsequent redemption from it. That is in so far at least that he assented to it, and rejoiced at the prospects it held out to him. "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?" was the significant question which God asked of Job of olden fame, "declare, if thou hast understanding. Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? * * * Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stones thereof; when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy." [^19] Beyond question this shouting for joy on the part of the sons of God at the prospect of the creation of an earth, which they were destined to inhabit, was because of the opportunity that would be given them for development and future progress by reason of the probation through which they would pass. "At the first organization in heaven," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "we were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed and the plan of salvation made and we sanctioned it." [^20] Hence I say that man was a party to his earth-life to the extent of assenting to it; and he rejoiced, at the prospects it opened up to him. And therefore God must be acquitted of cruelty, so far as man's probation on the earth is concerned. It was doubtless made clear to the spirits of men by God the Father that it was greatly to their advantage, nay, absolutely necessary to their progress, to pass through this earth-life, this earth-probation, no matter how severe the ordeal, and to this they assented.

It is to be observed that at this point I do not stop to consider in way of argument the fact of the pre-existence of man's spirit. It is here assumed as a settled doctrine; but the matter is considered at some length in that part of this work which deals with "Man's Relationship to Deity." It might be mentioned in passing, however, that the "sons of God" referred to in the passage quoted from Job, are understood to be the pre-existent spirits of men; that Job was among them and one of them. "We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence"—says the writer to the Hebrews—"shall we not much rather be subject to the Father of spirits, and live?" [^21]—is all I deem necessary to say here with reference to pre-existence.

Let it be remembered, then, that man's earth-life is not an accident, but on the contrary was fore-known and is designed of God for man's progress in that eternal existence which beyond all question is to be his. This earth-life involving a probation under conditions which could only be brought about by the Fall, the Fall itself became a part of the divine plan of man's earth-existence, and as necessary as any other fact connected with the purposes of God. The Fall made necessary the redemption, and the redemption a Redeemer—a Savior, if man was to be redeemed from those conditions from which, it appears, from the scriptures, he was not able to save himself.

As a further vindication of God from the charge of cruelty put upon him by infidel writers in connection with this matter of man's earth-life, the Fall and the Atonement made by Jesus Christ, it should be borne in mind that he who made the Atonement did so voluntarily. Testifying to his disciples respecting the matter he says:

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down and I have power to take it up again. This commandment have I received of my Father. [^22]

When his enemies gathered about him,—a former friend betraying him with a kiss,—and Peter prepared to defend him with the sword, he chided the apostle for his rashness, commanding him to put up his sword, and added:

Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? [^23]

Thus down to the very last moment, it appears that Jesus could have been delivered from the sacrifice had he so willed it. But the principle which was the guiding-star of his life—"Father,not my will, but thy will be done"—influenced him in this instance, and he drank of the cup given him of his Father, and wrung out the dregs in agony; but he did it voluntarily, and that, too, out of his great love for mankind.

Among men we sometimes see this willingness to suffer for others. Men there are who would lay down their lives for their friends. In the times when imprisonment for debt was customary in England, we often meet instances where out of pure love and kindness toward his fellows a man under no obligation whatever to do so, has paid the debts of the unfortunate, satisfied the demands of the law, and set captive free. It is related of Lord Byron that when he was a lad attending school, a companion of his fell under the displeasure of an overbearing bully, who unmercifully beat him. Byron happened to be present, but knowing the uselessness of undertaking a fight with the bully, he stepped up to him and asked him how much longer he intended to beat his friend.

"What's that to you?" gruffly demanded the bully.

"Because," replied young Byron, the tears standing in his eyes, "I will take the rest of the beating if you will let him go."

That partakes to some extent, at least enough so for illustration, of the spirit by which the Son of God was actuated when he offered himself a ransom for mankind, to redeem them from the power and dominion of death, from which they were powerless to free themselves.

There was something more, however, in the sufferings of the Messiah than merely the ordinary pangs and terrors of personal death. As stated by the late President John Taylor,

The suffering of the Son of God was not simply the suffering of personal death; for in assuming the position that he did in making an atonement for the sins of the world, he bore the weight, the responsibilities and the burden of the sins of all men, which, to us, is incomprehensible. As stated "The Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffereth the pains of all men," and Isaiah says: "Surely he hath laid our griefs and carried our sorrows," also, "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all;" and again, "he hath poured out his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bear the sins of many;" or, as it is written in the second book of Nephi, "For behold, he suffereth the pains of all men yea the pains of every living creature, both men, women and children, who belong to the family of Adam;" whilst in Mosiah it is declared, "He shall suffer temptations and pains of body, hunger, thirst and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and abominations of his people." [^24]

By this Atonement of Messiah's there is especially one fact thrown out into bold relief, that is, the great love of God and Christ for mankind. When you come to think of the unspeakable agony, of the anguish of heart, of the pains that racked the body and distressed the mind of the Savior at the time of his betrayal, and during his trial and crucifixion, you may begin to see how great the love of the Father for mankind must be, when he would consent for his only begotten Son to pass through this great humiliation and affliction, in order to redeem mankind from the bonds of death. On such contemplation increased emphasis will be given to the passage—"In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him." [^25] And also to this—"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved." [^26]

Then what shall we say for the greatness of the love of the Son of God, who of his own free will volunteered to take upon himself the task of man's redemption? Not only of redeeming him from death, but also from the consequences of all sins, that is, on certain conditions, as we shall see further on.

I have often thought that the love of a son for his mother must ever be made stronger, and become more sanctified, through bringing to mind the suffering which brought her to the very gates of death to give him life; her subsequent devotion, anxiety, toil and watchfulness in the years of his childhood and youth, making her a being "enskied and sainted" to him. So it is with Christ. The recollection of the love he bears for us as manifested in the sufferings he endured in our stead, for upon him was laid the iniquity of us all, and by his stripes are we to be healed,—the recollection, I say, of his excruciating agony in Gethsemane, where he sweat great drops of blood; in the council chamber of the Jews; in the streets of Jerusalem, at the hands of the rabble; and finally upon Calvary, in order to satisfy the inexorable claims of justice, must seal and make perfect the bond of love which connects us with him; and bear witness to the world how great, how infinite the love of Christ for us is; and how great the price paid for our ransom. Well may the Apostle say—"Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price." [^27]

In the Atonement made for man, there is a nice balancing of the relative claims of justice and mercy. The law given to man being transgressed, Justice demanded the payment of the penalty, which was death. And as Adam had no power apparently to liberate himself from the captivity thereof, his sleep in the grave must have been eternal; so also with all his posterity, to whom his mortality was bequeathed as an evil legacy, had not Mercy put in her claims and prevented Justice from being cruel. The Son of God having had it given unto him to have life in himself, [^28] and being capable of making an infinite Atonement, he stood forth as the great friend of man and offered himself as a sacrifice to satisfy the claims of Justice. That offering was accepted by the great Law Giver, and upon the demands of Justice being satisfied—the law having no further claim upon man—the captive is set free from the dominion of death.

Mercy is not permitted to rob Justice but she claims her own. Justice is not permitted to be cruel, but he retains his dignity—his demands are satisfied. As the late President Taylor very beautifully and very truthfully said:

Is justice dishonored? No; it is satisfied, the debt is paid. Is righteousness departed from? No; this is a righteous act. All requirements are met. Is judgment violated? No; its demands are fulfilled. Is mercy triumphant? No; she simply claims her own. Justice, judgment, mercy and truth all harmonize as the attributes of Deity. "Justice and truth have met together righteousness and peace have kissed each other." Justice and judgment triumph as well as mercy and peace; all the attributes of Deity harmonize in this great, grand, momentous, just, equitable, merciful and meritorious act. [^29]

Through this Atonement, made by Messiah, a full and complete redemption from the consequences of Adam's transgression is brought about; that is, a victory over the grave is secured; and that too, through the merits of Jesus Christ. And while the law transgressed by Adam has been vindicated, the posterity of Adam, who became subject to death through his disobedience, are redeemed from the grave without anything being required of them. So far salvation is free, universal, and unconditional; extending to every man, woman and child who has ever breathed the breath of life. And hence the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote as one of the articles of our faith, "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

This is what I mean, then, by General Salvation; Free redemption for all mankind through the resurrection from death, which was the great penalty fixed to the law that Adam transgressed. This is what the Atonement of Christ accomplished for man; but this is not all Messiah did for man, as we shall see when we come to speak of individual salvation.

Meantime, through the Fall, comes our present state of probation; our opportunities for gaining an experience in this life; of coming in contact with good and evil; learning to love the one and to despise the other, by seeing them placed in contrast with each other, working out their respective results, to the production of happiness on the one hand and misery on the other—from which experience we shall learn on what basis rests the eternal felicity of intelligences, and how to perpetuate it throughout the ages yet unborn.

Footnotes

"The fact is clearly proved, instead of Christianity deriving its existence and facts from the ideas and practices of heathen mythologists, and from the various false systems that had been introduced by apostasy unrecognized pretentions and fraud, that those very systems themselves were obtained from the true priesthood and founded on its teachings from the earliest ages to the advent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. * * * The Gospel is a system great, grand and comprehensive, commencing in eternity, extending through all time and then reaching into the eternities to come; and the ideas with regard to these disjointed materials, that are gathered together from the turbid waters of heathen mythology, are so much clap trap and nonsense, calculated only to deceive the unwary, superstitious and ignorant, and are as far below those great and eternal principles of heavenly truth which permeate through all time, penetrate into the heavens, and are interwoven with all the interests, happiness and exaltation of man, as the earth is below the heavens above."

I especially commend to the reader this whole chapter [the appendix] in the late President's work.

---
Notas:
[^1] Isaiah liii:4:6.
[^2] Mark xvi:16.
[^3] Heb. v:9.
[^4] Mosiah iii:11, 12.
[^5] Alma xi:40 41.
[^6] Doc. and Cov. Sec. xix:16-19. See also Mosiah iii:20, 21.
[^7] Moroni viii:8-12.
[^8] Doc. and Cov. Sec. xxix:46, 47.
[^9] The torments of the ungodly sinners are likened unto a lake of fire and brimstone by this writer, Nephi—not that sinners are plunged into a lake of fire and brimstone as so-called orthodox Christians teach. Indeed, in the above passage there is a definition of what the lake of fire is—it is "endless torment," which ever exists for the punishment of impenitent sinners—each one partaking of it to such a degree and for such time as is necessary to satisfy the demands of justice. In the very chapter above quoted Nephi says of the wicked: "And their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flames ascendeth up for ever and ever, and have no end."
[^10] II Nephi ix:25, 26.
[^11] Moroni viii:22.
[^12] I venture the suggestion, basing it on the sense of the whole passage, that it should read: "Shall also be judged without the law."
[^13] Rom. ii:12.
[^14] Doc. and Cov. Sec. xxix:49,50.
[^15] Doc. and Cov. Sec. xlv:54. See also Messiah xv:24, 25.
[^16] Doc. and Cov. Sec. lxxvi:71, 72.
[^17] See chapter on Salvation for the Dead.
[^18] Matt. xxviii:19,20.
[^19] Matt. xix:16-22.
[^20] 20. Richards' Compendium, p. 288.
[^21] 21. Heb. xii.
[^22] 22. John x. 17, 18.
[^23] 23. Matt. xxvi:53, 54.
[^24] 24. Mediation and Atonement, ch. xxi.
[^25] 25. I John iv:9.
[^26] 26. John iii:16, 17.
[^27] 27. I Cor. vi. 19, 20.
[^28] 28. John v. 26.
[^29] 29. Mediation and Atonement, ch. xxiv. To the reader who would make a more thorough investigation of this subject than these pages afford, I refer him to the following passages and works. Book of Mormon II Nephi, chap. ii; Mosiah xv:18-27; Alma xxxiv:7-17; Alma xlii, 1-26. Doc. and Cov. sec. lxxvi, and especially the "Mediation and Atonement," by the late President John Taylor. Also Watson's "Apology for Christianity," letter vi. Jenyn's "Internal Evidences of the Christian Religion," the concluding chapter.
