B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

CHAPTER V

FAITH

IT is now my purpose to enter into a more particular consideration of the respective principles and ordinances which constitute the Gospel, or plan of man's salvation.

First in order, both from necessity and because of its importance, is the principle of faith. And following the same method of investigation I adopted at the commencement of this inquiry, viz., defining as clearly as I am able the meaning of the words and terms used, I come to the question, What is faith? And in answer say it is an assurance in the mind of the existence and reality of things which one has not seen, or which to him have not been demonstrated; and, for matter of that, may not be demonstrable. It may be an assurance in the mind of the existence of some being whom he has not seen, but whose works are visible, and who has been seen by others; or it may be of the transpiring of some event at which he was not present, but of which others bear witness; or it may be an assurance of the correctness of certain deductions based upon scientific calculations, though the principles of the science, and the method of dealing with them, and the means by which the conclusions are reached, he neither understands nor is able to follow; in whatever it may be, that assurance of the mind which accepts as truth those things which one has not seen, and does not know for a certainty from his own experience to be absolutely true, is faith. For example, to bring to our aid the assistance of illustration, few, perhaps none of my readers have even seen the Lord Jesus Christ; yet the writers of the New Testament bear testimony to the reality of his existence, and relate the circumstances which make up his eventful career. The writers of the Book of Mormon do the same in relation to his labors on the western hemisphere; Joseph Smith testifies that, in vision, he saw both Jesus and his Father in the spring of 1820. [^1] Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon bear record that they saw him in February, 1832; [^2] and Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith say they saw him in the Kirtland Temple, in April, 1836. [^3] These evidences establish an assurance, or faith, in the mind, concerning the existence of Jesus, the Lord.

Again, none of us, and perhaps no one living, was at the battle of Waterloo; yet the fact of the battle taking place is testified to by many historians; no one doubts it, and the evidence in the case is so certain, that one may say he has perfect faith or assurance, approaching almost within the lines of absolute knowledge, that the event transpired—that assurance in the mind is faith.

Still another illustration: Mathematicians claim that they can weigh the earth, and measure the distance between our planet and the sun. One may not be acquainted with the methods of their calculations, or the principles involved in them, yet such is the character and learning of the thoughtful men who make the claim, that we accept their statements and conclusions as true, though we may not be able ourselves to comprehend the science which reveals to them, perhaps, to the certainty of demonstration, these facts:—this confidence in their statements—this assurance of the mind, is faith.

Other elements enter into this principle, but at this stage of our investigation, I desire to present the subject in its simple rather than in its complex character.

A step further in the investigation of this principle brings us to the consideration of the facts upon which faith rests, or from which it springs. I think a careful reading of the remarks already made in this chapter will lead the reader to see that faith is based upon evidence, upon testimony. It is the evidence we have in the testimonies of the writers of our Scripture, and the prophets of God to which I have alluded, supported to some extent also by the glorious works of nature, that creates in the mind faith in the existence of God. That Paul held these views, that is, that faith is based upon evidence, is clearly seen in this passage:

For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent? * * * So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. [^4]

Or, in plainer terms—"faith cometh by hearing the word of God." [^5]

Faith is based upon evidence, then; and here I would remark, that the faith will be true or false according as the evidence or testimony is truthful or untruthful. Evidence is to faith what the fountain is to the stream; and as an impure fountain cannot send forth pure streams, so incorrect evidence cannot establish a true or profitable faith.

By way of illustration I borrow the following from the works of Orson Pratt:

When Europeans first began their explorations in the New World, the Indians whom they met were much amazed at the power and explosive properties of gunpowder and asked many questions respecting the manner in which it was produced. The Europeans, taking advantage of the ignorance of the savages, and seeing an opportunity to increase their wealth by the deception, told the Indians that it was the seed of a plant which grew in the lands they had come from, and doubtless it would thrive in their land also. The Indians, of course believed this statement, and purchased the supposed seed, giving in exchange for it large quantities of gold. In implicit faith they carefully planted the supposed seed, and anxiously watched for its sprouting and the appearance of the plant; but it never came. They had faith in the statements made to them by the Europeans, but as these statements were false, and therefore the evidence on which the Indians based their belief untrue, their faith was vain.

Thus must it ever be. Only correct evidence, only truthful testimony can produce fruitful, profitable, true faith. No matter how sincere one's belief may be in an error, that will not transform the error into truth. The sincere faith of the Indians in what the Europeans had said about the "gunpowder seed" did not make that substance produce a plant yielding gunpowder. And so faith in false doctrines, founded upon false testimony, cannot savor of salvation.

It is also worthy of note, in passing, that character and intensity of the faith depends largely upon the quality and quantity of the evidence. If a credible witness testifies to any matter of fact, however strange or unusual the fact may be, one would have some degree of faith in it; but if another witness to the fact, equally credible with the first, also testifies to the same thing, one's faith would be greatly increased; and so as the evidence was multiplied the faith would grow, until at last faith would become so perfect that it would pass almost into the domain of knowledge.

So much for faith in general. Now to consider it as a principle of revealed religion. Here it occupies a prominent place. It is the foundation on which religion rests, and the source of all righteousness. In religion, it is in God that faith centers; it is to him that religious faith directs the eyes of man, and bids him hope through Christ to obtain eternal life. And as this is the primary principle in religion, it is my purpose to show from the Scriptures that there is an abundance of evidence which, if carefully considered, will not fail to produce faith in the mind of him who is desirous to believe the truth as to the existence of God, the divinity of Christ's mission and the truth of the Gospel.

So far I have treated the subject of faith from the intellectual side of it only. There is, however, another point of view from which it should be considered, namely: that of faith being a gift of God. A moment's reflection on the matter will convince the reader that all men are not blessed with the same capacity to believe. "Some," we often hear it said, "are harder to convince than others." Nor does this always arise from the fact that some men are more intelligent than others; and that being more intelligent they quicker grasp the evidence presented and hence arrive quicker at a state of faith. Often it is the reverse of this; that is, those not so intellectual arrive sooner at a state of faith. Not because of a paucity of intellect either, as some skeptics mockingly suggest; but because of an unexplainable intuition of mind by which they reach as if by a single bound that state of assurance of mind which we call faith. As all men vary in keenness and power of intellect, so, too, they differ in degree of intensity and power in the separate qualities of mind which go to the making up of that assemblage of qualities which we call the intellect; or, when we would extend our description, the character of the individual. Thus one mind seems possessed of an almost intuitive ability for mathematics; another for languages; another for music; another for drawing and painting; and men differ in those qualities of mind which give them these abilities in the several directions named. Of one we say, "He is gifted in mathematics;" of another, "He is gifted in languages;" of another, "He is gifted in music," and so on throughout. And now as men differ in the qualities of mind which make of one the better mathematician, and of another the better linguist, so, too, do they differ in those native faculties of mind which make it easier for one man to believe or to have faith than another; and of him we say, "He is gifted with faith," or "He is not gifted with faith."

In his second letter to Timothy we have the great Apostle of the Gentiles speaking of faith as an inherited quality. He says:

Greatly desiring to see thee, [Timothy], being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy; when I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother, Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also. [^6]

Enumerating the "gifts" of the Spirit to the Saints in his letter to the Corinthians, he says:

To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge; * * * to another faith by the same spirit; to another the gifts of healing. [^7]

And to the Ephesians:

By grace are ye saved through faith; and that [faith] not of yourselves; it is the gift of God. [^8]

But notwithstanding I here represent faith as a "gift" of God, and point out the fact that some men possess—(shall I say the faculty of it?)—the gift more largely than others, it must not be thought that I would urge that some do not possess the gift at all, unless, of course, they are mentally deranged. On the contrary, I am firmly of the opinion that while men possess the "gift" in infinitely varying degrees, I believe that all possess it sufficiently to lead them into salvation if only they will exercise that gift within them in an honest desire to attain unto salvation; just as I believe that although men differ in degree of intellectual power, still unto all has been given sufficient intelligence to comprehend the evidences of God's existence, and thus are able to lay the foundation of that faith in him which will ultimately result in salvation.

Before I proceed with that investigation from the Scriptures which I have proposed, concerning the existence of God, the divinity of Christ's mission, and the truth of the Gospel, I think it will be profitable to enquire a little into the authenticity and credibility of the Scriptures themselves; that is, as to the Jewish Scriptures; for I consider such an inquiry respecting our other Scriptures, the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and the revelations contained in the Pearl of Great Price, as altogether unnecessary here, and beyond the limits of this work.

The reason that I undertake to devote several chapters to this inquiry is because some have supposed that the testimony of the Bible respecting God is so imperfect that it is scarcely reliable. And to the extent of my ability, I desire to check a growing skepticism in relation to the Bible, and therefore will endeavor to prove that not only are the revelations contained in the Bible sufficient to lay a sure foundation for an intelligent belief in God in the minds of those who accept it as a revelation from God, but that the Bible itself is both authentic and credible. I must ask my readers to remember, however, that this of itself is a subject for a volume, or, indeed, several of them, and I can but devote a few pages to it; and therefore ask that too much be not expected.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Vide Kitto.
[^2] See the prologue to the Book of Ecclesiasticus, in the Apocrypha.
[^3] The five books of Moses—Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.
[^4] This is a Greek term for the sacred writings not included in the other two divisions. The Talmud places the following books in this division: Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Lamentations, Daniel, Esther, Ezra and Chronicles. The books not included in this list, nor in the Pentateuch, of course, constitute the division called the Prophets.
[^5] Our thirty-nine books of the Old Testament were so grouped by the Hebrews as to make but twenty-two, which accorded with the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. What are generally known as the minor prophets, twelve in number, are connected as one book. The Book of Ruth was coupled with Judges; Ezra with Nehemiah; Lamentations with Jeremiah; while the two books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles were counted but one each.
[^6] Josephus against Apion, Book I., Sec. 8.
[^7] Deut. xxxi:9, 24, 25, 26.
[^8] Deut. xvii:18.
