B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

CHAPTER VI

THE BIBLE

A WORD, in passing, on the Bible as a whole. I am of the opinion that a very great many people look upon the Bible as simply one book, one testimony—one witness for God; when in fact it is not one book, but a collection of books; not one witness for God, but the collected testimony of many witnesses for him.

The word does not come, I am assured on very good authority, from the word biblos, as many have supposed; nor does it signify the book by way of eminence—the book of books, but "Bible" is a word derived from the Greek biblia, meaning the books, and is a term first applied by Chrysostom to denote the collection of small books which constitute the Old and New Testaments; and this term with the prefix "Holy," soon came into general use. This is how the Jewish Scriptures came to be called the Holy Bible; meaning, really, the holy or sacred books. The Bible is made up of sixty-six distinct books, usually bound together in one volume, and written by about forty different authors. And if each book is not a separate and independent witness for God, it cannot be denied that each author is.

The first of the sacred writers is Moses, whom Bacon calls "God's first pen," the last is the Apostle John. These two writers, the first and the last, are separated by a period of some two thousand years; and the men who wrote as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, in that lapse of time, and whose works have been preserved to us in the Bible, occupied various positions in life, ranging from the grand old war king of Israel, David, and the wise King Solomon, down to the humble shepherd Amos, the despised tax collector, Matthew, and Peter, the unlearned fishermen. But whatever the condition of life occupied by these men, or whatever the nature of their respective writings, whether histories, biographies, poems, prophecies, or only didactic discourses on morals or religion, they all, in one way or other, bear witness to the existence of God and give us some information respecting his character and attributes.

It is now our task to inquire briefly into the authenticity and integrity of these writings. For convenience I shall take up the two Testaments, the Old and the New separately.

First, then, the Old Testament: It is maintained by the best biblical scholars, that the books which now constitute the Old Testament, were collected as we have them, immediately after the return of the Jews from the captivity in Babylon; that would be about the middle of the fifth century, B.C. The work is ascribed to Ezra, Nehemiah, and the men of the Great Synagogue. In proof of this they point to the testimony of the son of Sirach, who flourished between the years 310-370,B.C.; [^1] and who speaks of the canon—with its three divisions—as finally made up. [^2] By the "three divisions," I mean those divisions made by the Jews in their scriptures, and which are supposed to be contemporary with the completion of the canon. Those divisions are (1) the Pentateuch, or Law; [^3] (2) the Prophets; and (3) the Hagiographa. [^4] It is of these divisions that the son of Sirach speaks.

Josephus in his first book against Apion (section viii) enumerates twenty-two books, "Which contain the record of all the past times; which are justly believed to be divine; and of them, five belong to Moses, which contain his laws, and the traditions of the origin of mankind till his death. This interval of time was a little short of three thousand years; but as to the time from the death of Moses till the reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia [5th cent. B.C.], the prophets, which were after Moses, wrote down what was done in their time in thirteen books, the remaining four books [^5] contain hymns to God and precepts for the conduct of human life. It is true our history hath been since Artaxerxes, very particularly, but hath not been esteemed of the like authority with the former of our forefathers, because there has not been an exact succession of prophets since that time."

This testimony settles the question back to the commencement of the fifth century B.C., that is for a period of about twenty-four hundred years the authorship of the respective books of the Old Testament has been ascribed to the men who today are regarded as their authors. The rabbins say: "The wise men have left us the law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa, combined into one whole;" and then they specify the authors of the sacred book. That specification ascribes the respective books to the men now regarded as the authors of them. The Talmud says: "Moses received the law of Sinai, and transmitted it to Joshua; Joshua to the Elders; the Elders to the Prophets; the Prophets to the men of the Great Synagogue," and, as we have seen, it was Ezra, Nehemiah, and the men of the Great Synagogue who made up our present collection of books known as the Old Testament. Josephus in speaking of those who wrote the scriptures says:

Every one is not permitted of his own accord to be a writer, nor is there any disagreement in what is written; they being only prophets that have written the original and earliest accounts of things as they learned them of God himself by inspiration; and others have written what hath happened in their own times, and that in a very distinct manner also. [^6]

From the books of the Old Testament something may be learned as to the manner in which the original parchments of the sacred books were preserved previous to the days of Ezra, extending as far back even as to Moses himself—1451 B. C., and some of the passages that I shall notice—belonging to the subsequent period to Moses, yet previous to the days of Ezra—refer to a collection of sacred books that leave small doubts that the books of Moses and other sacred writings were the ones to which allusion is made.

We are told that after Moses wrote the law, he delivered it to the priests, the sons of Levi, with a commandment to put it in the side of the Ark of the Covenant, [^7] that it might be there for a witness against Israel, whom Moses, by the spirit of prophecy, foresaw would turn away from God.

In laying down the duties of the future king of Israel, Moses says:

And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which is before the priests the Levites. [^8]

This shows that it was the intention of Moses to have the law always preserved by the priests. When Joshua had completed the book that bears his name, it is said: "And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the Law of God;" [^9] which was doubtless the book which Moses had placed in the Ark of the Covenant in care of the priests.

When the form of government of Israel was changed into a monarchy, Samuel explained the character of the new kingdom to the people, "and wrote it in a book and laid it up before the Lord." [^10] This was three hundred and fifty years after Moses, and yet the practice of laying up these important records before the Lord, as Moses had done with his books still prevailed; and I doubt not were placed side by side with the books of Moses and Joshua, if not attached to them.

Four centuries and a half later than Samuel, bringing us to about 640 B.C., in the reign of good King Josiah, Hilkiah, the high priest, when the temple was undergoing some repairs, found the Book of the Law in the house of the Lord, [^11] and sent it to the king, who read it; and when he saw how far Israel had departed from the observance of it, and the judgments pronounced against them on condition of their forsaking the law, he sought to lead his people to repentance.

Isaiah, some seventy years before this, when wishing to confirm some of his own prophecies, recommended the people to seek out the Book of the Lord and read it. [^12] The value of this passage is that it gives us the testimony of Isaiah that such a book as "The Book of the Lord" was known to the people, that they had access to it, that it was a recognized authority on questions about which there might arise doubts. And there can scarcely be two opinions as to this book, alluded to by Isaiah, being either the original or an authorized copy of the writings placed in the keeping of the priests, and found by Hilkiah.

We have traced this matter down to 640 B. C., there is one more step to take, to reach Ezra, in whose days the books of the Old Testament were collected, some one hundred and eighty-five years after the date above noted.

What became of the sacred records of the Jews at the time Jerusalem was laid waste by Nebuchadnezzar, about 588 B. C., [^13] is difficult to learn. But the document granting permission to Ezra and the priests to go and rebuild the temple at Jerusalem is addressed to him thus:

Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect peace.

Then follows permission for all the people of Israel in his realm to go to Jerusalem with Ezra. He then continues:

Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king * * * to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of thy God which is in thine hand. [^14]

From this it appears that during the captivity the priests were permitted to retain possession of the sacred records. At any rate Ezra had them when he departed from Babylon for Jerusalem, so that they had been preserved, and, that, doubtless, by the priests. This brings us to the period when the books of the Bible were collected as we have them today. And from that time, more than two thousand years ago, until the present, the Old Testament has been what it is now; the multiplication of copies and of translations, as well as the subsequent controversies between Jews and Christians, combined to secure the sacred writings against alterations.

No one will contend that the Old Testament contains all the writings of the Jews, perhaps not all the sacred or inspired writings; for there are a number of books and writings of prophets referred to in these very books of the Old Testament, which are not to be found in the collection. But that fact does not destroy the value of these we have, or refute the testimony they bear for God. That very care may have excluded from the sacred collection some books which were really inspired, has also prevented many worthless and uninspired books from becoming connected with the word of God.

What is set down so far in this chapter relates to the Hebrew version of the Scriptures alone; but about three hundred years B. C., by some set down at 285 B. C., an event occurred which did much to preserve the integrity of the Hebrew Scriptures; by that I mean the probability of alterations being made in them was lessened, and they the more likely to be brought down to us just as they were written originally.

At the date above given, Philadelphus, king of Egypt, was gathering up the books which constituted the splendid Alexandrian Library, and being informed by his librarian, Demetrius Phalerius, concerning the Hebrew Scriptures, he at once set himself at work to procure a Greek translation of them. The better to secure this object he set at liberty many Jews in his kingdom, and sent word to the high priest at Jerusalem, Eleazar, his desire, asking that six elders from each tribe of Israel, such as were skilled in the law, should be sent to him to translate the Hebrew Scriptures for him. This was done and it is said that the work was completed in seventy-two days. [^15]

This translation is called Septuagint, meaning the seventy, often represented by the Roman numerals, LXX; but whether it is so called because it was translated by about seventy elders, or for the reason that the translation occupied about seventy days, is not clear. At any rate copies of this translation were multiplied, and in the days of Messiah's personal ministering in Judea was the version most in use, and the one he and his Apostles usually referred to, when sustaining their teachings by that which aforetime had been written by inspiration.

That this is true is evident from the following facts: There are in the New Testament two hundred and twenty-five quotations from the Old; [^16] and of these over one half, that is one hundred and twenty, agree verbatim with the Septuagint. An able writer says:

That these quotations must have been taken from the Septuagint is plain from the copia verborum, the remarkable fertility of expression, in the Greek language, which forbids us to believe that, had the quotations been from the Hebrew, the Greek rendering would have agreed verbatim with the passages in the Septuagint version. Of any Old Testament passage made up of only ten words, there are not fewer than thirty modes of translating it into Greek; and such indeed are the possible varities, that if thirty different persons were translating into Greek a Hebrew sentence of three lines, none of them, though all were to give a perfectly correct rendering, would be found exactly agreeing in the Greek words employed, or in the collection of these.

Again, of the one hundred and five remaining quotations in the New Testament, from the Old, thirty-nine agree verbatim with the Septuagint, except that a synonymous word occurs once in two or three lines. There are next, twenty-two quotations agreeing verbatim, or nearly so, with the Septuagint, but even in sense differing from the Hebrew text. Hence out of the two hundred and twenty-five quotations in the New Testament from the Old, we may say that not fewer than one hundred and ninety must have been taken from the Septuagint version.

From about three centuries B. C., then, the Old Testament has existed at least in two languages, and this has contributed much, as I before said, to prevent the corruption of the text and preserve the integrity of the Scriptures; for if changes were made in the Hebrew, it would be discovered from the LXX; and if alterations were made in the LXX, it could be detected from the Hebrew. There were other translations made of the Scriptures into still other languages, but as space is limited, I cannot give an account of them here.

We have now seen how the books of the Old Testament, as we have them at the present day, were collected by Ezra, some 2400 years ago; before this we went to the last book written by Moses—Deuteronomy—and from it learned that his writings were deposited in the Ark of the Covenant in charge of the priests and Levites; how Joshua and Samuel also laid up their writings before the Lord; and how Isaiah referred the Jews to these sacred writings in confirmation of his own prophecies; how, when in 640 B. C., the temple was undergoing some repairs, the high priest found in it an ancient copy of the law; and how Ezra in Babylon had the sacred writings in his possession, so that he at that time would have no difficulty in fixing upon the authorship of the sacred books then before him.

I shall further examine this question of the authenticity of the Old Testament in my next chapter, but the testimony I shall there consider will also have a bearing upon its integrity, and will likewise tend to confirm the claims as to its containing the revelations of God to the Jews; and to this latter consideration I especially invite the attention of the reader.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The above I have condensed from the account given of this matter by the Prophet Joseph in his history.
[^2] Pearl of Great Price, pp. 41-45.
[^3] Pearl of Great Price, pp. from 1 to 32.
[^4] Those who desire to prosecute an investigation of this subject will do well to read the "Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon," by Orson Pratt; and "A New Witness for God," by the author of this work.
[^5] I Nephi v. 10-13.
[^6] I Nephi xiii:21-23.
[^7] See I Nephi, chapters xx, xxi; II Nephi vii, viii; also II Nephi, from the xii to xxiv.
[^8] Deut. xvii:18.
[^9] Joshua xxiv:26.
[^10] I Sam. x:25.
[^11] II Kings xxii—see the whole chapter.
[^12] Isaiah xxxiv:16.
[^13] This is the Hebrew chronology, according to Usher.
[^14] Ezra vii:12, 14.
[^15] For a full account of this matter see "Antiquities of the Jews," by Josephus, book xii, chapter ii.
[^16] The only books in the Old Testament not quoted in the New are Ruth, first and second Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations, Obediah, Nahum and Zephaniah.
