B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

CHAPTER VIII

THE NEW TESTAMENT

THERE is an impression existing, and it is one encouraged by infidel writers, that the acceptance of the books now comprising the New Testament, was the arbitrary action of a council of bishops three or four hundred years A. D. This I believe to be a wrong impression. I do not think the list of books that now constitute the New Testament was made up in an arbitrary manner, at one time, or by any single council. It can be shown that the books and epistles now in the collection known as the New Testament, were accepted as inspired writings by the Christian churches, before the councils of the church undertook any discussion of the subject; and even when this question was before those councils, they merely decided what books before-time had been regarded by the churches as inspired.

The first council which undertook to pronounce a decision on the subject was that of Laodicea in the year 363 A. D., "Probably the decree of this council," as Arch-Deacon Paley remarks, "rather declared than regulated the public judgment, or more properly speaking, the judgment of some neighboring churches, the council itself consisting of no more than thirty or forty bishops of Lydia and the adjoining countries," and after this council the question, "What books were entitled to be received as Scripture?" was discussed with great freedom, and without any reference to the declaration made by the council of Laodicea. [^1]

The list of inspired books of the New Testament, as we have them now, was accepted by the council of Hippo, held 393 A. D. The third council of Carthage, 397 A. D., and also the sixth of Carthage, 419 A. D., confirmed the decisions of the first. Thus, from that early date, the authorship and inspiration of the books of the New Testament may be said to have been fixed.

True, certain early Christian writers doubted the inspiration and authenticity of some of the books now in the New Testament; II Peter, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of James and the Apocalypse [^2] being among those whose inspiration and authenticity were questioned; and some Bible scholars since those days have held the same doubts; but the preponderance of evidence is in favor of the inspiration of all the books of the New Testament, and of their being the productions of the men accredited in those early days, and by the councils named, with having written them.

It is quite evident, however, that the New Testament does not contain all the inspired writings of the apostles and Christian disciples, since there are references in the books of the New Testament to other books written by the same authors, which would certainly be equally inspired with those we now have in the collection. Such, for instance, as another epistle to the Corinthians, [^3] also a second epistle to the Colossians, [^4] and another book of Jude. [^5] Still, because some inspired books were lost, and others rejected by these early councils, that does not affect the authenticity or inspiration of those that remain; though had we those inspired books that were lost or rejected, many passages in the books that have been preserved to us might be made more plain.

Could it be proven even, that some of the books now retained in the New Testament collection were uninspired, and not written by those now accredited with being their authors, that would not affect these books about whose authenticity and inspiration there has never been a question. Suppose all those books I have named as having had their authenticity questioned should turn out to be forgeries, we would still have the four Gospels, the Acts, the thirteen Epistles of Paul that stand unquestioned; and as long as even one of these books remains unshaken as to its authenticity and inspiration, you have a witness for God and Christ in it—an exposition, to some extent at least, of the character and attributes of Deity. The New Testament, like the Old, is not one book, but a collection of books; each independent of the other. It is not one witness for God and Christ, but a collection of the testimonies of a number of witnesses. And if it could be proven (but I do not think it can be) that some of these books were of such doubtful origin that they are unworthy a place in the collection, it does not follow that the other books of the New Testament are also of doubtful origin and unworthy of confidence.

Furthermore, if it be admitted (and I am willing to admit it) that some of the texts in the books comprising the New Testament have been corrupted or changed, and portions thereof taken away, while these things tend to, and do weaken the testimony of the witnesses, and make many parts obscure, and even contradictory, still, after making all these concessions, enough remains uncorrupted and unimpaired, to give us in those books strong and reliable witnesses—whose testimony cannot be impeached—for God. And while some parts have been corrupted, and thus rendered imperfect, yet the narrative of the life of Christ, the Gospel he advocated, the moral precepts he inculcated in his system of truth, the outward ordinances he instituted or accepted, such as the eucharist, baptism, and the laying on of hands for imparting the Holy Ghost and the healing of the sick, together with the revelations contained in those Scriptures respecting the character and attributes of Deity, are all substantially correct.

I refer again to the manner in which the list of books now composing the New Testament was decided upon. I have already stated that I do not think it was by the arbitrary decision of any one council at any one time, that the selection of this list of books was made and all others rejected. On the contrary it was most probably the work of years. "The most plausible supposition," says an unquestioned authority, "is that each of the most influential churches founded by the Apostles in person, made for its own use a collection of all the writings duly ascertained to be apostolic and inspired. The epistles sent to the different churches were soon, doubtless, communicated to the sister associations for the strengthening of each other's faith, hope and virtue." Indeed Apostle Paul, in one instance at least, commands an interchange of apostolic writings. In his epistle to the Colossian saints he says:

And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea. [^6]

Doubtless, as stated by Chambers,

The brotherly love which was a notable feature of primitive Christianity, led Christians everywhere to make common property of the local messages from apostles, as valuable to them all alike. Nor did they ever dream of withholding from their brethren copies of such inspired writings as had come into their own hands. No general order from the apostles was needed to prompt individual Christians or congregations that had been favored with an inspired communication to make it equally well known to every neighbor. There must have been the most cordial reciprocity of communication in this matter, an unreserved sharing of new Scripture with each other; the fair and full interchange of apostolic oracles leading to such a multiplication, that each church possessed, for the benefit of its members, a copy of all inspired writings previously issued by the apostles. [^7]

And here let me add, that in the multiplication of copies, it is not to be wondered at if the originals were soon lost sight of or worn out by constant use.

The earliest reference we have to any writings or collection of writings now in the New Testament, and in which they are recognized as authoritative Scripture, is in the second Epistle of Peter. That apostle, writing about the year 65 A. D., says:

Account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction. [^8]

It will be observed that the reference to the Epistles of Paul is of such a character that it leads us to infer that those Epistles were well and generally known by the church at large; for this Epistle of Peter which we quote, is written to no particular branch of the Church, but "to them that have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ;" [^9] in other words, to the church universal; and it can scarcely be doubted that some of the larger branches of the church, even in that early day, had the Epistles of Paul in a collected form. It will also be observed that Peter places these Epistles of Paul on equal authority with Scripture by saying, that the unlearned and unstable wrest them, "as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction."

There is a tradition that the Apostle John, on his return from his banishment to Patmos—96 A. D.—made a collection of what he considered the inspired writings of the apostles and disciples of Christ; but the tradition seems not to be well-founded. It is generally admitted, however, that he must have had before him the three other Gospels when he wrote the one which bears his name, because his book called "The Gospel According to St. John," is supplemental in its character, and in it he gives prominence to those incidents in the life of his Master and the doctrines he taught, about which the other writers are either silent or have said but little. This peculiarity is accounted for by the supposition that John had before him the other three narratives of his Master's life and mission, and that he sought to make prominent what they had omitted or treated but briefly, that the church—in the four books—might have a complete history of Messiah's life, and labors and doctrines.

In his admirable work on the "Evidences of Christianity," Arch-Deacon Paley maintains that the following allegations respecting the books comprising the New Testament are capable of proof; in fact, to my mind, the learned arch-deacon does prove them, and places them beyond the power of successful contradiction.

I. That the historical books of the New Testament, meaning thereby the four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, are quoted, or alluded to, by a series of Christian writers, beginning with those who were contemporary with the apostles, or who immediately followed them, proceeding in close and regular succession from their time to the present.

II. That when they are quoted, or alluded to, they are quoted or alluded to with peculiar respect, as books sui generis; [^10] as possessing an authority which belonged to no other books, and as conclusive in all questions and controversies amongst Christians.

III. That they were in very early times, collected into a distinct volume.

IV. That they were distinguished by appropriate names and titles of respect.

V. That they were publicly read and expounded in the religious assemblies of the Christians.

VI. That commentaries were written upon them, harmonies formed out of them, different copies carefully collated, and versions of them made in different languages.

VII. That they were received by Christians of different sects, by many heretics as well as those who were considered orthodox, and usually appealed to by both sides in the controversies which arose in those days.

VIII. That the four Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, thirteen Epistles of St. Paul, the first Epistle of John and the first of Peter, were received, without doubt by those who doubted concerning the other books which are included in our present canon—[authorized list.]

IX. That the Gospels were attacked by the early adversaries of Christianity, as books containing the account upon which the religion was founded.

X. That formal catalogues of authentic scriptures were published, in all of which our present sacred histories were included.

XI. That these propositions cannot be affirmed of any other books claiming to be books of Scripture; by which are meant those books which are commonly called apocryphal books of the New Testament. [^11]

Out of these eleven propositions I shall deal with but two, viz., the first and tenth; referring my readers to Dr. Paley's work, for information as to the other propositions. And what is said here of these propositions, I shall select or condense from Paley's work, sometimes using his language as well as his facts, without troubling myself to indicate the quotations.

Well, then, as to his first allegation, viz., that there are a series of Christian writers, beginning with those contemporary with the apostles, and extending on down to the present, who have quoted the chief books of the New Testament. To begin with, there is an epistle ascribed to Barnabas, [^12] the companion of Paul on some of his missionary tours. It is quoted as an Epistle of Barnabas, by Clement of Alexandria, A. D. 194; by Origen, A. D. 330; by Eusebius, A. D. 315, and more frequently by the writers above named, as an ancient work in their time, and as well known and read among Christians, though not accounted a part of Scripture. It purports to be written soon after the destruction of Jerusalem under Titus.

In this epistle appears the following remarkable passage:

Let us, therefore, beware lest it come upon us, as it is written: There are many called, few chosen.

From the expression, "as it is written," we infer, with certainty, that at the time when the author of this epistle lived, there was a book extant well known to Christians, and of authority among them, containing the words "many are called, few chosen." Such a book is our present Gospel of St. Matthew, in which this text is twice found, [^13] and found in no other book which existed in those days; therefore Barnabas must have referred his readers to Matthew's Gospel. Furthermore, the writer of the epistle was a Jew. The phrase, "it is written," was the very form in which the Jews quoted their scriptures. Hence, it follows that he would not have used this phrase, and without qualification, of any books but what had acquired scriptural authority. So that while the quotation "many are called, few chosen," confirms the existence of Matthew's Gospel, the expression "it is written," gives to it the authority or dignity of Scripture.

There are other passages in the epistle which are the same in sentiment as some of the passages in Matthew, [^14] some in which we recognize the same words. For example, "Give to every one that asketh thee;" and he says that Christ chose as his apostles men who were great sinners that he might show that he came, "not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

There is also extant an epistle of Clement, bishop of Rome, whom the ancient writers without doubt or scruple assert to have been the Clement whom Paul mentions in Philippians iv :3. [^15] This epistle is spoken of by the early Christian writers as an epistle acknowledged by all. Of it Irenaeus says (writing in the second century) it was "written by Clement, who had seen the blessed apostles, and conversed with them, who had the preaching of the apostles still sounding in his ears, and their traditions before his eyes." Dionysius, bishop of Corinth (the epistle is addressed to the Church of Christ) says, about the year 170 A. D., that the Epistle of Clement "had been wont to be read in that church from ancient times." [^16]

In the said epistle are found the following passages, evidently taken from our New Testament scriptures:

Especially remembering the words of the Lord Jesus which he spake, teaching gentleness and long suffering, for thus he said: "Be ye merciful, that ye may obtain mercy; [^17] forgive that it may be forgiven unto you; [^18] as you do so shall it be done unto you; as ye judge so shall ye be judged; as ye show kindness, so shall kindness be shown unto you; with what measure ye mete, with the same shall it be measured to you." [^19]

In another place he says:

Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, for he said: "Woe to that man by whom offenses come; it were better for him that he had not been born, than that he should offend one of my elect; it were better for him that a millstone be tied about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the sea than that he should offend one of my little ones." [^20]

The reference in the foregoing to the passages I have indicated in the margin is too palpable to leave any room for doubt.

Connected with the Sinaitic manuscript copy of the New Testament, now in the St. Petersburg Library, to which I have already called attention in a foot-note, is a manuscript copy of the "Shepherd" or "Pastor" of Hermas, dating from the fifth century; but that copies of it existed at a still earlier date is evident from the fact that it is quoted by Irenaeus, A. D. 178; by Clement of Alexandria, A. D. 194; by Tertullian, A. D. 200; Origen, A. D. 230. In this ancient work are many allusions to and some direct quotations from the Gospels of Matthew, Luke and John. Of all the allusions may be cited the confession and denying of Christ, [^21] the parable of the seed sown; [^22] and the comparison of Christ's disciples to little children. Of the more direct quotations I mention the following: "He that putteth away his wife and marrieth another, committeth adultery;" [^23] the singular expression, "having received all power from his Father," is undoubted allusion to Matthew xxviii:18; and Christ being the "Gate," or only way of coming "to God," in plain allusion to John xiv:6, and x:7, 9.

I now come to Ignatius, who became bishop of Antioch about thirty-seven years after the ascension of Messiah; and therefore, from his time and station, it is probable that he had known and conversed with many of the apostles. Some of the epistles of this bishop are referred to by Polycarp, his contemporary, the bishop of Smyrna; and some are quoted by Irenaeus, A. D ., 178; and by Origen, A. D. 230. In these epistles are plain and undoubted allusions to the Gospels of Matthew and John, of which the following are but specimens:

Christ was baptized of John that all righteousness might be fulfilled by him. [^24]

Be wise as serpents in all things and harmless as a dove. [^25]

Yet the Spirit is not deceived, being from God, for it knows whence it comes and whither it goes. [^26]

I now pass over several writers in whose works are similar quotations from the Scriptures to those already noted; among them Polycarp, a convert to Christianity through the teachings of the Apostle John; as also Papias, his companion; Justin Martyr, separated from the last named by but twenty years; and also Hegesippus, who came about thirty years after Justin. This brings us to the year 170 A. D. At this time the churches of Lyons and Vienna in France, sent a relation of the sufferings of their martyrs to the churches of Asia and Phrygia. This epistle is found entire in the works of Eusebius [315 A. D.] and in it are direct allusions to the Gospels of Luke, John and the Acts of the Apostles. The one to John is,

Thus was fulfilled that which was spoken by the Lord, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doeth God's service. [^27]

At that time these churches in France had for their bishop Pothinus, then about ninety years old, whose time, therefore, must have joined on to the times of the apostles.

"The evidence now," says Dr. Paley, "opens for us full and clear." Irenaeus succeeded Pothinus as bishop of Lyons. In his youth he had been a disciple of Polycarp, who was a disciple of [St.] John. * * * He asserts of himself and his contemporaries, that they were able to reckon up in all the principal churches the succession of bishops from the first. * * * The testimony which this writer affords to the historical books of the New Testament, to their authority, and to the titles which they bear, is expressive and positive. One principal passage runs as follows:

We have not received the knowledge of the way of our salvation by any others than those by whom the Gospel has been brought to us. Which Gospel they first preached, and afterward by the will of God, committed to writing, that it might be for time to come the foundation and pillar of our faith. For after that the Lord rose from the dead, and they [the apostles] were endowed from above with the power of the Holy Ghost coming down upon them, they received a perfect knowledge of all things. They went forth to all the ends of the earth, declaring to men the blessings of heavenly peace, having all of them, and every one alike, the Gospel of God. Matthew then, among the Jews, wrote a Gospel in their own language, while Peter and Paul were preaching the Gospel at Rome, and founding a church there; and after their exit, Mark also, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, delivered to us in writing the things which had been preached by Peter; and Luke, the companion of Paul, put down in a book the Gospel preached by him (Paul). Afterward John, the disciple of the Lord, who also leaned upon his breast, he likewise published a Gospel while he dwelt at Ephesus, in Asia.

Nor is this writer less explicit respecting the book of the Acts of the Apostles.

The force of the testimony we have considered will be strengthened by remembering that it is the testimony, and the concurring testimony of writers who lived in countries remote from each other. Clement flourished at Rome, Ignatius at Antioch, and Irenaeus in France.

I deem it unnecessary to pursue this inquiry much further, and shall close by remarking that Clement of Alexandria, one of the most voluminous of Christian writers, follows Irenaeus at a distance of but sixteen years. In the works of Clement which remain, the four Gospels are repeatedly quoted by the names of their authors, and the Acts of the Apostles is expressly ascribed to Luke. This brings us to the year 194 A. D. Tertullian joins on to Clement, and is no less explicit in his references to the New Testament than the writers who preceded him. Then follow numerous writers, among them Origen, A. D. 230; Eusebius, 315; and Jerome, A. D. 392.

So numerous are the references to Scripture, in the writings of these men, that were our books of Scripture lost, some aver, that they could be reproduced from the works of these writers alone. From the date last given, there can be no question as to the existence of our New Testament, or of its acceptance by the whole of Christendom, as containing the account of those events on which Christianity was founded.

I now come to the tenth allegation of Dr. Paley, viz.:

Formal catalogues of authentic scriptures were published, in all of which our present sacred histories were included.

In the writings of Origen which remain, and in some extracts preserved by Eusebius, from works of his which are now lost, there are enumerations of the books of Scripture, in which the four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles are distinctly and honorably specified, and in which are no books beside what are now received. The date of Origen's works is 230 A. D.

Athanasius, about a century afterwards (330 A. D.) delivered a formal catalogue of the books of the New Testament, containing our Scriptures, and no others, of which he says, "In these alone the doctrine of religion is taught; let no man add to them, or take anything from them."

About twenty years after Athanasius (350 A. D.) Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem, sent forth a catalogue of the books of Scripture, publicly read at that time in the church of Jerusalem, exactly the same as ours, except that the book of Revelation is omitted.

Fifteen years after Cyril (365 A. D.) the council of Laodicea delivered an authoritative catalogue of Canonical Scripture, like Cyril's the same as ours, with the omission of Revelation.

About thirty years later, that is, in 393 A. D., followed the council of Hippo, which delivered a catalogue of the books of the New Testament, which agrees with that now in our common English version. This was followed by the third council of Carthage in 397 A. D., and by the sixth of Carthage in 419 A. D., both of which confirmed the list of sacred books made out by the council of Hippo. [^28]

It seems to me that proving these two propositions selected from Dr. Paley's list, is sufficient to make out a case for the authenticity of the books of the New Testament; but when the reader remembers that the nine other allegations I quoted can also be sustained by undeniable proofs, the case is made out so clearly that there can be no room for doubt.

Then the Book of Mormon comes in also as a witness for the New Testament, as well as for the Old. Not so much a witness for the authenticity of the books composing it, however, as for the correctness of what is contained in them.

The writers of the Book of Mormon who bear a direct testimony as to what the New Testament scriptures contain, and in that way indirectly establish their authenticity and credibility, may be divided into two classes, prophetic and historical. By the former, I mean those who by the inspiration of God foresaw the birth and mission of Jesus Christ as it all afterwards came to pass; by the latter, I mean those who lived at the time and were witnesses to the personal ministrations of the Messiah on the western hemisphere, and made a record of those things they saw and heard.

Of the first class, the prophetic, the first Nephi stands out most prominently; for he gives such a vivid description of the leading outlines of Messiah's life and labors on the earth, that it makes one feel in very deed that "prophecy is but history reversed," for had he lived and written in the first century of the Christian era instead of the fifth century preceding it, and been familiar with the things Jesus did, I feel sure that he could not have been more vivid and exact in writing the life, mission and doctrines of the Son of God; [^29] and all that he predicts is in strict accord with what is contained in the New Testament.

Next to Nephi we may place King Benjamin, whose testimony is found in the book of Mosiah; [^30] and next to him, Abinadi, whose prophecies in relation to the coming and mission of Jesus, are contained in the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth chapters of Mosiah; and lastly, Samuel, the Lamanite prophet, whose testimony is in the fourteenth chapter of Helaman.

All these prophets give the outlines of the life and mission of Jesus Christ, and, as before stated, what they say is in strict accord with what is written in the New Testament, by those who witnessed the events that these prophets of the western hemisphere foretold.

On the other side of the line, that is, of the historical witnesses, those living at the time Jesus visited the western hemisphere and wrote an account of what took place, the III Nephi, the one whom the Lord made the chief of the apostles among the Nephites, is most conspicuous. He records the fact of Messiah's visit to the Nephites after his resurrection and departure from his disciples in Judea; and gives a most particular account of the several visits of Jesus to his people, and of his organizing a church, after the pattern of the one organized in Jerusalem; also of the doctrines and moral precepts which he taught; in all of which there is a substantial agreement with what is recorded in the New Testament. [^31]

Thus the Book of Mormon is an additional witness for Jesus, testifying as well as the New Testament, that he is both Lord and Christ. It also sustains the New Testament, that is, it does not directly prove the authenticity of the various books composing it, it proves the correctness of what is contained in them, by testifying that the same person who was crucified by the Jews is the Son of God, the Savior of the world, and that he taught the same doctrines, ordinances and precepts, and organized his church on the western hemisphere, after the pattern of that described in the New Testament; and all this, I take it, is very strong proof of the correctness of what is recorded in the New Testament Scriptures—it is, in fact, the testimony of a mighty and numerous people, speaking from the silence of past ages, bearing witness of the truth as contained in the Jewish Scriptures; and withal, is such an evidence of their authenticity, and, likewise, of their integrity, in the main—speaking now of both the Old Testament and the New—and of the correctness of the matter they contain, that before this new witness for God unbelief must hide its head; atheism must stand rebuked; the scorner is reproved; they that watch for iniquity are cut off; the terrible ones are brought to nought; they that erred in spirit may come to understanding; they that murmured may learn doctrine; the meek increase their joy in the Lord and the poor among men rejoice. [^32]

I have been led thus far into an investigation of the authenticity of the Jewish Scriptures, touching, too, here and there, the question of the integrity and truthfulness of them, by a desire to fix in the mind of the reader the fact that our principal volume of Scripture is worthy of all confidence so far as the question of authenticity is concerned.

I am aware, however, that after treating the question of authenticity, there still stands the question of credibility. After proving the authenticity of a book, I believe the further questions may be asked, and usually with great propriety—"Is it worthy of belief? Can it be believed? Is it credible?" To this rule I make one exception, and in the case in hand it is important. That exception is this: If it can be proven that God is the author of the book, or, what would be equivalent, if those who wrote it were inspired by his Holy Spirit, then if you prove such an authenticity as that, you prove at the same time the credibility of the book. For, let it be proven clearly that the book emanates from God directly or indirectly, then who could doubt its truth, its wisdom, or the events, however wonderful, it relates? Or who could question the mercy and justice of the acts of God as represented in that book or books that are the fruits of inspiration?

It matters not how at variance their contents may seem to be with our supposed knowledge of the laws of nature; our knowledge of those laws are so limited; our understanding of the mechanism of the universe so imperfect; our acquaintance with the universe and the forces that operate in it so insignificant, that let it be clearly proven that a revelation from God contradicted our supposed facts, and I believe the wisest and best among the children of men, with becoming humility that would but add to their dignity, would bow in submission to the revelation.

Neither does it matter how much the conduct of Deity, as represented in such books, may violate what we understand to be the relative claims of justice and mercy; our knowledge of the operation of these qualities, and their effect upon men in time and in eternity, and under varied conditions, is so uncertain and imperfect that we are liable to confound good with evil, and that which is indeed an infinite mercy, we may condemn as a piece of barbaric cruelty. In this matter we would bow, also, and say, "Thy will, O Lord, be done," righteous must be all thy judgments merciful are thy ways! Shall not the God of the whole earth do right?

In connection with these observations, I would remark, that throughout the Jewish Scriptures, that is, in their composition, in their diction as well as in the excellence of their matter, whether in the historical, legislative, poetic, or prophetic books of the Old Testament; or in the gospel histories, the epistles or prophetic books of the New, everywhere may be traced the inspiration of God; and the style and matter of the whole volume proclaims that the Spirit which prompted the writers and brought those books into existence, is divine.

Then again, if the prophecies contained in the volume of scripture be studied, and their fulfillment traced out in the history of the rise and fall of nations, cities and people; in the calamities that have overtaken the Jews [^33] and their country; in the coming of Messiah and the work he performed, all of which was foretold by those holy men of God, who spake as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost—if all these prophecies and their fulfillment be considered, it seems to me that there is an accumulation of evidence to the divinity of the Jewish Scriptures that must break down all the petty objections that unbelief can carry against them. And indeed, I may say, that such has been the effect of these considerations on the human understanding that the noblest and brightest intellects of all ages have been so impressed with them, that they have yielded a ready assent to their divine inspiration, and worshiped God whose character and attributes are unfolded in the revelations contained in them. [^34]

Now, if to these evidences, which have been sufficient to convince men of powerful intellect, as well as the masses of Christendom, be added the further fulfillment of prophecy in respect to taking the Gospel from the earth and then restoring it in the last days, much of which—pertaining to the restoration of the Gospel—has been fulfilled in our day; and then to this be added the testimony contained in the Book of Mormon to the divinity and general truth of the Bible; and, to this the testimony of the Book of Abraham and the visions of Moses, as revealed to Joseph Smith and now contained in the Pearl of Great Price—tell me, where is there room for unbelief on the part of the youth of Israel? Or where is their excuse for infidelity?

Let me remind my readers, that the Bible is a record of man's crimes and vices, as well as of his righteousness and virtues. It as faithfully records the former as the latter. But because it thus faithfully records the evils that men did as well as the good, it must not therefore be concluded that God sanctioned or condoned those evils. It was the doing of those very evils that brought down the displeasure of God upon those guilty of them. And what is true of individuals in this respect is also true of peoples and nations.

Then again, as to the Old Testament, let it be remembered that when the Lord took the children of Israel from the land of Egypt to make of them a people for himself, he presented them first with the Gospel of Christ, with all its mercy and inspiring love and gentleness; but they would not live in accordance with its high moral precepts, nor reflect in their lives its spiritual excellence. Accordingly, a less perfect law was given to Israel; a law which in the New Testament is called "the law of carnal commandments;" a law more in keeping with their moral development; a law which breathed less of mercy, forgiveness and love, and more of exacting, relentless justice; demanding an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth—and this was to be their schoolmaster, to prepare them for the more excellent law of the Gospel of Christ. [^35] Many things in that law of the Old Testament are imperfect, and must not be taken as reflecting the full glory and excellence of the Divine wisdom or goodness. On the contrary it is plainly stated, and that too by the voice of inspiration in the New Testament, that it was a law carnal and imperfect, and yet, withal, demanding a higher excellence than the people of those days seemed able to attain.

Add these considerations to the fact that in some of its details and in its translation the Bible has been marred by the hand of man; a number of sacred books lost, and some plain and precious parts taken away from those we have, and it is not surprising that men find imperfections in it, and some things difficult to harmonize with our ideas of the mercy and justice of God.

Yet, with all its imperfections, in the main the Bible is true, and may be relied upon as a witness for God; that is, as to his existence, his character and attributes; and also as to the existence, character and mission of his Son, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world, and of the plan of salvation—the Gospel. What the Bible says of those, and topics associated with them, may be relied upon as God's truth; for the evidences of its authenticity and credibility are so numerous, I may say so overwhelming, that for my part, I see not how intelligent men can disbelieve it.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Doc. and Cov., II Lecture on Faith, verse 30.
[^2] Gen. v:28, 29.
[^3] Those desiring a more minute account of these points are referred to the Doc. and Cov., II Lecture on Faith.
[^4] Crabb's "Mythology of All Nations," pp. 174-5.
[^5] The vast supplies of heat thus emitted by the stars not only suggests the conclusion that there must be worlds around these orbs for which those heat-supplies are intended, but point to the existence in those worlds of the various forms of force into which heat may be transmuted. * * * Thus the fact that the stars sent forth heat to the worlds which circle round them suggests at once the thought that on those worlds there must exist vegetable and animal forms of life.—"Other Worlds Than Ours," (Proctor) p. 246. See for further consideration of this subject the author's "New Witness for God," vol. I, chapters xxviii xxix and xxx.
[^6] Romans i:20.
[^7] Doc. and Cov. Sec. lxxxviii:45, 47.
[^8] II Peter iii:15, 16.
[^9] II Peter i:1.
[^10] That is, of its own kind.
[^11] "Evidences of Christianity," part 1:ch. ix. I would also recommend my readers to carefully study Dr. Lardner's "Credibility of the New Testament," from which Dr. Paley obtains much, I may say nearly all of the material for this division of his admirable work. There is also a fine article on the subject, in Chambers' "Information for the People," entitled "History of the Bible," and another in Dr. Kitto's "Biblical Literature," under the heading, "Canon of Scripture."
[^12] There is a manuscript copy of this epistle in connection with a copy of the New Testament entire, dating back to the fourth century, now in the St. Petersburg Library. It was found by Tischendorf in the convent of St. Catherine on Mount Sinai, in 1859, and is known as the Sinaitic Manuscript—the oldest one in existence.
[^13] Matt. xx:16; xxii:14.
[^14] Matt. v:42; ix:13.
[^15] "With Clement also, and with other my fellow-laborers whose names are in the book of life."
[^16] A copy of this epistle dating back to the fifth century, is connected with the Alexandrian manuscript of the New Testament now in the British Museum. The manuscript was given to Charles the I, in 1628 by Cyril Lucas, patriarch of Constantinople
[^17] Matt. v:7.
[^18] Luke vi:37, 38.
[^19] Matt. vii:1, 2.
[^20] Matt. xviii.
[^21] Matt. x:32, 33; Luke xii:8, 9.
[^22] Matt. xiii:3. Luke viii:5.
[^23] Luke xvi:18.
[^24] Matt. iii:15.
[^25] Matt. x:16.
[^26] John iii:18.
[^27] John xvi:2.
[^28] Thus far I have followed Paley.
[^29] For the remarkable prophecies which foretell the events here alluded to, I refer my readers to the xi, xii, xiii, and xiv chapters of I Nephi, Book of Mormon.
[^30] 30. Book of Mosiah, ch. iii.
[^31] 31. The reader is recommended to read carefully the whole Book of III Nephi, and compare it with the teachings of the New Testament.
[^32] 32. Isaiah xxix:18-24.
[^33] 33. "You may question, if you will," says Bishop Lightfoot in the Quarterly Review for April, 1888, "every single prophecy in the Old Testament, but the whole history of the Jews is one continuous prophecy more distinct and articulate than all. You may deny, if you will, every successive miracle which is recorded therein; but again, the history of the Jews is from first to last one stupendous miracle, more wonderful and convincing than all."
[^34] 34. In making this observation I do not close my eyes to the fact that there are exceptions to this general assertion; nor will I be so unjust as to claim that among unbelievers there are none who are honest in that belief. There have been men in all ages, or nearly so, who have doubted the truth of the Jewish Scriptures, and some of them have been most brilliant in intellect, and not a few most upright in their manner of life; but these are the exceptions, not the rule; and the remark on this point in the text holds good.
[^35] 35. In proof that the Gospel was first offered to ancient Israel, and then because of transgression the law of carnal commandments, I invite the reader's attention to the following Scriptures: Heb., latter part of chap. iii, in connection with Heb. iv:1, 2; I Cor. x:1-4'; and Gal. iii; also Doc. and Cov., Sec. 84; see also the chapter on "History of the Gospel" in this work.
