B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

CHAPTER XIX

THE HOLY GHOST

HE who said a man must be born again—born of water, said also that he must be born of the Spirit; [^1] and it is to that birth, or baptism of the Spirit that we now direct the attention of the reader.

John the Baptist made reference to this matter when he was preaching repentance and baptism throughout Judea. He told the people that he truly baptized with water, but one should come after him, mightier than he was, who would baptize them with the Holy Ghost. [^2] Afterwards he bore record that Jesus of Nazareth was he of whom he spake. "I saw," said he, "the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him [Jesus]. And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bear record that this is the Son of God." [^3]

Jesus frequently alluded to this baptism of the Holy Ghost and the powers that a reception thereof would impart to those who received it; and, finally, after his death and resurrection, and just previous to his departure from among his disciples in Judea, he said to them:

Wait for the promise of the Father, which * * * ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. [^4]

The reference to the promise made through John the Baptist is obvious; and the disciples who had anxiously looked for its accomplishment were now informed that its fulfillment was not many days hence.

The promise was fulfilled, for in about seven days [^5] after the Messiah's ascension, on the day of Pentecost, the disciples being assembled with one accord, in one place, "Suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." [^6]

Thus was the promise made by John and repeated by Messiah, fulfilled.

I have been particular to call attention to this promise, and its fulfillment, because a similar promise is made to all men of all nations, and in all generations wherever and whenever the Gospel is proclaimed. The promise I allude to was made on this very same day of Pentecost, on which the promise of John and Messiah was fulfilled.

Peter, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, so abundantly given to himself and companions on that day, preached a discourse which convinced thousands that Jesus was both Lord and Christ, the Savior of the world; and in answering the question of the multitude as to what they should do, after telling them to repent, and to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of their sins, he added:

And ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. [^7]

I call attention to the universality of this promise. It was made to those who were listening to the apostles, but not to them alone, it extended to their children, to them also that were afar off—to those who were a hundred years off, or five hundred, or five to ten thousand years off; the promise was to them; and as if this was not sufficiently universal, the apostle adds, "even as many as the Lord our God shall call"—call to what? to as many of course, as are called to yield obedience to the Gospel—to all such the promise extends.

As the promise made by John was repeated and emphasized by the Savior, so, likewise, has this general promise made by the apostle Peter been repeated and emphasized by the Lord, in restoring the Gospel to the earth in this dispensation in which we live. To the first elders of the Church in our day, he said:

As I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for ye are mine apostles. * * * Therefore, * * * I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost. [^8]

So to those who have faith in the revelations which the Lord has given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the promise of the Holy Ghost is repeated, and assurance is made doubly sure.

The necessity of this baptism of the Holy Ghost is made apparent, first, by the plain declaration of the Savior himself, wherein he says, except a man is born of the Spirit as well as of the water, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven; and of course outside of the kingdom of heaven there can be no salvation, nor perfect happiness; second, its necessity appears from the very nature of things.

Through water baptism is obtained a remission of past sins; but even after the sins of the past are forgiven, the one so pardoned will doubtless feel the force of sinful habits bearing heavily upon him. He who has been guilty of habitual untruthfulness, will at times find himself inclined, perhaps, to yield to that habit. He who has stolen may be sorely tempted, when opportunity arises, to steal again. While he who has indulged in licentious practices may again find himself disposed to give way to the seductive influence of the siren. So with drunkenness, malice, envy, covetousness, hatred, anger, and in short all the evil dispositions that flesh is heir to.

There is an absolute necessity for some additional sanctifying grace that will strengthen poor human nature, not only to enable it to resist temptation, but also to root out from the heart concupiscence—the blind tendency or inclination to evil. The heart must be purified, every passion, every prosperity made submissive to the will, and the will of man brought into subjection to the will of God.

Man's natural powers are unequal to this task; so, I believe, all will testify who have made the experiment. Mankind stand in some need of a strength superior to any they possess of themselves, to accomplish this work of rendering pure our fallen nature. Such strength, such power, such a sanctifying grace is conferred on man in being born of the Spirit—in receiving the Holy Ghost. Such, in the main, is its office, its work.

I do not know such a conclusion directly from any one passage of Scripture, but from the whole tenor of the teachings of the servants of God in both ancient and modern times.

We shall see, presently, that it is this Spirit which reproves the world of sin, of righteousness and judgment, [^9] that he guides into all truth, takes of the things of the Father and reveals them unto the children of men, and testifies that Jesus is the Christ. These things increase knowledge and faith; and as the foundation of knowledge and faith are broadened and deepened so are the powers to work righteousness increased.

We shall see also that the fruits of the Spirit are goodness, righteousness, truth, love, joy, peace and gentleness, [^10] and as these things are increased in the soul, viciousness and impurity are rooted out until the whole man is changed and is very deed becomes a new creature in Christ Jesus—is numbered among the pure in heart, and blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see and dwell with God.

The reader will remember that John the Baptist was sent to preach repentance and baptism before the coming of him who was to baptize with the Holy Ghost. We may also have observed in the teachings of Peter on the day of Pentecost, after his arguments and the power of the Spirit by which he spake and aroused belief in the minds of the people, that he required them to repent and be baptized for the remission of their sins before he gave them the promise of the Holy Ghost.

If we turn to the account given in the Acts of the Apostles of the conversion of the people of Samaria, we shall find the same order observed. Philip went down to that city, taught them the word, which they believed, they repented of their sins, and were baptized; then Peter and John came and conferred upon them the Holy Ghost. [^11]

Then, again when Paul found a number of men in Ephesus, who claimed to have been baptized unto John's baptism, yet had not so much as heard of the Holy Ghost, Paul was careful to rebaptize them—since there seemed to be some doubt as to the validity of their first baptism—before he conferred upon them the Holy Ghost. [^12]

It appears from these circumstances that faith, repentance, and baptism, precede the reception of, or the baptism of, the Holy Ghost, and are in fact, prerequisites to a reception of it. This order in respect of these principles, and ordinances, is further sustained by other passages of Scripture.

Just previous to his crucifixion, Jesus said to the apostles:

I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him. [^13]

It is evident from this that the world cannot receive the Holy Ghost. And now, who are the world? I answer, those who have not yet put on Christ; or in other words, those who have not yet entered into the kingdom of God, through Faith in God and Christ, repentance and baptism. They are the world; and, according to the word of the Master, they cannot receive the Holy Ghost.

Again: When Peter and other apostles were brought before the senate of the Jews, accused with intent to bring the blood of Messiah upon them, Peter answered:

The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given them that obey him. [^14]

Not, mark you, to them who have not obeyed him. This is in harmony with the statement that the world cannot receive the Holy Ghost, and also with the other cases we cited where the order in presenting the Gospel to the people was faith in God and Christ, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, and then the reception of the Holy Ghost.

There is an exception, however, to this rule, in the New Testament: the case of Cornelius, the devout Gentile, [^15] and for this exception there was a special reason. It seems that the apostles applied the narrow and contracted views of the Jews to the Gospel. They thought it was to be confined to the house of Israel—to those of the circumcision. They appeared slow to understand that in Jesus Christ all the nations and peoples of the earth were to be blessed, the Gentiles as well as the Jews. Consequently, when the time had come to send the Gospel to the Gentiles, the Lord opened the way by sending an angel to Cornelius to tell him that his prayers and alms had come up for a memorial before the Lord, and to direct him to send men to Joppa for Peter, who would tell him what he ought to do. [^16] He at once obeyed the heavenly injunction.

Meantime the Lord prepared Peter to go to the Gentiles. In vision he beheld a great net lowered down from heaven, filled with all manner of beasts, and a voice cried unto him, "Rise, Peter, kill, and eat." But Peter said, "Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean." "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common," said the voice. [^17] This was done thrice, and before he had wholly concluded what the vision could mean, the messengers from Cornelius were at the gate,—and the Spirit told him to go with them, for the Lord hath sent them.

That Peter understood the import of this vision to be that the Gospel was for all mankind, for all races and nations, is evident from the fact that when on the following day he went with the messengers to the house of Cornelius, he said to him:

Ye know how that it is an awful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath showed me that I should not call any man common or unclean. Therefore come I unto you without gain-saying, as soon as I was sent for. [^18]

Cornelius related to him his vision and expressed himself as ready to receive the commandments of God. Then Peter preached to him Christ and him crucified, and that whosoever believed on him should have remission of sins. And "while Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord." [^19]

Afterwards, when they of the circumcision complained of Peter going to them who were uncircumcised, he related the whole matter to them, and testified that as he began to speak to Cornelius and his kindred, "the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning. * * * Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God?" [^20] When they heard this they held their peace, and the saying went abroad that God had also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.

The object for deviating from the order in which the principles and ordinances of the Gospel follow each other is obvious—it was that the Jews might have a witness from God that the Gospel was for the Gentiles as well as for their own nation. But according to the Scriptures, and, I may say, according to the nature and relationship of these several principles and ordinances of the Gospel to each other, the reception of the Holy Ghost comes after repentance and baptism.

In writing to the Corinthian saints who had received the Holy Ghost, Paul says:

What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God? [^21]

And again:

Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy. [^22]

From these passages this much is learned: that the man who receives the Holy Ghost becomes a temple thereof, even the temple of God; and since it is decreed that if a man defiles the temple of God him will God destroy, it may be reasonably inferred that the Holy Ghost dwells not in unholy temples; hence, through faith in God, sincere repentance of all sins, and baptism for the remission of them, man cleanses his temple, his body, that it may be a fit dwelling place for the Holy Ghost.

Thus faith, repentance, water baptism and then the baptism of the Spirit is the order in which these principles stand, both according to the teachings of the Scriptures, and the nature of the things themselves, the one leading up logically to the other, which follows in beautiful and harmonious sequence.

The manner in which the saints under the teachings of the apostles received the baptism of the Holy Ghost was through the laying on of hands. In proof of this I call attention once more to the labors of Philip in the city of Samaria.

It is already known how he taught them the Gospel, how they believed it and were baptized; then we are informed that "when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John; who, when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost (for as yet he was fallen on none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus). Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. [^23]

Previous to the labors of Philip among the Samaritans one Simon Magus, a magician, had given it out that he himself was some great one, and his influence among the people was considerable. But, he, too, became converted to the teachings of Philip, and was astonished at the power which attended his administrations, for the sick were healed, the lame were cured, and unclean spirits were cast out of those who were possessed of them. Afterwards when the apostles John and Peter came and conferred the Holy Ghost upon those whom Philip had baptized, Simon was present:

And when Simon saw that through laying on of apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, Give me also of this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. [^24]

Paul, it will be remembered, found a number of men at Ephesus who claimed to have been baptized unto John's baptism, but when Paul questioned them as to the Holy Ghost, they had not heard even that there was such a Spirit. So doubting the validity of their baptism, he rebaptized them; after which, "when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied." [^25]

The same apostle, also, in writing to Timothy, exhorts him to stir up the gift of God which was in him, and which he had received by the putting one of his [Paul's] hands, alluding, no doubt, to the time that Paul bestowed the Holy Ghost upon him by the laying on of hands. [^26]

That this practice of laying on hands for the bestowal or baptism of the Holy Ghost continued in the primitive Christian Church for a long time—at least for three centuries—is evident from the following testimony:

Of the rites and ceremonies of the third century, Mosheim says:

The effect of baptism was supposed to be the remission of sins; And it was believed that the bishop, by the imposition of hands and by prayer conferred those gifts of the Holy Spirit which were necessary for living a holy life. [^27]

In a note on the foregoing question, Murdock, the most accurate translator of Dr. Mosheim's great work on church history, says:

This may be placed beyond all controversy by many passages from the fathers of this century. And as it will conduce much to an understanding of the theology of the ancients, which differed in many respects from ours, I will adduce a single passage from Cyprian. It is in his Epistle, No. 73, p. 131: "it is manifest where and by whom the remission of sin conferred in baptism is administered. They who are presented to the rulers of the church, obtain by our prayers and imposition of hands, the Holy Ghost." [^28]

In another passage Cyprian writes:

Our practice is that those who have been baptized into the Church should be presented, that by prayer and imposition of hands they may receive the Holy Ghost.

While Augustine in the fourth century, says:

We still do what the apostles did when they laid their hands on the Samaritans and called down the Holy Ghost upon them. [^29]

In subsequent centuries, however, this part of the Gospel was lost, or neglected by some of the sects of Christendom, and when announced among them today, it is not infrequently regarded as a new doctrine. [^30] Yet it is not. We have seen that it was a doctrine practiced by the apostles and their immediate successors. Indeed it is named directly as one of the principles of the doctrine of Christ, by Paul. The following is the passage:

Therefore, not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead and of eternal judgment. [^31]

And here it may be well to call attention to the fact, that it is written that "whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God." [^32] And since a large part of the religious world has lost sight of this important doctrine of the laying on of hands for imparting the Holy Ghost, it is evidence, among many others, that they have not God; for the absence of this part of the Gospel proves that they have not continued in the doctrine of Christ.

In restoring the Gospel to earth in the present dispensation, it seems, from the frequency with which it is mentioned, that particular prominence is given to this doctrine and ordinance through which the Holy Ghost is imparted. Out of the many passages in the Doctrine and Covenants relating to the subject, I select the following:

In April, 1830, the same month and year in which the Church of Christ in this dispensation was organized, the Lord in explaining the office and calling of an apostle, said:

An apostle is an elder, and it is his calling to baptize. * * * And to confirm those who are baptized into the Church, by the laying on of hands for the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, according to the scriptures. [^33]

In a revelation of James Covill, given in January, 1831, calling him to obedience to the Gospel and appointing him to be God's servant, even a minister for Jesus Christ, the Lord said:

And this is my Gospel; repentance and baptism by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire, and the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which showeth all things, and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom.

After calling him to be his servant, the Lord said:

And again, it shall come to pass, that on as many as ye shall baptize with water, ye shall lay your hands, and they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^34]

Then in a revelation given to Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt and Lemon Copley, through Joseph the Prophet, on the occasion of these men being sent with the Gospel to the Shakers, the Lord said:

Go among this people and say unto them, like unto mine apostle of old whose name was Peter; Believe on the name of the Lord Jesus, * * * repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ according to the holy commandment, for the remission of sins; and whoso doeth this shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of the hands of the Elders of this Church. [^35]

As this last is a general law, I do not consider it necessary to cite further passages, though the revelations of the Lord contained in the Doctrine and Covenants are replete with them. Sufficient has been said to show that the doctrine has been made prominent in this dispensation.

To my mind this ordinance is the most philosophical of any in the Gospel. On one occasion as Jesus passed through a throng of people, a woman who had been troubled with an issue of blood for twelve years, and had spent all her living upon physicians, but received no benefit from them, came up behind him, saying in her heart, if I can but touch the hem of his garment I shall be healed. And it was so, even according to her faith; for pressing through the crowd she laid hold of his garment and was immediately made whole. "And Jesus said, Who touched me?" When all denied, Peter and they that were with him said, "Master, the multitude throng thee and press thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?" And Jesus said, "Somebody hath touched me; for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me." [^36]

Now, what had happened? And why the expression— "Somebody hath touched me; for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me?" My answer would be that the person of Jesus, aye, and also the very garments he wore, were so charged with that divine influence, the Holy Spirit, that when the woman with the issue of blood touched his garments, so much of that Spirit left him to heal her that it was perceptible to him, and he exclaimed, "Virtue is gone out of me!"

So, when a servant of God, who has the companionship of the Holy Ghost, is filled with that Spirit, and possesses authority to act in the name of Jesus Christ, lays his hands upon one who has prepared himself through faith, repentance, and baptism, some of the influence of the Holy Spirit passes from the one who administers to him upon whom he lays his hands, and he is baptized with it. These are the laws by which the Holy Ghost is received; these are the conditions that must exist, in order that men may walk within the circle of his influence, and in the full and free enjoyment of his companionship. The transmission of the influence of the Holy Ghost from one person to another by an observance of the principles and ordinances of the Gospel we have now considered, is as natural and philosophical in the spiritual things of the universe, as it is for electricity or steam to perform the wonders which these forces are now made to enact in the commercial and mechanical worlds, when the laws upon which the manipulation of them depend are complied with; but which they will not perform, unless the conditions by which their power is made available, are complied with.

As stated by Elder Parley P. Pratt—whose language, however I slightly modify—to impart a portion of the influence of the Holy Spirit by the touch or by the laying on of hands; or to impart a portion of the element of life from one animal body to another by an authorized agent who acts in the name of God, and who is filled therewith, is as much in accordance with the laws of nature as for water to seek its own level: air its equilibrium; or heat and electricity their own mediums of conveyance. * * * An agent possessed of this heavenly influence cannot impart of the same to another, unless that other is qualified, washed, cleansed from all his impurities of heart, affections, habits or practices by the blood of the Atonement, which is generally applied in connection with the baptism of remission. A man who continues, in his sins, and who has no living faith in the Son of God, cannot receive the gift of the Holy Spirit through the ministration of any agent, however holy he may be. The impure spirit of such a one will repulse the pure influence, upon the natural laws of sympathetic affinity, or of attraction and repulsion. [^37]

In other words, the Spirit of God will not dwell in unholy temples, hence repentance and baptism for the remission of sins go before the baptism of the Spirit that men may be cleansed from their sins, justified before God, and their bodies by these means made fit dwelling places for the Holy Ghost—the living temples of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The following is the teaching of the Prophet Joseph Smith on the subject: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us."—Doctrine and Covenants, section cxxx.
[^2] John xvi:16, 17.
[^3] John xiv:26.
[^4] John xv:26.
[^5] John xvi:13, 14.
[^6] John xvi:8.
[^7] Gen. i:2, 3.
[^8] Job xxvi:12, 13.
[^9] Psalms civ.
[^10] John xiv.
[^11] Doc. and Cov., sec. lxxxviii:1-13.
[^12] Doc. and Cov., sec. xxix:30, 31.
[^13] Doc. and Cov., sec. xciii; also I Cor, iii; 16, 17; I Cor. vi:19; see also Lectures on Faith v:2, 3.
[^14] Fifth Lecture on Faith, Doc. and Cov., p. 54.
[^15] John xiv:16, 26.
[^16] John xvi:13-15.
[^17] I John ii:20, 27.
[^18] Isaiah xxx:20, 21.
[^19] Romans ii:21. See also Matt. v, vi.
[^20] II Peter i:21.
[^21] Rev. xix:10.
[^22] I Cor. ii:10, 11.
[^23] John xv:26.
[^24] I Cor. xii:3.
[^25] I Cor. xii:4-12.
[^26] Gal. v:22, 23.
[^27] Key to Theology, p. 102.
[^28] Mosheim's Church History (Murdock), Vol. I, p. 189.
[^29] Mosheim's Church History, Vol. I, p. 189.
[^30] Laying on hands was employed in the Church for other purposes than imparting the Holy Ghost. It was the manner of administering to the sick (Mark xvi:18; Acts xxviii:8); and also of conferring authority or priesthood on men (see Acts vi:5, 6; vii:17; xiii:3); but as we here are only dealing with the ordinance as it relates to a means of imparting the Holy Ghost, I do not stop to discuss the other purposes for which it was employed.
[^31] It is a mistake to suppose all Christendom have neglected the practice of this ordinance. The Catholics teach that "Confirmation [by the laying on of hands] is a sacrament instituted by our Lord, by which the faithful, who have already been made children of God by baptism, receive the Holy Ghost by prayer, unction (or anointing with holy oil called chrism), and the laying on of hands of a bishop, the successor of the apostles. It is thus they are enriched with gifts, graces and virtues, especially with the virtue of fortitude, and made perfect Christians and valiant soldiers of Jesus Christ to stand through life the whole warfare of the world, the flesh and the devil. The first recorded instance of confirmation being administered to the faithful, is in the eighth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where St. Peter and St. John confirmed the Samaritans who had been already baptized by St. Philip. 'They prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. * * * Then laid they their hands on them and they received the Holy Ghost'." (Catholic Belief, Bruno, pp. 97, 98.) The Church of England, and of course the Episcopal churches in the colonies and the United States, teach practically the same.
[^32] Heb. vi:1, 2.
[^33] II John 9.
[^34] Doctrine and Covenants, section xx:38, 41.
[^35] Doctrine and Covenants, section xxxix:6, 23.
[^36] 36. Doc. and Cov., sec. x1ix:11-14.
[^37] 37. Luke viii:43-46.
