B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

CHAPTER XX

THE NATURE OF THE HOLY GHOST—HIS POWERS

CAN the naturalist find out and comprehend the secret of the endless variety of life in the vegetable and animal kingdoms? Can the chemist find out the essences of substances, or make himself master of the secrets of great nature's laboratory where those wonderful combinations are wrought which produce the substances that constitute the material universe? Can the physician or surgeon with scalpel and microscope "trace to its source the lightning of the soul"—trace out the secret springs of life and intelligence in the human organism? Can the astronomer, even with his mightiest telescope, penetrate to the outside curtains of space where worlds and planetary systems do not exist—can he circumscribe the creations of God, within the scope of his vision or knowledge?

To all these questions a negative answer must be given; when man has done his best, when his whole life has been spent in seeking knowledge and finding out wisdom, even then the facts which he has mastered, compared with those beyond the power of his intellect to comprehend, are insignificant; and the fields of knowledge which he has explored, compared with those wherein man has never yet set his foot, are as the few grains of sand compared to the untold millions of such grains that form old ocean's beach.

The great Sir Isaac Newton at the close of his life—a life devoted to the search for knowledge, in which pursuit he had been more than ordinarily successful, and most men thought he had accomplished something of which he could boast—said in accents most humble:

I have been like a child playing upon the beach; I have succeeded in finding a few pretty shells, and picking up a few pretty pebbles, but the great ocean lies before me unexplored.

Questions and considerations like these, are calculated to reveal the fact that man, with all his boasted intelligence, is, after all, in this sphere of existence, "cribbed, cabined and confined" to limits extremely narrow, so far as his ability to comprehend facts is concerned.

The naturalist will answer, "No," to the question I have set down to him. He will tell us that he can classify the various forms of animal and vegetable life, basing his classification upon certain similarities of structure or habits; but when it comes to accounting for the great variety and forms of life in animated nature; or to telling why it is that one seed produces the mighty, sturdy oak, and another the supple willow; or why each species of animals produces its kind—he cannot inform you. His most careful investigations and patient watching have failed to rob nature of these secrets.

The chemist of a century ago, who thought he had reduced compound substances to their primary elements, and had discovered all the primary elements, of substances, could he live today, he would see his "elements" separated and reduced, and a multitude of other elements unknown to him, brought within the compass of chemical knowledge; and yet the existence of the universe itself, remaining as great a mystery as ever. Indeed, the wonder grows rather than diminishes with each succeeding discovery; for these things increase the mystery by revealing the complexity and delicate combinations of substances as they exist in their varied forms.

To the physician, the surgeon, the scientist, the mystery of life remains as much an unsolved problem as it ever did. It is true they claim to have traced it down to its beginning; they say it originates in a substance known to them as protoplasm; that a single cell of this wonderful substance has the peculiar power of producing another cell, and this one still another. This multiplication of protoplasmic cells continuing until it develops in the varied processes of nature into the great variety of animal organisms known to us. Yet after all his work, the scientist at last, with nervous hand and throbbing brow reaches a point beyond which he cannot go, and the single cell of protoplasm, with the peculiar power to multiply itself, is as great a mystery as man with his complex organism of bones and nerves and muscles.

To the question I have put to the astronomer, he would doubtless answer, with some impatience, that his best instruments but revealed to him the nearest outposts of the stellar worlds; and that beyond these few street lamps within his vision, with whose positions he has become acquainted and marked down on his chart, are numberless planetary systems out of the reach of his instruments, but whose existence is revealed by masses of light through which he cannot penetrate. His science is unsatisfied, the little he has learned but reveals to him the vastness and extent of those fields of knowledge beyond his power to enter, much less to reap.

If in relation to these grosser materials or objects, and their relationship to each other, man's knowledge is so limited, and his powers of comprehension so restricted, the reader will not be astonished when I tell him there is very much that is beyond our power to understand in relation to the Holy Ghost, from whom proceeds influences so subtle, powerful, sensitive, intelligent and universal that they are far beyond our present powers of comprehension. It is clear, however, from the Scriptures that the Holy Ghost, though a spirit, is nevertheless a personage, but differs from the other two persons of the godhead, the Father and Son, in that he has not a body of flesh and bones as they have. [^1] But the Scriptures clearly teach the personality of the Holy Ghost. In them the Holy Ghost is he not it . "I will pray to the Father," said Jesus, "and he will give you another Comforter, * * * even the Spirit of Truth whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you and shall be with you." [^2] "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, * * * he shall teach you all things." * * "He shall testify of me." [^3] "He will guide you unto all truth; for he shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak, and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me for he shall receive of mine and shall show it unto you." [^4] "And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness and of judgment." [^5]

But the influence or power radiating from the personal presence of the Holy Ghost fills all the realms of God; and the Holy Ghost by reason of his universally diffused, subtle and powerful influence, is the medium through which the Godhead operates in creative acts and governmental functions. When the work of creation was about to begin, with reference to our own earth, when the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep, "The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be light, and there was light," [^6] etc. "By his Spirit," saith Job, "he hath garnished the heavens, * * * he divideth the sea with his power." [^7]

"O Lord," said the Psalmist, "how manifold are thy works. * * * The earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein. These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in due season. That thou givest them they gather; thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good. Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust. Thou sendeth forth thy Spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth." [^8]

And to this agrees what God has revealed in this present dispensation of Gospel through Joseph Smith. To a number of elders who had assembled together, to learn the will of the Lord concerning them—after telling them that he was well pleased with them, and that their names were written in the book of the names of the sanctified—he said:

Wherefore, I now send upon you another Comforter, even upon you my friends, that it may abide in your hearts, even the Holy Spirit of promise; which other Comforter is the same that I promised unto my disciples, as is recorded in the testimony of John. [^9]

This Comforter is the promise which I gave unto you of eternal life; even the glory of the celestial kingdom:

Which glory is that of the church of the first born; even of God; the holiest of all, through Jesus Christ his Son:

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things; in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, [that is, by the power of his Spirit] the light of truth;

Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof, by which it was made.

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof, by which they were made.

And the earth also, and the power thereof; even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which now shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space.

The light which is in all things; which giveth life to all things: which is the law by which all things are governed: even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. [^10]

And again the Lord says:

As the words have gone forth out of my mouth, even so shall they be fulfilled, that the first shall be last, and the last shall be first in all things whatsoever I have created by the word of my power, which is the power of my Spirit;

For by the power of my Spirit created I them, yea, all things both spiritual and temporal. [^11]

Again it is written:

The elements are the tabernacle of God, yea man is the tabernacle of God, even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple. [^12]

This cannot allude to God the Father or to God the Son, because each has a tabernacle of flesh and bones, as tangible as man's; but it alludes to God the Holy Ghost whose power and influence are in the elements of the universe, giving life and light and intelligence to all things, and is the grand medium of communication between God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ and their vast creations.

It would be well to remember also in this connection. and it may prevent some confusion in the minds of those who read the Scriptures, that by metonymy the words "Spirit," "Holy Spirit," "Spirit of God," "Spirit of Christ," and even "God" are sometimes used when the "Holy Ghost" is meant. In other words, these terms above given are used interchangeably. And sometimes the influence of the Spirit or his powers or even his operations are spoken of as the Holy Ghost himself, and hence confusion in thought, and perhaps also in what is written in our books. But it should be held as a most positive dogma of revelation that the Holy Ghost is a spiritual personage. Going out from him, however—radiating from him,—is a universal influence and power that permeates all the works of God, and he is God's witness for the truth of all things and the power by which all things subsist. He proceeds from the father and the Son, and is the mind of each—of both. [^13] All three, indeed, are of one mind, have one purpose, and are so perfectly united that they constitute one Godhead—the supreme governing power in heaven and in earth.

Having said so much as to the nature of the Holy Ghost, let us turn our attention to what he does for those who possess him, what gifts and graces he bestows and develops within them.

As the time drew near for Jesus to make his great sacrifice, and then depart from the immediate presence of his disciples, he manifested a great desire to comfort them in prospect of this separation, and this he did by promising to send to them from the Father the Holy Ghost, that he might abide with them for ever; [^14] and in explaining to them the powers of this Spirit, he said:

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

In continuation of his remarks on this subject, he told them he had many things to say unto them, but they could not bear them at that time. "Howbeit," said he, "when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you." [^15]

From these passages four important things are learned respecting the powers of the Holy Ghost:

I. That he will teach all things; and, what is equivalent, "guide into all truth."

II. He will bring all things to remembrance, that is, whatsoever things have been stored in the mind.

III. He will show things to come.

IV. He will take of the things of God and reveal them unto men.

Of the excellence and importance of these several powers it is scarcely needful to speak, since their excellence is evident, upon the mere enumeration of them, yet one cannot refrain from looking at them more in detail. How excellent a thing it is to have a teacher competent to teach all things, and guide into all truth! In view of the fact that the saints possessed the Holy Ghost, and that the Holy Ghost has these powers, one can understand the reasonableness of John's remarks to the saints, in which he says:

But ye have an unction from the Holy One and ye know all things. * * * The anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him. [^16]

Moreover, to that extent that a man is guided into all truth, he is preserved from all error. There is no danger of his being deceived, or led astray by every wind of doctrine, or the cunning craftiness of false teachers, so long as he is in possession of that Spirit which guides into all truth. So taught Isaiah, who, in speaking of the time when the house of Israel should possess this Spirit, says:

And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers:

And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. [^17]

As to the second power enumerated, viz., the power to bring all things to the recollection, I maintain that it would be impossible for man to live the law of the Gospel without come such grace being conferred upon him by the Lord. The law of the Gospel requires men not only to do good to those who do good to them, but to do good to those who despitefully use them; not only to lend to those who lend to them, but to lend to those of whom they can hope to receive nothing in return; to revile not those who may revile them—in a word, the law of the Gospel is summed up in this:

Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. [^18]

However fine this may be in theory, or however beautiful it may look on paper, to carry it practically into the affairs of life is difficult.

When reviled it seems but natural to answer railing with railing, blows with blows, and for injury inflicted, return as much in kind as is within one's power to inflict. And unless in possession of this grace bestowed by the Holy Ghost, viz., having brought to one's recollection the things of Christ's Gospel, being reminded in the very moment of temptation of these laws—when smarting under a sense of injustice, or suffering under wrongs heaped upon one—it would be difficult if not impossible to live up to these heavenly precepts. But by having the Holy Spirit as one's prompter in the moments of temptation, and by cultivating the Christian virtue of patience, this law of the Gospel, so contrary to the natural disposition, may be complied with, and the follower of Christ, like his Master, may be able to say for those who inflict injury upon him, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."

Thirdly, "He will show you things to come." In other words, the Holy Ghost is the spirit of prophecy, for by it the future has been unfolded to the minds of the prophets; and by it the Scriptures were given. In proof of this I quote the apostle Peter:

Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. [^19]

And that which they spake was written and became scripture.

When an angel visited John on Patmos and that apostle fell at his feet to worship him, the angel said:

See thou do it not: I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: [which is the Holy Ghost]: worship God; for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. [^20]

These facts will exhibit the inconsistency, nay, I may say, the absolutely erroneous position of those who insist that while the Holy Ghost has continued with men, prophecy and revelation have ceased.

The very fact, as stated in the fourth item taken from these passages under consideration, viz., that the Holy Ghost will take of things of the Lord and show them unto men, also proves that this Spirit is one of revelation, and is in harmony with the Scripture:

The Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. [^21]

In addition to these powers there is still another, and it is an important one. The Holy Ghost is a witness for God and Christ: "When the Comforter is come," are the words of the Son of God, "whom I will send unto you from the Father, * * * he shall testify of me." [^22] The testimony of Paul is still more emphatic than this:

No man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed: and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. [^23]

I have shown in my remarks on the Holy Ghost being "the Spirit of prophecy," that that Spirit and this—without which no man can say that Jesus is the Lord—are identical. Several other powers belonging to this Spirit are also enumerated by Paul. He gives us to understand that "There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And there are differences of administration, but the same Lord. * * * But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will." [^24]

In addition to this splendid array of powers and gifts of the Holy Ghost, we are told that the result of possessing him "is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance." [^25] Indeed we may say with Apostle Parley P. Pratt—though slightly changing his language—the Holy Spirit adapts himself to all the organs and attributes of man. His influence quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands and purifies all the natural passions and affections; and adapts them by the gift of wisdom to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness and charity. It develops beauty of person, form and feature. It tends to health, vigor, animation and social feeling. It develops and invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens, invigorates and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone. joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being. [^26]

Such is the Holy Ghost and his sanctifying influence—such the Spirit given to be the companion of those who accept the Gospel, who believe in God and in Jesus Christ, who repent of their sins and are baptized for the remission of them. In other words, from the nature of his spiritual being the Holy Ghost directly influences the spirit of man and brings him into the ways of God. By accepting the Gospel men are given power to walk within the circle of his influence, and the Spirit himself is accessible to them as companion, guide and comforter. To those brought into harmonious relations with God through the Gospel, the influence of the Holy Ghost becomes the very presence of God to them, and in them; for by him they are made one with God as the Son is one with the Father.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] II Peter i:5-8.
[^2] Luke xviii:1.
[^3] Rev. ii:10. History of Joseph Smith, April 10, 1842.
[^4] Rev. xxii:14.
[^5] John xvi:13, 14.
[^6] John xvi:8.
[^7] Gen. i:2, 3.
[^8] Job xxvi:12, 13.
[^9] Psalms civ.
[^10] John xiv.
[^11] Doc. and Cov., sec. lxxxviii:1-13.
[^12] Doc. and Cov., sec. xxix:30, 31.
[^13] Doc. and Cov., sec. xciii; also I Cor, iii; 16, 17; I Cor. vi:19; see also Lectures on Faith v:2, 3.
[^14] Fifth Lecture on Faith, Doc. and Cov., p. 54.
[^15] John xiv:16, 26.
[^16] John xvi:13-15.
[^17] I John ii:20, 27.
[^18] Isaiah xxx:20, 21.
[^19] Romans ii:21. See also Matt. v, vi.
[^20] II Peter i:21.
[^21] Rev. xix:10.
[^22] I Cor. ii:10, 11.
[^23] John xv:26.
[^24] I Cor. xii:3.
[^25] I Cor. xii:4-12.
[^26] Gal. v:22, 23.
