B. H. Roberts, Gospel and Man's Relationship to Deity ( 1901)

CHAPTER XXII

DIVINE AUTHORITY—THE CHURCH

I HAVE now considered, at some length, the doctrines and ordinances which constitute the first principles of the Gospel of Christ. In connection with these principles, however, there is another matter which must claim the reader's attention; viz., the important fact that the Gospel must be preached and its ordinances administered by those having authority from God; or the administrations will have no binding force in heaven or on earth, in time or in eternity.

We are informed in the Scriptures that the Lord wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul, whom he had called to be his servant. The sick were healed, and evil spirits were cast out of those who were possessed. "Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth. And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so. And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house, naked and wounded." [^1] These men presumptuously took it upon themselves to act as those who had divine authority, and the result was that not even the devils would respect their administrations, much less the Lord.

There is a principle of great moment associated with this incident. The question is, if these men, when acting without authority from God could not drive out an evil spirit, would their administration be of force, or have any virtue in it, had they administered in some other ordinance of the Gospel, say baptism for the remission of sins, or laying on hands for imparting the Holy Ghost? Manifestly it would not. And hence we rightly come to the conclusion, so well expressed in one of the articles of the faith of the Church, viz.:

A man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

Such a conclusion as this could reasonably be drawn also from the words of Paul in Hebrews, where he says:

Every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sin: * * * And no man taketh this honor unto himself, but that he is called of God, as was Aaron. [^2]

The manner in which Aaron was called to the priest's office is recorded in the writings of Moses as follows:

Take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons. [^3]

It may be objected that this was the law relating to the calling of high priests alone, but if high priests are to be called in this manner, is it not reasonable to conclude that all who administer in "things pertaining to God" must be called in the same way—that is, of God? So far as the Scriptures are concerned, and on subjects of this character their authority is conclusive, wherever we have an account of men administering in the things pertaining to God, and their administrations are accepted of him, they have either been called directly by revelation from him, or through inspiration in those who already had authority from God to act in his name; and to be called by a legitimate, divinely established authority is to be called of God.

On the other hand, whenever men have taken it upon themselves to act in the name of God, so far as any such instance is recorded, it has been followed by some manifestation of displeasure from him.

As an example of this statement, I call attention to the case of Uzza. The Lord appointed Aaron and his sons to take special charge of the ark of the covenant and all the holy things belonging to it. When it became necessary for the camp to move, after all things had been arranged by Aaron and his sons, then the sons of Kohash were to come to bear it; "but," said the Lord, "they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die." [^4] Some generations after this, King David undertook to move the ark from Baalah,—called also Kirjathjearim, where it had remained many years. Uzza and Ahio drove the cart on which the ark and its furniture were placed, and when the company engaged in this pious work reached Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to steady the ark, for the oxen stumbled, but in doing so he broke the law which had been given to Israel [^5]—he acted without authority. "And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzza, and he smote him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before God." [^6]

Take still another case, that of Uzziah. He was one of the kings of Israel; and for a long time he prospered exceedingly because of his righteousness. His enemies were smitten before him, and wisdom was given him to fortify Jerusalem as it never had been fortified before. But in the midst of his glory and the pride of his heart, he undertook to minister in the temple of God in the priest's office; and appeared before the altar to burn incense:

And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him four score priests of the Lord, that were valiant men:

And they withstood Uzziah, the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God.

The Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the Lord, from beside the incense altar.

And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him.

And Uzziah the king was a leper until the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; and he was cut off from the house of the Lord. [^7]

Swift punishment followed upon the presumptuous attempt of this king to exercise the authority of God without having had it conferred upon him: and we have already seen that in New Testament times the Lord would not have respect for the administration of those who spoke in his name without authority, no matter how nearly they conformed to the forms of the ceremony: there was no force in it, and the devil could and did prevail against them.

We have the testimony of Jesus respecting the authority which he had conferred upon his apostles; said he:

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit. [^8]

When seven men were chosen to look after the poor and minister to them, they set them before the apostles who, when they had prayed, laid their hands on them and ordained them to their calling. [^9]

So in the case of Paul. It was not enough that he saw and spoke with the Messiah, not enough to have Ananias come and baptize him, and receive the Holy Ghost; for afterwards, when the Lord would have him engage in the work of preaching the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof, the Holy Ghost said unto certain prophets at Antioch:

Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto ] have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. [^10]

Furthermore, as Paul went about confirming the souls of the saints, he ordained elders in every church. [^11] He did not suffer men to take the authority on themselves to minister in the things of God; but warned the saints against such characters. Having assembled the elders of the church of Ephesus, he said to them:

Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God. * * * For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. And of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. [^12]

This same thing pressed itself upon his mind when he wrote his Epistle to Timothy; for we find him exhorting that worthy man to "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering, and doctrine. For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." [^13]

To this also agrees the testimony of Peter. After speaking of the prophets that were in ancient Israel, he says:

But there were false prophets also among the people [then addressing the saints of his own day,] even as there shall be false teachings among you, who, privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bringing upon themselves swift destruction.

And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. [^14]

That is just what happened. False teachers arose, damnable heresies crept into the churches, the Gospel was corrupted, and a few generations after the Gospel was introduced by the personal ministry of John the Baptist and the Messiah himself, the authority of God was taken from among men.

Hence, when a knowledge of the Gospel was restored to the earth in this last dispensation, it became necessary to restore also the authority to teach it, and administer its ordinances. For this purpose John the Baptist, acting under the direction of Peter, James and John, was sent to restore the authority to administer in the outward ordinances, to teach faith and repentance, and baptize for the remission of sins. [^15]

Subsequently Peter, James and John were sent of the Lord [^16] early in the summer of 1829, and ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood—in fact, they were ordained apostles. [^17] And as the "Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things, [^18]—these men, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, had authority to administer in all the ordinances of salvation, and to organize the Church of Christ; which, under the direction of the Lord, they did. And thus not only has the Gospel been restored to the earth in this last dispensation, but the authority to administer in all its ordinances, and to build up the Church of Jesus Christ and the kingdom of God on earth has been brought from heaven and bestowed upon men.

Closely associated with the question of divine authority, and indeed springing out of it, is The Church of Christ; which in fact, may be said to be the depository of the divine authority of which I have spoken—divine authority organized into an institution. The Church evidently has two great functions to perform; first, proclaiming the truth—the Gospel which God has committed to her keeping, to the whole world: second, instructing and perfecting the body of Christ, the Church, until the Saints are brought to the unity of the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God—unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. [^19]

Owing, doubtless, to the fragmentary character of the Christian annals, the doctrines of the Church in the New Testament of the Jewish Scriptures, is very imperfect; only the barest outline of it may be traced; while the distinctions between the respective offices in the priesthood of the Church and the definition of the duties of each officer are still less satisfactory. Enough is written, however, to clearly indicate the existence of a gradation in those offices and the existence of specific duties that are peculiar to each. Paul, in his epistle to the Corinthians, compares the Church of Christ to the body of a man, which, though it be composed of many members, yet it is but one body; and all the members thereof are needful to its perfect existence and the performance of those functions assigned to it. "The eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee," remarks the apostle; "nor the head to the feet, I have no need of thee. Nay, much more, those members of the body which seem to be more feeble are necessary." [^20] This is equivalent to saying that the apostle cannot say to the elder. I have no need of thee; nor the deacon to the bishop, I have no need of thee; nor the seventy to the priest, I have no need of thee. The argument is that all the officers, even those which seem least necessary, are all needful to the existence of the Church of Christ, and every one is forbidden to hold as unnecessary his brother officer. Moreover, the apostle insists that there should be the same bond of sympathy between the members of the Church that there is between the members of the human body; that there should be no schism in it, and that the members should have a care one for another; that when one member suffers all the members suffer with it; or if one member be honored all rejoice with it. Then he proceeds to say:

And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily, prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracle, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.

Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles?

Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?" [^21]

The obvious answer to all this is that all are not apostles, nor prophets, nor teachers: all are not workers of miracles in the Church, but the whole body is fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth. [^22]

In another description of the Church the same writer says that Jesus Christ having led captivity captive gave gifts unto men—"and he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers." He also enumerates the objects for which this organization was given: for perfecting the saints; for the work of the ministry; for edifying the body of Christ; to prevent the saints being carried about by every wind of doctrine or the craftiness of men. [^23]

But we may turn from the fragmentary documents of the Christian annals, and the imperfect description of the Church, the Lamb's bride, contained in them, and describe the Church from the revelations which have been given in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times, the dispensation of the Gospel introduced by the revelations of God to Joseph Smith, and which re-established the Church of Christ once more in the earth, and for the last time.

From those revelations we learn that the officers of the Church, and in fact, the whole Church organization, grows out of the priesthood. Priesthood is divine authority or power which God delegates to man, by which a man is authorized to act in the name of God. It makes him the legally appointed agent of God; and so long as he performs his official acts in accordance with the laws of the priesthood—by which we mean the regulations which God prescribes for it—whatsoever man does in that official capacity is as valid as if it were done by God himself. Thus, if a man so authorized takes a repentant sinner into the water, according to the teachings of the Gospel, and baptizes him for the remission of sins, that is just as valid as if God had done it in person. Or if he lays hands upon the head of one who has accepted baptism as above described, and by virtue of holding this delegated power from God, should say, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," that is just as valid as if God had done it in person. Or if one holding this divine authority should go with a message of warning to a city, state, or nation, and deliver that warning, his words would be the words of God to that city, state, or nation, and those who rejected him would be guilty of rejecting God, for they reject God's authority in that messenger.

It is from this priesthood, we say again, that the Church officers and the Church organization come. While there is of necessity a unity in this power, that is, it is all one power, yet in the exercise of its functions divisions are recognized. First, a division into what is called respectively the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood, the former of which is the greater and devoted more especially to spiritual things, while the latter has most to do with temporal concerns.

Within each of these divisions there are degrees of power or authority. Speaking of the Melchizedek Priesthood, one degree of it makes men elders, another high priests, another seventies, another patriarchs, another apostles. Speaking of the Aaronic Priesthood, one degree of it makes men deacons, another teachers, another priests, another bishops—the bishopric is the presidency of and embraces the fullness of this lesser priesthood.

These respective degrees of priesthood are limited to the performance of special duties or functions. While the deacon and teacher may teach and expound Scripture, persuade and exhort men to come unto Christ, and the former may visit the homes of the members of the Church, watch over them and see that there is no iniquity in the Church, yet neither may baptize the people for the remission of sins nor administer the sacrament. While the priest may teach and expound doctrine, baptize and administer the sacrament, and assist the elder in the performance of his duties, when necessity requires, yet he cannot lay on hands for imparting the Holy Ghost. So in the Melchizedek Priesthood: each degree or order of it has its specific duties assigned to it, but the greater always includes the lesser and may, on occasion, officiate in all the offices below its own.

First and highest of all officers in the Church stands the first presidency, consisting of three presiding high priests, or apostles. Their jurisdiction and authority are universal. Their jurisdiction extends over all the affairs of the Church as well in temorpal as in spiritual things: as well in the organized stakes of Zion as in the missions and branches of the Church abroad. In that presidency are legislative, judicial and executive powers. That is to say, the president of the Church is the mouthpiece of God to the Church, and he alone receives the law from the Lord by revelation and announces the same to the people; virtually, then, this is the law-making power. From all high councils—the judicial courts of the Church—except where the twelve apostles sit as a high council abroad—there lies an appeal to the first presidency, which finally determines the matter, and also defines the law of the Church, hence here is judicial power. The proof that in the presidency is executive power is seen in the fact of its universal presidency, and authority over all the affairs of the Church in all the world.

The great powers enumerated, then, center in the first presidency. On the right of the first presidency may be said to be the twelve apostles, clothed with the authority to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the first presidency to build up the Church and regulate all the affairs of the same in all the world, but more especially abroad among the nations of the earth—they stand more especially at the head of the foreign ministry of the Church. [^24] Next to them stand the seventies as their assistants in the great work assigned to them. To these two orders of the priesthood more especially is assigned and upon them rests the responsibility of the foreign ministry of the Church. They are witnesses for the Lord Jesus Christ in all the nations of the earth, and their special duty is that of preaching the Gospel and regulating all the affairs of the Church in all the world. [^25]

On the left of the first presidency may be said to stand the high priests, to which order of priesthood belongs the right of local presidency in the Church. From their ranks patriarchs, presidents of stakes, high councilors, and bishops and their counselors are chosen. [^26]

Next to the high priests stand the elders, who are to assist them in the performance of their duties. These quorums of priesthood constitute the standing ministry in the stakes of Zion, upon whom more especially devolve local presidency, and the duty of preaching the Gospel within the stakes of Zion.

The presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood centers in the presiding bishopric of the Church, which presides over all traveling and local bishops. The former are bishops appointed to preside over large districts of country, and who travel from place to place therein, setting in order the temporal affairs of the Church; the latter are bishops appointed to preside over regularly organized wards, and whose jurisdiction is confined within such wards respectively.

To aid the bishops in the duties of their several bishoprics are the quorums of priests, teachers and deacons.

The duty of the priests is to visit the homes of the saints, to teach the people, to expound the Scriptures, baptize believers and administer the sacrament. Forty-eight priests form a quorum of which the bishopric is the presidency.

The duty of the teachers is to be the standing ministers in the respective wards where they reside, to ferret out iniquity in the Church, and see that the members perform their duties. Twenty-four of them constitute a quorum, which is presided over by a president and two counselors chosen from the members.

The duty of the deacons is to assist the teachers, and they may also expound, teach, warn and invite all to come unto Christ. Twelve of them form a quorum, and from their number a president and two counselors are chosen to preside.

A stake of Zion is a division of the Church territorially that embraces several villages or towns or ecclesiastical wards. A stake is presided over by a presidency comprised of a president and two counselors, all of whom must be high priests. In each stake is a high council, composed of twelve high priests. The presidency of the stake is also president of the high council, which constitutes the highest tribunal in the stake. The stakes are divided into ecclesiastical wards, presided over by a bishopric, assisted in its labors by the quorums of the lesser priesthood as already explained.

The judicial powers of the Church are vested in the ordinary bishops' courts; the standing high councils of the stakes of Zion; temporary high councils of high priests abroad; the traveling presiding high council—the twelve apostles; a special court consisting of the presiding bishop of the Church and twelve high priests (of which more is to be said presently), and finally in the presidency of the Church.

Church discipline requires that in case of difficulty between members, every effort shall be made by the parties aggrieved with each other to become reconciled. Failing in this they are required to call in others to bring about a reconciliation, but if through that means a settlement of the case is impossible, the matter goes to the bishop's court on the complaint of the party aggrieved, and there the case is heard on testimony and a decision rendered. The bishop's court is the first or primary court of the Church, and the bishop is known as the common judge. In the event of the parties or either of them being dissatisfied with the decision of the bishop, an appeal lies to the high council of the stake, where a re-hearing is given to the case. The organization of the high council is worthy of consideration. It is composed of twelve high priests presided over by the presidency of the stake. [^27] The high council cannot act unless seven of its members are present; but seven have the power to call upon other high priests to act temporarily in the place of the absent councilors. Whenever a high council is organized, the twelve draw lots for their places. Those who draw the even numbers—two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve—are to stand in behalf of the accused; those drawing the odd numbers in behalf of the accuser. In every case the accused has a right to half of the council, to prevent injury or injustice. The councilors who represent the accused and accuser respectively, do not become partisans bent on winning their case irrespective of its righteousness or justice; on the contrary every man is to speak according to equity and truth; and aside from that is merely to see that each party to the issue involved has justice accorded him and that he is not subjected to insult or injury.

There are three kinds of high councils in the Church. They are similar in organization, and the manner of procedure is practically the same before them all; but they differ in authority and jurisdiction.

I. The Traveling High Council. This council consists of the twelve apostles of Jesus Christ. They are a traveling, presiding high council; and, laboring under the direction of the first presidency of the Church, they have the right to build up the Church and regulate all the affairs of the same in all the world. Whenever they sit as a high council, there is no appeal from their decisions—that is, they can only be called in question by the general authorities of the Church in the event of transgression.

II. The Standing High Councils at the Stakes of Zion. As already noted, the Church is divided into branches or wards with appropriate officers; and these branches, wards and settlements of the saints are grouped into stakes of Zion. In each stake there is a standing high council, limited in its jurisdiction to the affairs of that particular stake where it is located.

III. Temporary High Council. The high priests abroad, that is, outside of the organized stakes of Zion—whenever the parties to a difficulty, or either of them demand it, and the high priests abroad deem the case of sufficient importance to justify such action—are authorized to organize a temporary high council to try the case. The council is to be organized after the pattern and proceed in the same manner as those at the stakes of Zion. If the decision of any high council—except that of the traveling, presiding high council—is unsatisfactory, an appeal lies to the first presidency, who take such steps in the case as wisdom and the Spirit of the Lord indicate. But whatever their decision is, it is final.

The special court referred to above—consisting of the presiding bishop of the Church and twelve high priests especially called for each occasion—I must not neglect to mention for the reason that it exhibits the fact that no one in the Church is so exalted but he is amenable to the laws and courts of the Church, as well as the humblest member. This special court is called into existence for the purpose of trying the president of the high priesthood, who is also the president of the Church, if he should be found in transgression. It may investigate his conduct, subject him to the most rigid examination, and if the evidence should show him to be in transgression, the court could condemn him and its action would be final; from its decision there would be no appeal. [^28]

Thus none, not even the highest, is beyond the operation of the laws and councils of the Church. However great and exalted any single officer of the Church may be, the Church is still greater and more exalted than he; for though the president of the Church is God's mouthpiece—God's vicegerent on earth—yet he may be tried and his conduct inquired into by this court to which I have called attention. Therefore if the time should ever come that the Church should be so unfortunate as to be presided over by a man who transgressed the laws of God and became unrighteous (and that such a thing could be, and that the president of the Church is not regarded as impeccable, is quite evident from the fact that provisions are made for his trial and condemnation), a means of deposing him, without destroying the Church, without revolution, or even disorder, is provided in the Church system of government. [^29]

It is the law of the Church that the decisions of the quorums of the priesthood are to be "made in all righteousness in holiness, in lowliness of heart, meekness and longsuffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity; because the promise is if these things abound in them, they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord." [^30] There is nothing in this Church organization which justifies the exercise of arbitrary power or any improper authority over men.

In March, 1839, while the Prophet was imprisoned in Liberty jail he wrote a letter to the Church for its instruction and comfort, and in the course of that letter, in speaking of the priesthood and the exercise of its power, he remarks:

There are many called but few chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honor of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—that the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control, or dominion, or compulsion, upon the souls of the children of men in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, amen to the priesthood, or the authority of that man. Behold! ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks; to persecute the saints, and to fight against God. We have learned by sad experience, that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion. Hence many are called, but few are chosen.

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile, reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the bands of death.

As the letter from which the foregoing is quoted was inspired by the Spirit of the Lord, and is published in the Doctrine and Covenants, at least in part, it stands as the word and law of God to the Church, and exhibits the spirit of the government thereof.

Such is the Church of Jesus Christ, the institution established of God for the promulgation of the Gospel and the instruction and perfecting of the saints.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Pearl of Great Price, pp. 65, 66.
[^2] Pearl of Great Price, p. 15.
[^3] Rev. xiii:8.
[^4] Pearl of Great Price, p. 20
[^5] Pearl of Great Price, p. 33.
[^6] Doc. and Cov., sec. lxxiv.
[^7] Gal. iii:8.
[^8] Gal. i:8, 9.
[^9] Heb. iv:1, 2.
[^10] I Cor. x:1-4.
[^11] Gal. III:19, 24.
[^12] Doc. and Cov., sec. 1xxxiv:20, 21, 22.
[^13] Doc. and Cov., sec. 1xxxiv:23-27.
[^14] Deut. xxxiv:10-12.
[^15] See Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, part II, "The Apostasy."
[^16] Pearl of Great Price, p. 85.
[^17] Doc. and Cov. sec. xx:2, 3.
[^18] Doc. and Cov. sec. cvii.
[^19] Eph. iv. 11, 12, 13.
[^20] I Cor. xii.
[^21] I Cor. xii.
[^22] Eph. iv:16.
[^23] Eph. iv:11-14.
[^24] See Doc. and Cov. sec. cvii:23, 33, 35, 98.
[^25] Doc. and Cov. sec. cvii:34.
[^26] The office of the bishop of right belongs to the first born of the seed of Aaron, and properly descends from father to son of the chosen seed. A bishop of this lineage can act without counselors—except in a case where a president of the high priesthood is tried; in that event he must be assisted by twelve councilors of the high priesthood—but when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, then a high priest is to be chosen for a bishop, and two other priests to act as counselors—Doc. and Cov. sec. cvii:68-76.
[^27] In the absence of his counselors, the president of the stake has power to preside over the council without an assistant; and in case that he himself is absent, his counselors have power to preside in his stead, both or either of them. In the absence of all the presidency then the senior member of the council may preside.
[^28] Doc. and Cov. sec. cvii:76, 82-84.
[^29] This special court was once organized; before it Sidney Rigdon, one of the presidency of the Church, was tried and condemned in 1844.
[^30] Doc. and Cov., sec. cvii.
