Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Genesis

Genesis contains the religious history of four gospel dispensations spread over two and one-half thousand years. The first eleven chapters briefly review the dispensations of Adam, Enoch, and Noah. The remaining thirty-nine chapters evaluate the dispensation of Abraham through the four generations of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph.

Often called the "First Book of Moses," this record was first written by Moses, the prophet of the fifth dispensation. In reviewing the earlier religious history of the earth, Moses not only had access to oral traditions and possibly written records, but he also had seen these earlier events in a divine vision. (Moses 1:4, 8, 27-35, 40-41.) Selecting from his vast knowledge of the past, he presented a brief overview of the genesis (origin) of the earth and its earliest dispensations. Then he discussed the dispensation of Abraham in more depth and highlighted the personalities of the great patriarchs. He also gave examples of their humanness and personal challenges. He told of family members (usually the elder sons) and how they sometimes sinned and lost the blessings of the birthright. He concluded the book with the promises given to the sons of Israel and their descendants who would continue to live in Egypt after the deaths of Jacob and Joseph.

In Genesis, Moses presented the good and the bad, the righteous prophets and the devil worshipers. He identified a God of love and mercy, who created the earth and blessed it for the growth and protection of his righteous children, and also a God of indignation and justice, who allowed plagues and wars to punish his wicked offspring. In the context of Moses' involvement with the Israelites in the wilderness, one can see why Moses selected and stressed these themes rather than a detailed account of the creation, a complete history of earlier time periods, or more events from earlier dispensations. His purpose was to show God's work with his children.

Bible Dictionary references:

How Long Were the "Days" of Creation?

(Gen. 1:5)

Three theories are accepted by various Latter-day Saints as a possible answer to this question:

Some hold that each day of the creation was the same length as under our present system of time. They believe that if man, with his limited capacity, experience, and power can use greenhouses and controlled conditions to put "years" of growth on young trees within a few weeks, then God, with his capacities, could develop this earth through the seven periods of creation within a week of our time.

Many Latter-day Saints combine the creation stories of Genesis and the Pearl of Great Price with a vision given to Abraham wherein he was told that one revolution of the Lord's governing star, Kolob, was equal to one thousand years of earth's time. (Abr. 3:4.) They suppose that this same time relationship existed before the days of Abraham and before the fall of Adam (and of the earth) and that each "day" of creation (according to Kolob time) was a thousand years of our time. Based upon the first viewpoint discussed (one day equals one day), if God has the power to complete a creation stage within one day, he could also do it within one thousand years.

Some Latter-day Saints combine the various creation accounts and note that Abraham used the word "time," not "day," to summarize the events of each creative period. They also stress that only after each stage or series of creative events was completed was it called a "day" or a "time." Thus, each period would not even have to be the same length of time, but when one stage of the creation was completed it was called a "day" and then the next stage was begun. (See Abr. 4:5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31; 5:2-3, 13.) The name "day" or "time" was only given the work after it was completed. The term "day" would thus not have to be a set length of time. It could be like our use of the term "day" in the statement, "We live in a modern day and age." Here "day" means the last number of years (even centuries) of our time.

Some adherents of this third viewpoint also suggest that geologists, earth scientists, and other specialists usually recognize the same general sequence of events as recorded in the creation story, but identify many thousands and millions of years for each stage.

Summary:

The Lord has not revealed in the scriptures the exact length of time of the creation process. It is important to note what questions of the creation he did answer. He did not tell us how long the creation took, but he did emphasize who created this earth—God, and why—for man and woman so that they could achieve their immortality and eternal life. Eventually we will know the answers to the questions of the creation, but for now it is important to recognize who the creator was and why he organized this earth and allowed us to come here.

Was Adam "Created" or "Born"?

(Gen. 1:26-27)

Adam was created from the dust (or elements) of the earth. We also are made from these elements. Within a mother's womb the elements of the original cells are joined by other earthly components until a developed baby is born. Adam was "born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which [God had] made, and so became of dust a living soul." (Moses 6:59.)

The prophets Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and Joseph Fielding Smith taught that Adam was created by the same natural means as we were created. (See HC 6:476; JD 7:285-86; 11:122; MOD, pp. 276-77; DS 1:139-40.)

For example, Brigham Young stated:

I believe that the declaration made in these two scriptures is literally true. God has made His children like Himself to stand erect, and has endowed them with intelligence and power and dominion over all His works, and given them the same attributes which He Himself possesses. He created man, as we create our children; for there is no other process of creation in heaven, on the earth, in the earth, or under the earth, or in all the eternities, that is, that were, or that ever will be. . . . There exist fixed laws and regulations by which the elements are fashioned to fulfill their destiny in all the varied kingdoms and orders of creation, and this process of creation is from everlasting to everlasting. (JD 11:122.)

Joseph Fielding Smith and the First Presidency stated:

Adam, our progenitor, "the first man," was, like Christ, a pre-existent spirit, and like Christ he took upon him an appropriate body, the body of a man, and so became a "living soul." The doctrine of the pre-existence,—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner.

It is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and that the original human being was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The word of the Lord declares that Adam was "the first man of all men" (Moses 1:34), and we are therefore in duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race. It was shown to the brother of Jared that all men were created in the beginning after the image of God; and whether we take this to mean the spirit or the body, or both, it commits us to the same conclusion: Man began life as a human being, in the likeness of our heavenly Father.

True it is that the body of man enters upon its career as a tiny germ embryo, which becomes an infant, quickened at a certain stage by the spirit whose tabernacle it is, and the child, after being born, develops into a man. There is nothing in this, however, to indicate that the original man, the first of our race, began life as anything less than a man, or less than the human germ or embryo that becomes a man. (MFP 4:205.)

Creation of Woman

(Gen. 2:21-24)

Moses records that Eve was created from Adam's rib. According to a contemporary prophet, Bruce R. McConkie, this Mosaic account is merely figurative and Eve was placed on the earth in the same manner as was Adam. (MD, p. 242; see also commentary on Gen. 1:26-27 in this book, and JD 7:285.)

Eve coming from the rib of Adam is considered symbolic of her role as a companion to the man. She is to stand at the side of man to be the joint-inheritor with him in receiving a celestial reward. They would also become one flesh and one in purpose during this life and the eternities because of their everlasting covenant of marriage. (DS 2:72; see also PGPC, pp. 145-46.)

Death on the Day Adam Partook of the Forbidden Fruit

(Gen. 3:3-5)

Adam did experience death on the day he partook of the forbidden fruit. He actually experienced two deaths, each within its own time framework of a day.

The first death occurred on that day of the earth's time system. The death was spiritual, as Adam was cut off from the presence of the Lord. (See D&C 29:41.)

One of the Lord's days is as one thousand of our years. (See Abr. 3:4.) On that day (or time) of the Lord, Adam died physically. He did not live longer than one thousand years. (See Abr. 5:13 and Gen. 5:5.) His 930 years upon the earth were not even a day of the Lord's time.

Enmity

(Gen. 3:15)

Enmity is a feeling of innate dislike. For example, most people dislike snakes, even though they may never have had a life-threatening encounter with a snake.

The Lord has placed enmity between mortals and Satan. However, individuals can lose this fear of the archenemy if they follow his encouragements and temptations. Before they know it, they become all too familiar with Satan as they come under his bonds and buffetings. However, the righteous maintain a distrust and hostility toward the devil and never become familiar with him. Their enmity toward him along with the Lord's protection guarantees that he will never have power to tempt them beyond their means to withstand. (See TG "Tempt" and "Temptation.")

Cain's Offering

(Gen. 4:3-7)

See Moses 5:18-26. Cain followed and obeyed Satan's command when he brought his offerings to the Lord. Yet he still could have been accepted and blessed by God if he had obeyed the Lord. (See BD "Cain" and TPJS, pp. 58, 169.)

Merciful Reasons for the Flood

(Gen. 6:17)

The Bible reader often considers God's reason for the flood as severe judgment upon the wicked. However, there are many reasons why a merciful Heavenly Father would have sent a flood. Among these are the following:

Now I will go back to show you how the Lord operates. He destroyed a whole world at one time save a few, whom he preserved for his own special purpose. And why? He had more than one reason for doing so. This antediluvian people were not only very wicked themselves, but having the power to propagate their species, they transmitted their unrighteous natures and desires to their children, and brought them up to indulge in their own wicked practices. And the spirits that dwelt in the eternal worlds knew this, and they knew very well that to be born of such parentage would entail upon themselves an infinite amount of trouble, misery and sin. And supposing ourselves to be of the number of unborn spirits, would it not be fair to presume that we would appeal to the Lord, crying, "Father, do you not behold the condition of this people, how corrupt and wicked they are?" Yes, "Is it then just that we who are now pure should take of such bodies and thus subject ourselves to most bitter experiences before we can be redeemed, according to the plan of salvation?" "No," the Father would say, "it is not in keeping with my justice." Well, what will you do in the matter; man has his free agency and cannot be coerced, and while he lives he has the power of perpetuating his species?" I will first send them my word, offering them deliverance from sin, and warning them of my justice, which shall certainly overtake them if they reject it, and I will destroy them from off the face of the earth, thus preventing their increase, and I will raise up another seed." Well, they did reject the preaching of Noah, the servant of God, who was sent to them, and consequently the Lord caused the rains of heaven to descend incessantly for forty days and nights, which flooded the land, and there being no means of escape, save for the eight souls who were obedient to the message, all the others were drowned. But, says the caviller, is it right that a just God should sweep off so many people? Is that in accordance with mercy? Yes, it was just to those spirits that had not received their bodies, and it was just and merciful too to those people guilty of the iniquity. Why? Because by taking away their earthly existence he prevented them from entailing their sins upon their posterity and degenerating them, and also prevented them from committing further acts of wickedness. (JD 19:158-59.)

Seven Pairs and One Pair of Animals

(Gen. 7:2)

Moses recorded that Noah took one pair of most animals, but that he took seven pairs of the "clean" animals. These would be clean animals according to Moses' definition. (See Lev. 11.)

These domesticated animals would be necessary for Noah's family to provide sacrifices and sustenance after the flood, and yet they would also become a prey to the wild animals released after the ark was opened. The larger numbers of these "clean" animals would provide food for both man and beast.

Also, the number seven was symbolic of wholeness. This number showed up repeatedly in Noah's episode—he not only collected seven pairs of clean animals, but he had seven days to load the ark, it floated seven months before it rested on Mount Ararat, and Noah waited seven days between each time he released a bird.

Should We Include Meat in Our Diets?

(Gen. 9:2-5)

After the flood, the Lord told Noah that all living animals could be used as food. Noah was not commanded to eat meat, but if he did, he was to respect the lives of the animals and not kill them wantonly.

Joseph Fielding Smith commented:

The inference in this interpretation is that the use of the flesh of living creatures should be indulged in sparingly although there was no sin in the shedding of their blood when required for food. There is no inference in the scriptures that it is the privilege of men to slay birds or beasts or to catch fish wantonly. The Lord gave life to every creature, both the birds in the heavens, beasts on the earth, and the fishes in the streams or seas. They also were commanded to be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth. It was intended that all creatures should be happy in their several elements. Therefore to take the life of these creatures wantonly is a sin before the Lord. (AGQ 4:43-44.)

Why Is Blood Not to Be Eaten?

(Gen. 9:4)

Joseph Fielding Smith gave the following answer:

The blood plays a far more important part in this mortal world, whether it is the blood of human beings or the blood of other creatures, than is generally understood. It is the life-giving fluid of the mortal body; but it has in it the seeds of death as well as the sustaining power of mortal life. Its duties are many and varied, but it is not the purpose here to recount them. Notwithstanding its great importance to the physical body, it is, above all else, a mortal element. (AGQ 3:100.)

How and Why Was the Earth Divided?

(Gen. 10:25)

Some scholars believe the earth was divided socially and politically into different nations and tribes.

The more common explanation is that the land masses of the earth were physically divided into continents.

The reason for the earth's division is found in the story of the Jaredites (Ether 1) and in the following quotation from President John Taylor:

In the days of Peleg the Lord divided the earth, hence the eastern and western hemisphere, doubtless thinking by doing so he would have a better opportunity to preserve some of the human family from going down to perdition. But still the devil found ready access to the hearts of the people generally, and many became so corrupt that God had to destroy them. But before allowing his justice to overtake them, he saved unto himself certain good seed and planted it in different parts of his vineyard. (JD 18:331.)

(See TG "Earth, Dividing of.")

Chronology of Abraham

(Gen. 11:27-25:10)

Age Event (and Scriptural References)

Birth about 2000 B.C. (Gen. 11:26.)

? Sought for holy priesthood; attempt was made to offer him as a human sacrifice in Ur. (Abr. 1:1-27.)

? Famine in the land; Abram's written records; his brother, Haran, dies. (Abr. 1:28-31; Gen. 11:27-28.)

? Abram marries Sarai, daughter of Haran. (Abr. 2:2.)

? Abram and Lot with wives (and father, Terah, following) move to Haran. (Abr. 2:3-5; Gen. 11:29-31.)

? Abram and Lot pray; Abram given blessing and priesthood. (Abr. 2:6-11.)

62 Abram sixty-two years old when he leaves Haran. (Abr. 2:14-15.)

? Abram and group go to Jershon (in Syria?) and Abram prays that famine would be turned from his father's house. (Abr. 2:16-17.)

75 Terah dies (Abram apparently at burial); Abram leaves homeland and kindred to go to Canaan. (Gen. 11:32; 12:1-5.)

? Abram goes through Canaan; famine in land; travels to Egypt. (Abr. 2:18-21; Gen. 12:6-10.)

? Sarai introduced as his sister. (Abr. 2:22-25; Gen. 12:11-13.)

? Abram's knowledge of stars, creation, and so on received through revelation and the Urim and Thummim. (Abr. 3:1-28; 4:1-31; 5:1-21.)

? Episodes with Abram and Sarai in Egypt. (Gen. 12:14-20.)

? Return to Bethel, Canaan, and separation from Lot. (Gen. 13:1-13.)

? Abram promised Canaan as inheritance; he dwells in Hebron. (Gen. 13:14-18.)

? He rescues Lot. (Gen. 14:1-16.)

? Abram and Melchizedek. (Gen. 14:17-24; D&C 84:14; Alma 13.)

? Abram's vision with divided animals. (Gen. 15:1-21.)

86 Hagar as second wife; she conceives and bears Ishmael. (Gen. 16.)

99 Abram receives new name of Abraham; covenant of circumcision; Isaac's birth promised. (Gen. 17.)

99 Three divine messengers; bargaining about the righteous in Sodom. (Gen. 18.)

99 Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; Lot and two daughters preserved. (Gen. 19.)

99 Abraham, Sarah, and Abimelech. (Gen. 20.)

100 Son Isaac born; several years later Hagar and Ishmael leave. (Gen. 21.)

c. 115 Test of faith for Abraham and Isaac. (Gen. 22.)

137 Sarah dies; Abraham purchases burial ground in Hebron. (Gen. 23; see 17:17.)

140 Finds a wife, Rebekah, for Isaac. (Gen. 24; 25:20.)

c. 140 Abraham takes a third wife, Keturah, and has six more sons; gives them their inheritances. (Gen. 25:1-6.)

160 Isaac and Rebekah have twins. (Gen. 25:14-34.)

175 Abraham dies and is buried at Hebron. (Gen. 25:7-10.)

Abraham's Travels

(Gen. 12:1)

See Map 2 in the LDS edition of the Bible.

Five City-States near the Dead Sea

(Gen. 14:2, 8)

Genesis 14 records how Abraham rescued Lot, his family, and other captives who were taken from five city-states in the plains near the Dead Sea. Two of these cities, Sodom and Gomorrah, are well known, while the other three, Admah, Zeboiim, and Zoar, are less familiar.

The story has puzzled scholars, but the exact order of names, the awkward style, and the unusual events of this chapter point to an authentic, ancient record that must have been familiar to Moses. In the 1970s an archaeological site in Syria was excavated that helps us understand more of this patriarchal time period. The site is known as Ebla, and includes a library of almost 20,000 clay tablets, four times as many as all the earlier known records in the Middle East from this time period.

The few tablets already translated include many biblical names such as Abram, Esau, Israel, Saul, David, and Michael. Ebla's greatest king was Ebrum (or Iberium), whose name is strikingly similar to Eber (Iber, Heber) the ancestor of Abraham and the Hebrews. Also, the same five city-states of Genesis 14 show up in exactly the same order. These records also indicate many other cities and villages were in the Middle East during the patriarchal period. As more records from Ebla and other sites are translated and become available to English readers, we can begin to understand much more about the time of Abraham and his history. (For example, see Howard La Fay, "Ebla, Splendor of an Unknown Empire," National Geographic, Dec., 1978, pp. 731-759; Giovanni Pettinato, "The Royal Archives of Tell Mardikh-Ebla," Biblical Archeologist, May, 1976, pp. 44-52.)

Sarah Giving Hagar as a Second Wife

(Gen. 16:2)

Numerous ancient Near Eastern records demonstrate the practice of a barren wife (usually after at least seven years without a child) giving a second wife to her husband. Even in a patriarchal society the husband did not automatically have the right to acquire a second wife without the first wife's permission. The fact that Sarah set such a noble example with this practice led to perhaps the only place in the scriptures where a law was named after a woman. We read about the laws of different kings and the law of Moses, but the law of plural marriage is called the "law of Sarah." (D&C 132:65.)

Circumcision, a Preparatory Ordinance to Baptism

(Gen. 17:10)

During the time of Abraham, the people had corrupted almost every element of baptism. They sprinkled rather than immersed those baptized. They baptized children before the age of accountability. They used blood instead of water. And they supposed that the blood of ancient Abel was the atoning sacrifice, rather than anticipating the future Christ and his atonement.

Therefore, they were given the law of circumcision and commanded to circumcise their children at eight days of age that they might remember that children were not accountable to the Lord until they were eight years old, when they were to be baptized. And they were instructed to keep all the other covenants as they had been commanded. (See JST Gen. 17:3-7, 11-12; BD "Circumcision." Compare D&C 74.)

In later Jewish history, they continued the practice of circumcision while gradually abandoning the ordinance of baptism, although Orthodox Judaism still requires a "washing" for all converts. The initiates are dressed in white and immersed completely under the water. A priest supervises with at least two male witnesses. Even so, they have largely neglected the primary ordinance of baptism while retaining the ordinance of circumcision.

Abimelech

(Gen. 20:2-18; 21:22-32; 26:1-31)

A king or kings of Gerar (in the land of the Philistines) named Abimelech associated with Abraham and Isaac over the course of about one hundred years. Two or more kings of the city may have carried the same name. In fact, the name "Abimelech" means "my father—a king," which easily could have been a title or hereditary name. Or, Abimelech may have been one king who lived a long time.

His first episode with Abraham and Sarah came at the time she carried Isaac. Abimelech desired Sarah as a wife or concubine, but the Lord spoke to him in a dream to prevent him from such action, which, if it had succeeded, would have brought Isaac's paternity into question. Shortly thereafter Abraham and Abimelech made a covenant of peace at Beersheba (21:22-32).

Much later, a king named Abimelech desired Isaac's wife, Rebekah, after they had resided in Gerar for a long time as "brother and sister." After a time, however, Abimelech recognized that Isaac and Rebekah were husband and wife, and protected them and later made a covenant with Isaac preserving the grazing and water rights for their respective flocks (26:1-31).

Hand under the Thigh

(Gen. 24:2, 9)

Placing a hand under the upper leg or thigh of a seated person was a solemn means of concluding an oath or contract, similar to "shaking hands" on an agreement in our society. Abraham requested this from his servant, and later Jacob asked for the same sign from his son Joseph. (See Gen. 47:29.) In the Abraham episode the Joseph Smith Translation changes the word "thigh" to "hand," meaning "put your hand under my hand" as a sign of the covenant.

Birthright Inheritance and Birthright Blessing

(Gen. 25:31-34)

The firstborn son had the first right to receive the birthright inheritance and the birthright blessing. The birthright inheritance dealt with physical property, such as flocks and herds. Unless the father had determined otherwise (see Gen. 48:5; 1 Chr. 5:1, 2) at the father's death, the physical property was to be divided into balanced portions equal to the number of sons, plus one. The eldest son received the double portion. (Deut. 21:17.) With the inheritance, he assumed responsibility for his mother and unmarried sisters. He also was to be a financial resource for his brothers in times of hardship. Basically he provided for the physical welfare of the family and usually served as the social-political leader of the family or clan.

The birthright blessing was spiritual. In the patriarchal order of the priesthood, it included the keys of the priesthood and the authority to preside as the religious leader of the family or clan. Rather than automatically belonging to the eldest son, it was given to the most righteous son. In fact, for all the patriarchal families with more than one son, the birthright blessing went to a younger son: Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and Ephraim each received the birthright blessing even though none of them was an eldest son.

One reason why some negative, almost sordid information was given in Genesis about some of the sons in these families was to demonstrate why they had lost the birthright blessings.

The prerogative for both the birthright inheritance and the birthright blessing originally rested exclusively with the father. He could give gifts (as Abraham did to Keturah's sons in Gen. 25:6), pass out the inheritance (compare the story of the prodigal son who received his early in Luke 15:11-12) and pronounce the blessing. (See Gen. 27:30-36.) Jacob received his blessing initially through deceit, but eventually acquired it in full integrity. (See Gen. 27:30-36; 28:1-4.) After the time of Moses, the inheritance automatically went to the eldest son, regardless of whether or not his mother was the first or favored wife. (See Deut. 21:15-17.) The birthright blessing was still conditional.

Bible Dictionary references: Firstborn; Birthright; Inheritance.

Blessings of Judah

(Gen. 49:9-10)

The tribe of Judah received three special promises under the hand of Jacob:

Blessings of Joseph

(Gen. 49:22-26)

Joseph received from Jacob many special promises that covered a number of conditions that would come upon his descendants. They included:

Prophecies of Joseph of Egypt Compared

(Gen. 50)

(Note: Italics indicate differences in the two versions.)

JST Genesis 50

2 Nephi 3
