Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Exodus

Like the book of Genesis, the first twenty chapters of Exodus are familiar to most Latter-day Saints. However, the later portions of this "Second Book of Moses" often confuse and frustrate readers. These problems continue through the rest of the five books of Moses (also known as the Pentateuch, the Books of the Law, or the Torah). To better appreciate these five books, review them from the context of the Israelites during the time of Moses and note how these detailed, particular instructions were necessary to separate them from their Egyptian paganism and to prepare them for their settlement in the promised land (note that the Jaredites, Nephites, and Mormon pioneers also went through long periods of travel, testing, and teaching before they reached their own lands of promise). Then try to evaluate the principles or higher laws behind all the laws, commandments, and stories of this period of Israelite history. Finally, try to apply these principles and higher laws to life today and compare them to the laws of the gospel. Such a threefold approach to this material will take it from the realm of dry, historical past and place it within the struggles and challenges of contemporary life.

The book of Exodus is often divided into three segments:

Bible Dictionary references:

See also Map 3.

How Could Moses Abide in God's Presence?

(Exodus 3:6)

A modern prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, has given a clear answer to this question:

It must be obvious, then, that to endure the glory of the Father or of the glorified Christ, a mortal being must be translated or otherwise fortified.

Grease on the swimmer's body or a heavy rubber skin-diver's suit may protect one from cold and wet; an asbestos suit might protect a firefighter from flames; a bullet-proof vest may save one from assassin's bullets; one's heated home may protect from winter's chilling blasts; deep shade or smoked glass can modify the withering heat and burning rays of the midday sun. There is a protective force that God brings into play when he exposes his human servants to the glories of his person and his works.

Moses, a prophet of God, held the protecting holy priesthood: ". . . and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." (Moses 1:2.)

In heavenly glorious vision, Moses "beheld the world . . . and all the children of men . . . ." (Moses 1:8.) He was protected then, but when the protection from such transcendent glory was relaxed, Moses was left near-helpless. (FPM, p. 86.)

Joseph [Smith] had had the same general experience as Abraham and Moses and Enoch, who had seen the Lord and heard his voice. In addition, he heard the Father, bearing witness of the Son, as had Peter, James, and John on Transfiguration's mount. He had seen the person of Elohim. He had fought a desperate battle with the powers of darkness as had Moses and Abraham. And like them all, he was protected by the glory of the Lord. . . .

In light of the testimony of Joseph Smith, the ancient scriptures take on new meaning, their literal verity confirmed by the experience of modern man who, quickened and protected by the Spirit, actually saw the Father and the Son. How great a blessing to see God and commune directly with him while yet in mortality! Though few of us will have that blessing, we can, through understanding the scriptures and by humble prayer, come in impressive measure to know God. We have the promise that if we sufficiently purify our hearts we shall surely see God and know him as he is! (FPM, p. 93.)

Why Was Moses Chosen by the Lord?

(Ex. 3:11)

From the human viewpoint, the ancient Israelites probably had many reasons to reject Moses as the Lord's prophet:

However, the Lord knew the power and potential of this great prophet, and with the Lord's support and power, Moses was able to lead Israel out of bondage.

Preparation for the Theophany

(Ex. 19:19-25)

The Israelites spent two days cleansing themselves physically and spiritually prior to the manifestation of God to them on Mount Sinai. As a whole community, they heard the voice of the Lord as he delivered the Ten Commandments. (See Deut. 4:33; 5:4, 24.) This experience so humbled and terrified them that they requested that any future words from the Lord should come through Moses. (See Ex. 20:18-22; Deut. 5:5, 23-33.)

The Ten Commandments

(Ex. 20:1-17; Deut. 5:6-21)

President Spencer W. Kimball explained:

Through Moses the word of the Lord came down from the mountain. The commandments which the Lord gave to the children of Israel set minimum standards of conduct. These commandments, said Paul, are "our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith" (Gal. 3:24).

But living by the letter of the Ten Commandments is only the beginning of perfection. Jesus taught the sanctity of the Ten Commandments, but emphasized repeatedly that there was more.

It is not enough to acknowledge the Lord as supreme and refrain from worshiping idols; we should love the Lord with all our heart, might, mind, and strength, realizing the great joy he has in the righteousness of his children.

It is not enough to refrain from profanity or blasphemy. We need to make important in our lives the name of the Lord. While we do not use the Lord's name lightly, we should not leave our friends or our neighbors or our children in any doubt as to where we stand. Let there be no doubt about our being followers of Jesus Christ.

It is not enough to refrain from moviegoing, hunting, fishing, sports, and unnecessary labor on the Sabbath. Constructive use of the Sabbath day includes studying the scriptures, attending church meetings to learn and to worship, writing letters to absent loved ones, comforting the sorrowing, visiting the sick, and, in general, doing what the Lord would have us do on this, his holy day.

If we truly honor our parents as we are commanded to do, we will seek to emulate their best characteristics and to fulfill their highest aspirations for us. Nothing we could give them materially would be more prized than our righteous living.

It is not enough to refrain from killing. We are rather under solemn obligation to respect life and to foster it. Far from taking a life, we must be generous in helping others to enjoy the necessities of life. And when this has been accomplished, we seek to improve the mind and the spirit.

We refrain from taking harmful substances into our body. Through wisdom and moderation in all things, we seek good health and a sense of physical well-being.

It is not enough to refrain from adultery. We need to make the marriage relationship sacred, to sacrifice and work to maintain the warmth and respect which we enjoyed during courtship. God intended marriage to be eternal, sealed by the power of the priesthood, to last beyond the grave. Daily acts of courtesy and kindness, conscientiously and lovingly carried out, are part of what the Lord expects.

It is for us to keep our hearts and minds pure, as well as our actions.

"Thou shalt not steal," the Lord said on Sinai (Exod. 20:15). Thus it is for us to be honest in every way. We must be generous, the very opposite of selfishness. When money is needed, we give money. But often what is needed more is love and time and caring, which money cannot buy. When that is true, even being generous with our money is not enough.

Bearing false witness and coveting the belongings of others are further evidence of selfishness. "Love thy neighbour as thyself," Jesus taught. On this and on the love of God "hang all the law and the prophets" (Matt. 22:39-40).

Kindness, helpfulness, love, concern, generosity—we could go on for the list of virtues is endless. The development of these traits is what the Lord asks of us. (Ensign, Nov., 1978, p. 6.)

What Is the Law of Moses?

(Ex. 21:1)

The law of Moses encompasses hundreds of laws, rules, and regulations. The Jews have identified 613 particular laws as recorded by Moses in the books of the Torah (or the Pentateuch: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy). The Ten Commandments and other familiar laws are included in this body, but most of the laws are unfamiliar, and seem outdated and strange to contemporary Bible readers.

Rather than trying to identify every single law, it is helpful to recognize that there are two major types of commandments within the law of Moses—eternal and temporary.

The eternal laws are those divine commandments that have been given to most, if not all, of the gospel dispensations. Included among these eternal laws are:

The temporary laws were given for a particular dispensation. However, similar laws or "carnal commandments" were usually given to other dispensations to fulfill similar purposes. Sometimes these peculiar laws were to test the obedience of God's children, but they usually had symbolic, physical, and social values as well. Included among them would be the following types of laws:

Robes of the Levitical Priesthood

(Ex. 28, 29, 39)

There were three divisions or offices in the Levitical Priesthood: Levite, priest, and high priest. Officers of these divisions wore special attire. These vestments are mentioned and sometimes described in the scriptures (see TG "Clothing," "Garment," "Robe," "Breastplate," and "Apparel") and in later rabbinical literature. The main items included:

Robes of the High Priest

(Ex. 28-29)

Washing or Baptizing the Priests

(Ex. 29:4)

According to the great rabbinical commentator, Rashi, the Hebrew verb in this verse translated as "wash" signifies "immersion" of the whole body. (Soncino Chumash, p. 527.) The word baptism (Greek) was unknown to the Israelites. They used the word rochatz, which is usually translated as "wash" or "washing."
