Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Leviticus

Leviticus is an unknown, almost "sealed" book to most Latter-day Saints. Most of the ritual laws and sacrifices in this book are not easily understood. Indeed, most of them are no longer practiced by Jews, Christians, or Moslems, although all three religions recognize the scriptural validity of this work. But rather than discarding Leviticus as a meaningless set of archaic religious laws, one should evaluate the role of these laws within ancient Israel. Then one can appreciate how: the symbolism of the sacrifices directed Israel toward Christ (1-7); the example of Aaron and his sons taught them about service (8-10); the laws of purification kept them physically and spiritually clean (11-15); the Day of Atonement forced them to annually evaluate their lives in preparation for the final day of judgment (16); the code of holiness distinguished them as a peculiar people, in the world but not of the world (17-25); and the promises and vows between the Lord and his people guaranteed them a special, eternal relationship (26).

The following introduction to Leviticus highlights some of its values:

Leviticus is essentially a rule-book—the book of laws given by God to his people through Moses at Sinai. The laws cover ritual and worship and many aspects of life—but all seen in relation to him. The book takes its name from the fact that it was the Levitical priests (Aaron and his sons and descendants, helped in the practical work of the tabernacle by the rest of the Levites) who administered the laws. But the book is not for the priests alone. God intended all his people to know and keep his law. Again and again Moses is told to 'speak to the people of Israel'.

To many modern readers it may seem a strange book, perhaps even a repulsive one with all its blood-sacrifices. Some see it as reflecting only an odd set of ancient taboos. Yet take it away and whole areas of Scripture become inexplicable. Without the message of Leviticus the key event of all time, the [Atonement and] death of Jesus Christ, is an enigma. The ritual and the rules were never simply an end in themselves. As the sacrifices were performed day after day, year after year, as the Day of Atonement came and went, Israel was constantly reminded of the sin which cut them off from God's presence. They had broken covenant with God by disobeying his laws and were under sentence of death. But God in his mercy showed them that he would accept a substitute—the death of an animal, perfect and blameless, instead of the offender. God was holy—a moral holiness unknown in the gods of the nations around. He demanded holiness in his people. The laws on ritual purity hammered this home in practical everyday experience.

Yet the book has value apart from its vital role in God's message of salvation. The laws in Leviticus show God working in harmony with his own natural laws for the good of his people. Although Israel had to obey the laws in blind trust (when they chose to do so at all), we can see how those laws were actually working for the nation's health and well-being. Because we know more today about the sources of infection and pollution, about quarantine and isolation, hygiene and preventive medicine, we can watch Israel's obedience actually fulfilling God's promise to take away their sickness (Exodus 23:25). And this not by magic, but by the natural working of principles we now, at least in part, can understand. (David and Pat Alexander, eds., Eerdman's Handbook to the Bible [Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1973], p. 172.)

Bible Dictionary references:

The Offerings of the Israelites

(Lev. 5-7)

It was also sometimes called the whole burnt offering because the whole animal was consumed upon the altar. The altar was "the table of the Lord" (Mal. 1:7, 12; Ps. 23:5) and whatever was put upon it was the "food of God" (Lev. 21:6, 8, 17, 21).

Procedure: (1) The person brought an unblemished male animal to the gate and dedicated it as an offering by laying his hands upon the animal's head. (2) He then slew the animal. (3) The priests collected the blood and sprinkled it around the altar. (4) The person skinned the animal (the priest kept the skin [Lev. 7:8]), and cut it into pieces. (5) The priests offered the pieces upon the altar after washing the inwards and legs with water.

This offering was a continuation of the sacrifice inaugurated in the days of Adam (Moses 5:4-8), and practiced by various individuals on down to the time of Jacob. It represented the spotless sacrifice of the Savior. Under the law of Moses there was a burnt offering of lamb each morning and each night on behalf of all Israel. (Ex. 29:38-42.) The morning sacrifice was to burn all day, and the evening sacrifice was to burn all night. (Lev. 6:9.) The priests were to see that the fire of the altar was kept burning perpetually. (Lev. 6:13.)

This offering took several forms. Usually it was in the form of fine flour that would be given raw or as baked cakes. The ingredients of the offering included flour, oil, frankincense, and salt. Honey and leaven were not to be used.

Only a "memorial" or portion of this offering was burnt upon the altar. The main part of it was to be eaten by the priests and their families.

This was an offering shared by the altar of God, the priest, and the family of the person making the offering. It was a feast of conciliation, a feast of communion, a feast of thanksgiving. The sacrificial victim could be chosen from among the cattle, the sheep, or the goats. As the animal was brought to the door of the tabernacle, the owner laid his hands upon its head and offered a prayer of thanksgiving. Therefore this offering is sometimes called a thank offering. After the animal was killed at the altar, the kidneys and internal fat were burned on the altar. The breast and the right thigh were given to the priest after they had been waved in the direction of the tabernacle, thereby signifying that it had been given to God and was now conferred upon his servants. (Lev. 7:28-34.) The rest of the meat was eaten by the offerer and his family at a so-called "sacrificial" meal, or meal of "thanksgiving." (Lev. 7:15-16.)

This offering was made for sins committed in ignorance but subsequently discovered. It was for offenses that could not be undone or repaired. If the offense could be repaired, a trespass offering was made. The ritual for a sin offering varied according to the rank of the offender. One distinction of the sin offering from the regular burnt offering was the disposition of the blood. The priest smeared the blood of the victim on the horns of the altar of incense inside the tabernacle and then poured out the rest at the base of the brazen altar of sacrifice outside. On the annual Day of Atonement the distinctive aspect of the sin offering was the fact that the priest took some of the blood into the holy of holies and sprinkled it before the mercy seat. (Lev. 16:14.)

A portion of the animal (the internal fat and the kidneys) was burned upon the altar and the rest of the animal was taken outside the camp to be burned in the area where the ashes of the altar were poured out.

This offering was appropriate in those cases where a person discovered that he had sinned or trespassed against the Lord or his neighbor, and was able to remedy or repair the damage. (Lev. 5:16; 6:4-5.) The scripture suggests two types of offenses for which the trespass offering would be appropriate. One was where a person found that he had held back or consumed something that belonged to the Lord such as tithes or firstborn of flocks. (Lev. 5:15.) The penalty was not only to restore to the sanctuary of the Lord that which had been withheld, but to add one-fifth thereto as a penalty. (Lev. 5:16.) A second kind of offense was where something had been withheld or disallowed to a neighbor by deceit. (Lev. 6:2-3.) Here again he had to restore that which had been lost by his neighbor plus one-fifth of its value for a penalty.

Responsibilities of the Levitical Priesthood

(Lev. 9:8-22)

The high priest (Aaron and his male descendants), priests (all male descendants of Moses and Aaron), and Levites (other male descendants of Levi) had many duties in ancient Israel. Some responsibilities were restricted to particular offices, while most of them were done jointly. Among them were:

Although the contemporary holders of the Aaronic Priesthood do not have all these responsibilities, they continue in some of them, and much of their work and service compares to the responsibilities of the ancient Levites. One can make many comparisons between these two groups of priesthood holders.

Justice under the Law of Moses

(Lev. 19:15)

The Law of Moses is usually considered a harsh system of justice, but in many ways it was more fair and helpful to individuals and society than our current system of justice. Justice under the Law of Moses had three main criteria: (1) the rights of the victim were of greatest priority, (2) the burden of responsibility rested upon the offender, and (3) the offender was helped toward repentance.

However, even after a person was found guilty of, for example, assault, and the judge ordered that he provide a strong manservant to work six months for the victim while the victim's broken arm healed, the guilty person still had at least three options: (1) he could accept the arbitrated decision of the judge, (2) he could opt for an eye for an eye (in this case a broken arm for a broken arm) if he felt the sentence was too harsh or unattainable, or (3) he could forfeit all rights as a member of Israelite society and flee the country to avoid punishment. However, this last choice would only be made in desperation or foolishness, because he would hardly be accepted in any other country on any more than the lowest level of their social order. And if he ever returned to Israel, any relative of the victim could automatically execute an eye-for-an-eye punishment.

None of these three options are pleasant, but the responsibility for the problem was upon the guilty party, and in order to satisfy justice, he had to make some choice.

Let us compare how ancient Israelite law and our system of justice would handle the same case. Suppose that two men got into an argument and started fighting. The one who started the fight knocked the other person to the ground. His head hit a rock and he is killed. The first man had not wanted to kill the other man, so he was not found guilty of murder, but of manslaughter.

In our society he would be sent to jail for a number of years, which would cost taxpayers thousands of dollars a year. In the meantime, his family and the family of the victim would both probably go on welfare, with additional burdens placed upon society. Even though the community did not commit the act, they assume the burden of the guilty person, his family, and the victim's family.

Under Israelite law, the guilty person would assume the responsibility for the victim's family while still providing for the welfare of his own family. If he refused, it would be a life for a life, so he would almost always accept the extra burden of caring for the victim's family rather than be executed or leave the country.

Direct or complete restitution was impossible in this case, since the father could not be replaced in the victim's family, but they should have some satisfaction in realizing that the guilty person was taking care of them. Compare our society, where the victim's family is left on its own and usually has only the temporary satisfaction of seeing the guilty person go to jail for a few years before he is set free, and yet they are still struggling to provide for themselves.

In summary, the Mosaic law was concerned with helping the victim. Only if a guilty party could not be found to compensate the victim would society assume the burden of caring for the victim and his family.

Society's burden was to teach and administer the system of justice, while the offender had the responsibility for reparation to the victim. The system also helped the guilty person recognize his errors and repent as he made restitution. The guilty party also had his rights, but his options were restricted to either righting the wrong or leaving the society if he could not be a positive part of it.

If the system was fairly applied, the whole society benefited, and those who erred were encouraged toward repentance and full participation in society. In many ways it was a better system of justice than our own today.
