Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Numbers

This work records some major events at the beginning and end of the Israelite wanderings in the wilderness. In Hebrew it is called the "in the wilderness" book. It picks up the Exodus historical narrative of Israel after their eleven-month sojourn at Sinai. After explaining why Israel was not ready to enter the promised land of Canaan at that time, it skips to the end of their thirty-eight years of wandering and highlights their travels around Edom and Moab. Historical events, religious laws, biographical sketches, and other items are loosely combined into a rough chronological order. The book could be divided into three time segments:

I. Near Mount Sinai (1-10:10)—two months.

A. First census (1-4).

B. Miscellaneous laws (5).

C. Nazarite vows (6).

D. Princely offerings (7).

E. Miscellaneous laws (8, 9).

F. Second Passover, fiery cloud, leaving Sinai (10).

II. Through the wilderness to Moab (11-22)—thirty-eight years.

A. From Sinai to Paran (11-12).

B. Sojourn in Paran (13-19).

C. From Kadesh to Moab (20-21).

III. In the plains north of Moab (22-36)—five months.

A. Balaam (22-24).

B. Miscellaneous laws and events (25-32).

C. Review of travels and preview of settlement (33-36).

As many religious laws and miracles of the Lord are recorded in this book, it illustrates the divine power given to Moses as he continued to lead Israel. Although confronted by many difficulties, Moses was able to retain and magnify his leadership role. His work completed, he gathered Israel to receive his last counsel and prepare them to enter into a covenant agreement with their Lord.

Bible Dictionary references: Numbers; Priests; Kohath; Nazarite; Hem of garment; Lots, Casting of; New Moon; Sabbath; Stranger; Usury; Eldad and Medad; Edom; Fiery Serpents; Serpent, Brazen; Gad; Reuben; Manasseh; Balaam.

The Numbers of Men

(Num. 1-3)

The first chapters in the book of Numbers record the results of three major censuses. The first was a census of all men aged twenty and older who could bear arms. The total was 603,550. (Num. 1:46.) The second census consisted of all Levite males one month and older. The total was 22,300. (Num. 3:22, 28, 34.) The last census was of all first-born males one month and older. The total was 22,273. (Num. 3:43.)

There is an obvious problem in matching the figures of the first and third censuses. If, according to the third census, there were 22,273 firstborn males one month and older (some of whom were fathers and grandfathers), one could assume there would be an approximately equal number of firstborn females one month and older. With forty-five to fifty thousand firstborn children aged one month and older, Israel at most would have had fifty thousand families (but in reality the number of families would be much less because many firstborn children would be the heads of their own families so that they and their first child would both be in the total figure). Yet even with around fifty thousand families, these families would have had to provide over six hundred thousand warriors aged twenty and older (according to the first census). That would mean each family would have had to provide between twelve and fifteen males over twenty years old who could bear arms. Assuming an equal number of daughters, each family would have had to have from twenty-five to thirty children over the age of twenty to match the two sets of figures. Obviously, the figures of one census or the other are incorrect or misinterpreted.

Many scholars support the figures of the second and third censuses, which would indicate an Israelite community of from twenty thousand to fifty thousand families for a total of one hundred thousand to two hundred fifty thousand Israelites. They argue that the figures of the first census are misinterpreted.

Chapter one lists how each tribe recorded the number of males (over age twenty) and all that could go to war. Then in the original Hebrew text, two sets of figures are listed for each tribe. For example, Numbers 1:21 says the tribe of Reuben had a total of forty-five eleph and five meot, which is usually interpreted forty-five thousand and five hundred. The second term meot is the plural of meah which appears 588 times in the Old Testament and is always translated as "hundred." However, the first term eleph, which frequently means thousand, has also been translated as "family" (Judg. 6:15), "duke" or "chief" (Gen. 36:15-36; Ex. 15:15; 1 Chr. 1:51-54), "captain" (Jer. 13:21), "chief friend" (Prov. 16:28), "friend" or "leader" (Prov. 17:9), "governor" or "clan" (Zech. 9:7; 12:5, 6), and "guide" (Ps. 55:13; Prov. 2:17; Jer. 3:4; Micah 7:5). Thus, the tribe of Reuben may have had forty-five chieftains (captains, leaders, guides, professional warriors, etc.) or forty-five families (companies, groups, units, squads, sets, etc.) of warriors and five hundred (of men aged twenty and older who were healthy and able to fight). The figures in Numbers 1 for all the tribes are:

Tribe Eleph Men

Reuben 46 500

Simeon 59 300

Gad 45 650

Judah 74 600

Issachar 54 400

Zebulun 57 400

Ephraim 40 500

Manasseh 32 200

Benjamin 35 400

Dan 62 700

Asher 41 500

Naphtali 53 400

Total 598 5,550

There are three ways these figures could be interpreted.

Given the facts of the third census, either option 2 or 3 would seem logical. At the time of the exodus, it is estimated that Canaan had between two and three million inhabitants. According to the biblical record, Israel was much smaller in numbers than the Canaanites (Deut. 7:7, 17, 22), and the Israelites were not able to overpower the Canaanites by sheer numbers (Ex. 23:29; Judges 1:19, 27-35).

Although outnumbered by the Canaanites, the Israelites in the wilderness were still a very large community of at least one hundred thousand and probably closer to two hundred thousand people. Imagine moving the entire population of Salt Lake City for forty years through the deserts of Nevada. Not only would the leadership of the prophet be severely tested, but a daily miracle of manna and occasionally miracles of water, quail, and so on would be required to sustain the multitude. The group of Israelites moving through Sinai required the help of God in order to survive, yet they were not large enough to invade and overpower Canaan. A figure of twenty-two thousand first-born sons and a total population of about two hundred thousand Israelites seems likely.

The Camp of Israel in the Wilderness

(Num. 4)

Nazarites

(Num. 6:1-21)

The term Nazarite comes from a Hebrew word whose root meaning is "to separate, cut off, or keep oneself from." There were two main ways that a Nazarite would "separate" himself.

First, a Nazarite would "separate from" certain products or actions. Specifically, he was not to eat any fruit of the vine (grapes, raisins, grape juice, wine, etc.). He was not to cut his hair while under the vow. And he was not to touch a dead person (even a member of his own family).

Secondly, the Nazarite would "separate toward" certain vows or obligations of his own choice. These could include personal goals, community service, religious duties, or whatever he desired. The vows were to be voluntary and from the heart.

The vow of a Nazarite lasted anywhere from a month to a lifetime. Either men or women could enter the vow (for example, Samson and his mother). Parents could even raise their child as a Nazarite and as the child matured he could decide if he wanted to honor his parents' desire and continue the vow on his own.

Noted examples of Nazarites are Samson (Judg. 13:5), Samuel (1 Sam. 1:11), and John the Baptist (Luke 1:15). The particular restrictions that separated the Nazarite from society and the vows that separated him toward personal fulfillment and social service are seen in the Church today in the missionary program. Although a Nazarite (or a missionary) seems to be sacrificing much while under their vows, they usually gain the most from such commitment and service. Both programs prepare disciplined, committed individuals who can better serve the Lord. (See BD "Nazarite.")

Moses' Transjordan Campaign

(Num. 21)

Balaam, a Prophet Who Leads Moab and Israel into Wickedness

(Num. 22-24)

Balaam was a prophet often inspired by the Lord. The leader of the Moabites repeatedly sought out Balaam and requested him to curse Israel, but Balaam ignored the bribes and threats and only blessed Israel and prophesied of the Messiah.

Later, under circumstances not recorded, Balaam became involved again with the Moabites. He would not curse Israel for Moab's sake, but he did inform the Moabites that the Israelites would lose the grace and strength of the Lord only as they sinned. Thereafter the Moabites and Midianites enticed many Israelites into idolatry and adultery until a plague struck Israel, taking twenty-four thousand casualties. Finally Israel repented and fought against and prevailed over the Midianites. One casualty of the war was Balaam, who was killed by the Israelites. (Num. 31:16, 8; 25:1-9, 16-18; 31:1-20.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie summarized the story of Balaam as follows:

What a story this is! Here is a prophet of God who is firmly committed to declare only what the Lord of heaven directs. There does not seem to be the slightest doubt in his mind about the course he should pursue. He represents the Lord, and neither a house full of gold and silver nor high honors offered by the king can sway him from his determined course, which has been charted for him by that God whom he serves.

But greed for wealth and lust for honor beckon him. How marvelous it would be to be rich and powerful—as well as having the prophetic powers that already are his.

Perhaps the Lord would let him compromise his standards and have some worldly prosperity and power as well as a testimony of the gospel. Of course he knew the gospel was true, as it were, but why should he be denied the things his political file leader could confer?

I wonder how often some of us get our direction from the Church and then, Balaam-like, plead for some worldly rewards and finally receive an answer which says, in effect, if you are determined to be a millionaire or to gain this or that worldly honor, go ahead, with the understanding that you will continue to serve the Lord. Then we wonder why things don't work out for us as well as they would have done if we had put first in our lives the things of God's kingdom?

What are the rewards of unrighteousness? Do they not include seeking for worldly things when these run counter to the interests of the Church?

And don't we all know people who, though they were once firm and steadfast in testimony, are now opposing the Lord's purposes and interests on earth because money and power have twisted their judgment of what should or should not be.

Balaam, the prophet, inspired and mighty as he once was, lost his soul in the end because he set his heart on the things of this world rather than the riches of eternity. (Bruce R. McConkie, "The Story of a Prophet's Madness," New Era, Apr. 1972, p. 7.)

Importance of Vows

(Num. 30:2)

Vows made in the name of the Lord were especially sacred. If even a simple vow was made in God's name and then broken, the person could be stoned to death. Breaking the vow itself was not as serious as the taking of the Lord's name in vain.

In this dispensation we still make sacred covenants through baptism, receiving the priesthood, and in the temple ordinances. These and other public or private vows should be seriously renewed each week as we partake of the sacrament.
