Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Joshua

Joshua was the able successor to Moses. The book named after him was not necessarily written by him, but it was about him and his role in the conquest and settlement of Canaan. Some of his sayings and records are in the book, indicating either a writing close to Joshua's time or the availability of written records from that time period.

The book is well structured and is easily divided into two equal segments of twelve chapters as illustrated in the following outline:

I. The conquest of western Canaan (1-12).

A. Preparations to cross the Jordan River (1).

B. In the Jordan Valley (2-6).

C. In the highlands (7-11).

D. Review of the Conquest (12).

II. Settlement in Canaan (13-24).

A. Tribal inheritances.

a. Process of selecting tribal areas (14).

b. Judah's inheritance (15).

c. Inheritance of Joseph, Ephraim, and part of Manasseh (16, 17).

d. Rest of tribal inheritance, except Levites (18, 19).

e. Cities of refuge and of Levites (20, 21).

B. Instructions from Joshua (22-24).

a. Discourse to Israel (23).

b. Reminder of their covenants (24).

This book is far from complete in the details of the conquest and provides only limited insights into the personality of Joshua, but it does illustrate how ably he led Israel after Moses. It also testifies how he and his generation followed the Lord. More importantly, this book shows the heart and hand of the Lord in settling his chosen children in a promised land.

Bible Dictionary references: Joshua; Joshua, Book of; Amorites; Ebal; Ephraim; Gerizim; Hill Country.

Why Did Joshua's Spies Go to Rahab the Harlot?

(Josh. 2)

Rahab may not have been a harlot. The Hebrew word used for harlot is zonah, which is from the same root as mazon meaning "food." A more correct translation might be to call her a "woman of zonah or 'food'," that is, a "woman innkeeper." Ancient inns often did provide harlots. However, just because a woman operated a tavern or inn did not necessarily mean she was a prostitute. (See Adam Clarke, Clarke's Bible Commentary [New York: Abingdon Press, n.d.] 2:11.)

Joshua's spies would have gone to Rahab's place for lodging and in order to mingle with other travelers while gathering information on the city and the morale of its inhabitants. She was impressed with them and their religion, and thereafter lived a righteous life. New Testament writers later praised her faith and good works. (See Heb. 11:31; James 2:25.)

Some Christians even identify the Rahab of Christ's ancestry with this same woman (see Matt. 1:5), and Jewish rabbinical tradition has her as the ancestress of eight prophets and priests, including Jeremiah. (Megillah 14b.)

What Caused the Walls of Jericho to Fall?

(Josh. 6:20)

From limited archaeological excavations of Jericho, it appears that its walls were not as large or as strong when the Israelites attacked as in other times of its history. The small fortified mound of about seven acres was surrounded by two parallel walls, fifteen feet apart, each thirty feet high and six feet thick. These walls were made of sun-dried brick without binding straw and with dried mud filling gaps in the construction. The wall foundations were the remnants of earlier partially destroyed walls. However, in spite of these deficiencies, the walls provided an imposing barrier to the ill-equipped Israelites, who had no battering rams, catapults, or other machinery.

Two possible answers explain how the walls fell under the hand of the Lord on the seventh day as the Israelites completed their seventh march around the mound. First, their own marching and the vibrations or resonance it created would have weakened the walls, much like the pitch and resonance of a soprano's voice can shatter a goblet. This phenomenon still exists, and modern soldiers in large numbers will cross bridges and other unstable structures in "broken cadence," that is, by not marching in step or in unison with each other.

Second, Jericho sits on one of the most active earthquake fault lines in the world. The Jordan fault stretches from Mount Hermon in the north to Ethiopia in eastern Africa. Archaeology and history both record other occasions when earthquakes have destroyed Jericho's walls.

The "miracle of Jericho" (as with all God's miracles) was through natural means. Whatever caused the walls to fall, the Israelites acted in faith as they marched around the city, and they recognized God's hand in this event.

Joshua's Central Campaign

(Josh. 6-9)

Joshua's Southern Campaign

(Josh. 10)

Joshua's Northern Campaign

(Josh. 11)

The Conquest of Canaan by Joshua and the Israelites

(Josh. 11:12-23; 13:1-7; Judg. 1)

At first reading, it appears that the Israelites easily and completely conquered Canaan under Joshua's leadership. However, more careful reading indicates that important cities and sections of Canaan, especially in the west, were not immediately brought under Israelite control. The Israelites did not conquer Canaan—they settled in the area.

Refer to Map 5 in the Bible and note how the rolling hills and plains of the Philistines and Sharon, along with the strategic valley of Jezreel and its fortress cities of Megiddo and Beth-shan, remained unconquered. These areas were (and still are) the most fertile lands in the whole country. Not to control them meant a loss of tremendous food resources.

It was the responsibility of the generations of Israelites after Joshua to conquer these lands, but they failed to do so. (See Judg. 2:20-23.) The Lord then preserved these areas and their Canaanite inhabitants from Israelite dominion for over two centuries, until they were finally subdued by David and Solomon. (See Maps 7 and 8.)

The Six Cities of Refuge

(Josh. 20)

These six cities were equidistant from each other on both sides of the Jordan River. Any person accused of murder or who had accidently killed someone else could flee to one of these Levitical cities and await a fair judgment. This process removed the danger of a vendetta from the kinsman of the slain person and allowed the elders of that city to render a more unbiased decision, like the "change of venue" process of our own legal system.

If the fugitive was found guilty of murder, he was to be delivered to the next of kin for execution. If found innocent of murder, but guilty of unpremeditated or unintentional killing, he was to remain in the city of refuge trying to maintain himself and to support his family. If he left the city, he could be slain by the kinsmen of his victim. Thus he would usually stay in the city of refuge under difficult economic and social circumstances, like a prison term, until the death of the high priest. The death of the high priest was a type of statute of limitations, and thereafter the offender could return to his home without danger of reprisal. Of course, if the fugitive was found innocent of any killing, he could immediately return home and resume his social position.

The Lord's establishment of these cities of refuge indicated his concern for the rights of the innocent against revenge. Also, man was to be judged for his motives as well as the actual act. And a system of pardoning or parole was available to mitigate the punishment of an offender.

Can a Stone Be a Witness?

(Josh. 24:26-27)

Two possible explanations might answer this question. First, the stone was a part of this earth. This earth has an intelligence and it will become a Urim and Thummim in the eternities. (D&C 130:9.) Perhaps the earth was in some way able to record the history of that event upon the rock.

Second, the stone could serve as a witness or reminder to the Israelites. As they would see the stone in later years, they would remember the earlier event. Plymouth Rock, Massachusetts, serves a similar role for many Americans today.
