Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Judges

The book of Judges is a collection of biographical narratives combined by a later writer (probably Samuel) who joined historical events into a theological framework for the whole time period from Joshua to King Saul. The writer first reviewed some of the historical material found in Joshua, and then gave an introduction to the whole book (1:1-3:6). In the introduction he stated the framework for the collection of narratives. In the generations after Joshua, the Lord had warned the Israelites that they had not heeded his command to cleanse the land of the wicked Canaanites. Therefore he would preserve the Canaanites in the land as a snare and a test (just as he would later preserve the Lamanites with the Nephites) to see whether the Israelites would follow the Lord (2:3, 20-22).

Then the main section of the book records how twelve judges rescued later generations as they turned away from God. These judges usually tried to bring righteousness to Israel, but the people quickly reverted back to their wicked ways. Judges 2:11-19 previews this cycle, which repeated itself throughout the book:

The Israelite judges were more than military leaders and judicious administrators. (See BD "Judges.") Some composed poems in the form of songs (Deborah, 5) or riddles (Samson, 14:14, 18; 15:16) or parables (Gideon's son, Jothan, 9:8-15). Although most judges exhibited charisma, some hesitated to go into battle (Deborah, Gideon) or required promises from the people before leading them (Jephthah). One, Samson, acted without assistance from Israelite forces. One characteristic many of them shared was having the Spirit of the Lord with them (Othniel, 3:10; Deborah, a prophetess, 4:4; Gideon, 6:34; Jephthah, 11:29; Samson, 13:25; 14:6, 19; 15:14, 19). The Israelites recognized the presence of the Lord with these leaders, and even though the people were wicked they willingly followed these righteous judges (like the wicked Nephites who followed Mormon in spite of his exhortations toward their repentance; Morm. 3:1-15).

The following chart shows where the twelve judges lived and repelled the invasions from almost all of Israel's enemies from about 1250 to 1050 B.C.:

The Twelve Judges and Their Victories

The last part of the book of Judges (17-21) consists of two appendixes summarizing the wicked and chaotic conditions in Israel. Whereas the introduction to the book contrasts the effective leadership of Joshua with the weakness of later generations, this conclusion to the book shows how Israelite society had degenerated even further into apostasy, priestcraft, sodomy, and civil war. In the story of Micah (17, 18), idolatry and a bribable priesthood became norms of society. During the time of the Levite and his prostitute wife (19-21), sexual abuses became so entrenched that a civil war was required to cleanse out the wicked and their defenders. One Israelite tribe, Benjamin, was almost destroyed in the process.

The spiritual framework of the whole book was one of gradually increasing wickedness. Initially the people willingly followed the Lord's prophet Joshua. Then their wickedness required external, forced humility before they followed inspired judges. Finally, their apostasy and immorality was so pervasive that the elders of Israel had to initiate a civil war before Israel lost all claims to being the people of God.

The book of Judges highlights a period of political disunity when there was no king in Israel and a time of spiritual disorganization when every person did what he thought was right. The book prepares the political and spiritual stage for the book of Samuel, which records how Israel received her first king and how Samuel became the first great prophet after Joshua. After centuries of weakness under the judges, Israel will finally be rescued from all her enemies, renewed through kingly leadership, and prepared by prophets to achieve her destiny. Studying the book of Judges shows how God worked with individuals and a whole nation to elevate them toward their divine potential even though they sought to become progressively more wicked.

Bible Dictionary references: Judges, Book of; Architecture; Baal; Benjamin; Dan; Furniture; Gideon; Grove; High Places; House; Philistines; Rain; Ras Shamrah Tablets.

Baal and Ashtart

(Judg. 2:11-13)

Baal and Ashtart were the main pair of gods among the Canaanites. Baal was the great male weather god, while Ashtart was the fertility goddess. Together they were responsible for the proper combination of moisture and earth and of germination and growth to ensure a successful harvest. They combined the mysteries of agriculture and sex into an apostate Canaanite religion.

Baal not only competed with Yahweh for the religious devotion of the Israelites, but was also an apostate substitute for Jehovah. According to Canaanite mythology, Baal's father was El (meaning god), the head of the gods. Baal came into power on this earth after he conquered Yamm, the dragon god of the sea (Satan?). Later, while building a temple upon this earth, Baal was killed by Mot, the god of drought, death, and the netherworld (Satan?). With help from members of his divine family, Baal was rescued from Mot, resurrected, and put on his throne. He could then join with his mother Ashtart (Ishtar or Asherah) and provide life upon the earth. Images, idols, and shrines of Baal and Ashtart (plural Baalim and Ashtaroth) were scattered throughout the land, in the "groves" and upon the "high places" where the Canaanites worshiped.

Rather than anticipating the later time when the Lord of this earth, Jehovah, would live thereon and become subject to Satan's temptations before his atonement and resurrection, the Canaanites believed that the master of the earth, Baal, had been on the earth and had already fought death (Mot). However, they also believed that Baal was not completely victorious because he still had to confront Mot each year. Indeed, Baal experienced temporary death annually and his conflict with Mot was represented on earth by the conflict waged in nature at the changes of the seasons. Baal personified spring and moisture while Mot represented the dry summer months and the drought season in Canaan. The cycles of spring and summer, fertility and drought, life and death, were all combined by the Canaanites into the story of Baal. Their religion gave them the false hope that they could control these cycles and have power to guarantee fertility of the soil. To release this power, they reenacted the life of Baal in his temple or shrine through pageantry, ritual, female idols, naked images, phallic sculptures, and religious prostitution.

Readers of the Old Testament usually assume that Baal paganism and Jehovah worship were completely different types of religion. More correctly, the Baal religion was just an apostate form of the true religion. It distorted the true relationship between God and man, it renounced the atoning powers of God, and it introduced emotional and sensual forms of worship which appeased the masses. Thus ancient Israelites faced much the same spiritual environment as modern, true believers in God do. Dominant apostate religions and worldly enticements still distract the righteous from their true purpose on earth, and each individual must still decide if he or she will serve the Lord or a form of Baal and Ashtart.

Deborah the Prophetess

(Judg. 4)

It seems natural to assume that a "prophetess" was simply a woman prophet. Actually, a prophetess in the Old Testament could be: (1) the wife of a prophet, (2) a woman who received prophecies of the future, or (3) someone gifted with poetical inspiration, since inspired, sacred poetry was considered to be divine. Several other prophetesses are mentioned in the Bible, such as Miriam, Hannah, Isaiah's wife, and Anna. Miriam and Deborah were probably called prophetesses because of their poetical inspiration as they developed their own special gifts of the Spirit.

The song of Deborah (Judg. 5) shows that she was a prophetess in the poetical sense. She also served as a judge who built upon her human perspectives and relied upon spiritual insight to make her decisions. She was confident in her relationship with God as evidenced in the counsel she gave Barak: "Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded . . .?" (Judg. 4:6.) She was a social leader and an ancient "Joan of Arc" who inspired the Israelites in battle. (Judg. 4:8.) She also demonstrated her development of the gift of prophecy. Her prophecy concerning Sisera's fate (Judg. 4:9) was fulfilled, which confirmed the fact that she did receive some knowledge of the future. All these characteristics show that Deborah was a prophetess who, as well as being poetically inspired, was also a spiritual leader of the people.

The gifts of the spirit, including prophecy, are promised to those who believe in God and follow his commandments. (Mark 16:16-18.) Paul has encouraged us to "desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy." (1 Cor. 14:1.) We must develop these spiritual gifts if we are to see and understand God (D&C 46:31) and if we want to witness his promised miracles, signs, and wonders (D&C 35:8). We should all be prophets or prophetesses within the areas of our own spiritual development and stewardships. Through the power of the Holy Ghost we can best receive and apply these gifts of the spirit. (D&C 46:8-28: see AF, pp. 217-18.)

Jephthah and His Daughter's Sacrifice

(Judg. 11:30-39)

Although a social outcast, Jephthah was recognized for his leadership abilities. As he confronted the Ammonites, he reviewed the biblical history of how the Israelites had conquered the Transjordan area from the Amorites, thus disproving the Ammonite claims to the land. The Ammonites still desired to control that area, and Jephthah gathered an Israelite army to repel the invasion. Before going into battle with the Spirit of the Lord upon him, Jephthah vowed that if he returned victorious he would dedicate to the Lord whatever came first out of his house to meet him. Then he added, "and I will offer it up for a burnt offering" (11:31). This promise and its fulfillment have disturbed Bible readers and confused Bible scholars for centuries.

When Jephthah returned victorious, his only child, a daughter, came out to meet him. He told her of his promise and she was willing to abide by it. She asked for a two-month period of fellowship and mourning with her friends. Then she returned to her father "who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man" (11:39).

Scholars agree that she was dedicated to the Lord and that she left Jephthah's home. They disagree as to whether her dedication to the Lord comprised a lifetime of religious service (probably at the tabernacle) without the opportunity of raising a family (like being a fulltime, lifelong welfare or proselyting missionary), or the taking of her life as a burnt offering or human sacrifice.

Joseph Smith apparently did not question the Lord about this dilemma, because he made no changes in the text of his inspired translation. The story as contained in the original Hebrew is, however, ambiguous as to how the vow was to be fulfilled. The phrase "and I will offer it up for a burnt offering" (11:31) could be translated a number of ways: "and/also/but/therefore/then/or I will offer/give/rise/lift/carry it as an offering/gift/ascent/lifting/sacrifice." It is perhaps significant that the fulfillment of this vow as recorded in verse 39 concludes with the phrase "and she knew no man." This phrase could be another way of saying "she died childless (as she was sacrificed as a burnt offering)." But it seems to mean that "she did not marry and raise a family (as she served the Lord the rest of her natural life)."

With the limited material available, and lacking revealed commentary, the answer to this dilemma is left to the individual reader. Regardless of what type of sacrifice Jephthah's daughter became, there are some positive objectives to be derived from this story:

Who Were the Philistines?

(Judg. 13:1)

The Philistines originally came from the Aegean Sea area near modern day Turkey. (See area B2 on Map 2.) Some early Philistines apparently had settled along the southeast coast of the Mediterranean Sea as early as the days of Abraham. (See Gen. 21:32, 34.) Many of them also settled in Crete (area A3 on Map 2) where they became quite numerous.

By 1200 B.C., the advancement of the Iron Age introduced from the Hittite kingdom (D2 on Map 2) and its resulting agricultural productivity (iron plows were much better than those of brass, bronze, or stone) and a population explosion as well as a major Phrygian invasion from the north pushed many Philistines from their homelands to the isles of the Mediterranean Sea and south toward Egypt and Canaan. In Egypt, they became mercenary soldiers. But as their power and numbers increased with the large migrations around 1200 B.C., the Egyptians, under Ramses III, expelled these "sea peoples" or "northerners." Many of them moved around the seacoast and settled in the rolling hills of southern Canaan. With five city-states as a power base (areas B5 and A6 on Map 6) and using their monopoly of iron instruments (1 Sam. 13:19), they attacked the Israelites from the west and sought to divide and conquer by gaining control of the Jezreel valley and the hills of Ephraim (areas C4 and C5 on Map 6). They extended their control toward the strategic territory near Shiloh, with its trade routes and highways. (1 Sam. 4.) Samson temporarily lessened their pressure upon Judah, and Samuel held them back, but it was not until the days of David that the Philistine power was finally destroyed. (See BD "Philistines.")

Samson's Covenants

(Judg. 13:5; 16:1-20)

An angel of the Lord had promised Samson's parents that their child would begin to deliver Israel from the Philistines if he would remain a Nazarite. A Nazarite was not to have strong drink, nor could he eat any fruit of the vine (grapes, raisins, etc.). He was not to have his hair cut, nor could he touch a dead person. If a person should die while the Nazarite was touching him, the Nazarite had to go through a week-long cleansing process. (Num. 6:2-12.)

As long as Samson remained faithful to his Nazarite vows, he had the strength of the Lord with him. Thus, even after his immorality in Gaza (Judg. 16:1) and his love affair with Delilah (16:4-20), he still had the strength to take down and carry city gates (16:3) and to break the bonds of strong ropes (16:12). The Lord has told us that when we do what he says, he is bound to grant us the associated blessing. And when we obtain any blessing from him it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (D&C 82:10; 130:20-21.) Samson was obeying the Nazarite vows. Thus, the Lord was bound to bless him as promised. However, Samson was disobeying other commandments and thus lost the precious blessing of the companionship of the Spirit of God. He was therefore unable to discern Delilah's true motives. Ironically, Delilah had a better sense of discernment than Samson; she could recognize when he finally told her the truth. (Judg. 16:18.) As Delilah cut Samson's hair, his vow was broken, and the Lord's power departed from him.

When a Nazarite vow or covenant was broken, it was sometimes possible to renew the vow after a period of repentance. (Num. 6:9-12.) Apparently Samson went through a period of repentance and recommitment because he again received extraordinary strength as he destroyed the Philistine temple and his own life. (Judg. 16:30.)

Tragedy came upon Samson because as he broke one commandment (morality) he lost the Spirit of the Lord. This led to his breaking other covenants and resulted in weakness, blindness, slavery, and death (both physical and spiritual).

Of What Value Was a "Piece of Silver"?

(Judg. 16:5; 17:10)

Delilah was offered 5,500 pieces of silver to deliver Samson captive to the five kings of the Philistines. The Bible does not tell us what type of coinage was used or how large these "pieces of silver" were. If they were shekels, each piece would have weighed about half an ounce and, depending upon the value of silver today, would have been worth from three to ten dollars for a total value of approximately fifteen to fifty thousand dollars in today's fluctuating money market. However, if each piece was the larger mina and not the small shekel, then each would have weighed about seventeen and one half ounces and would have been worth from one hundred fifty to five hundred dollars for a total bounty of from eight hundred thousand to almost three million dollars.

One correlation as to the relative value of these "pieces of silver" in the economy of that Israelite time period is found in the next chapter. A Levite from Bethlehem moved north to the tribal area of Ephraim and was enticed to become a personal family priest to a man named Micah (17:7-9). His yearly wages were to be an allotment of food and clothing along with "ten pieces of silver a year" (17:10). The Levite accepted these wages. Thus, if a man could receive food, clothes, and only ten pieces of silver annually for a salary, one can imagine what value and use Delilah would have made of her 5,500 pieces of silver (the wages of one man for 550 years).
