Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Job

A masterpiece in world literature, the book of Job combines a simple narrative outline (1:1-2:13 and 42:7-17) with classical Hebrew poetry of the highest order (3-37) and the record of a personal revelation (38-42:6) to form a literary work that excites the human senses and a theological treatise that stimulates the divine spirit in man.

Although considered a mythic folk-hero by some critics, Job was a historical personality, as attested to by Ezekiel (14:14), James (5:11), and the Lord (D&C 121:10). He lived for 210 years during the age of the patriarchs (about 2000-1800 B.C.) on the eastern edge of Canaan near the desert (modern Jordan; see areas D-3, 4, 5, Map 1).

Although a righteous, upright, and "perfect" man in his generation (1:1), Job's concept of God's relationship with man was limited. He, along with his friends, assumed that disasters and sorrow only came upon a person because of wickedness. He did not understand that life could be a testing ground for faith and that innocent servants of the Lord could be tried by Satan. He apparently understood the reality of a resurrection, but his lack of remembrance of a pre-earthly spirit existence was compounded with an ignorance of the post-mortal spirit world and how it functioned to provide a complete opportunity for all God's children to receive divine judgments and blessings. In other words, Job was a good, faithful man during a time when the full gospel truths were not available to him.

The book of Job can easily be divided into five parts:

I. The prose prologue (1:1-2:13).

II. Poetic dialogue between Job and his three friends (3:1-31:40).

A. Job's lament (3).

B. First cycle of discussion:

C. Second cycle:

D. Third cycle:

E. Job teaches about divine wisdom (27:11-28:28).

F. Job recalls his glorious past and his miserable present (29-30).

G. Job invites God to be his judge (31).

III. Elihu's tirade (32-37).

IV. The Lord answers from the whirlwind.

A. The first speech (38-39) and Job's submission (40:1-5).

B. The second speech (40:6-41:34) and Job's repentance (42:1-6).

V. The prose epilogue (42:7-17).

Satan was cast out of God's presence long before Job ever came to this earth. Satan did not return to the celestial kingdom to question Job's faith, but met the Lord (Jehovah) somewhere (probably here on the earth) to set up the conditions to test Job. (Compare D&C 29:39, 47.) Two rounds of tests followed without Job turning against the Lord (1:22 and 2:10). Then three sages or friends of Job came to comfort and help him.

Bildad speaks more forcibly. He suggests that Job's family may have been punished because of his children's wickedness (8:4), his separation from God (8:5-7), or the sins of his ancestors (8:8); Job should not hide his weaknesses. Job admits the justice of God but contends that because he is not wicked, God does not condemn him; he just wants to escape his afflictions and die (9-10).

Zophar chastises Job for his lies and hypocrisy and exhorts him to repent (11). Job proclaims his innocence and tells his friends to stop speaking for God, who has true knowledge of his actions (12-14).

The second cycle of arguments becomes more heated as Eliphaz outlines the misery of the wicked (15), Bildad highlights the status of the damned (18), and Zophar records the judgments upon the hypocrite (20). Job responds by rebuking his "comforters" who are making life more miserable; he knows he is mortal and subject to death, but he has not been wicked (16-17). He knows that God lives and will judge him as a resurrected being (19). Although the wicked sometimes prosper, God's judgments will come upon them, but he, Job, is innocent (21).

The third cycle breaks down as Eliphaz accuses Job of various sins (22). The second sage, Bildad, speaks very briefly to compare man to a worm (25). The last one, Zophar, does not speak at all. Also, Job becomes more entrenched in his innocence before God (23-24) and he resorts to rebukes (26-27:6) and sarcasm (27:8) to silence his friends.

Then Job turns from the hopeless debate and declares the true understanding and wisdom they all must strive toward. Human wisdom has failed in its ability to understand the mystery of human suffering. His friends have applied the traditional philosophies, while he has argued from the personal conviction of his innocence, admitting that he himself did not know the reason for his suffering. Although they have not solved his problem, they should agree upon some higher principles governing human relationships with God; true "wisdom" is to respect (fear) the Lord and "understanding" is to depart from evil (28:28). In other words, faith and repentance, not material blessings, are the basic principles of a righteous life.

Job recounts his former blessings and good deeds and laments his present afflictions (29-30). He concludes with sixteen pronouncements of innocence and oaths of varied divine judgments to come upon him if he is not telling the truth (31).

There is a spirit in man that receives divine inspiration (32:8); God speaks to men through various means (dreams, visions, spoken words) while hiding his purposes and a complete understanding of his messages (33:14-17).

No matter how old a person might be, he should appreciate the messenger who helps one understand God's word and repent (33:22-26).

God is just, and man should bear his chastisements (34:12-32).

Men's actions affect others' spirituality (35:6-9).

Man should trust the Lord (35:14).

God is no respecter of persons (36:5-9).

God is great in his knowledge (36:26-32) and power (37).

Elihu's comments do not have the poetic majesty of the earlier dialogue, but they contain sound theological messages that shift attention from Job's question of justice to the divine perspective of the creation. While many scholars feel the Elihu discourse is a later addition to Job, it fits the story well by elevating Job and his friends' attention from his own problems to becoming more receptive to communication from the Lord. Elihu provides the link between the earlier questions and speeches and the divine response.

In summary, many pertinent and eternal questions are raised in the book of Job, such as:

Why do people suffer?

Why do the wicked sometimes prosper?

Do we do good for a reward or because of our own nature?

Do we appreciate the periods of non-suffering (good health, esteem, ease of life, etc.) which we often have?

What are our answers to the modern philosophies of men (for example, compare 4:17-21; 15:14-16; 25:4-6 with contemporary ideas on the evil nature of man)?

How does one maintain faith in times of suffering or ignorance?

When and how will God vindicate the righteous?

How does God let us know today if we are on the right track?

Can God always be trusted?

Most of these questions are not completely answered in the book of Job, but by studying the book we should begin to ponder the possible answers. This process should lead us toward wisdom and understanding until we are sensitive enough to receive our own divine responses to these and other questions. This book not only raises these questions and gives some answers, but it also challenges us to do the same. (See BD "Job, Book of.")
