Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Psalms

The book of Psalms is the ancient Israelite hymnal. Unique among the books of the scriptures (which usually contain either God's words to his children or man's writings to man), the psalms record human expressions to God and his Son. In the psalms man praises God (Ps. 9, 24, 30, 33, 56, 67, 71, 95, 96, 150), petitions God for protection and help (Ps. 74, 102, 121), recounts divine acts in human history and among the earlier Israelites (Ps. 60, 78, 104), hopes for the Messiah (Ps. 2, 22, 45, 68, 69, 110, 118), pleads for forgiveness and mercy (Ps. 6, 25, 51), reviews teachings and wisdom of the gospel (Ps. 1, 37, 119), and gives thanks for the divine plan and the roles of the Godhead and men (Ps. 8, 15, 23, 27, 82, 90, 100, 139). After reading just the above-mentioned psalms, only one fourth of the book, one can readily see how poetry, insight, and the spoken word combined to make the psalms great literature and inspired scripture. One can see some of these same themes intertwined in smaller sets of the psalms, such as the Hallal or praise psalms (Ps. 113-118) sung at Passover (even the Last Supper; see Matt. 26:30) and other pilgrim festivals in Jerusalem. Or one can review a small collection of David's psalms, particularly 22-27, to see how he developed many of the same themes.

These major themes and other concepts are scattered throughout the book of Psalms. The book is divided into five sections (1-41, 42-72, 73-89, 90-106, 107-150) each ending with a doxology (short praise hymn). Within each section or the book as a whole, there is no particular order of the psalms by theme, topic, or date of composition (note the similar lack of organization in the current LDS hymnbook), although some psalms are roughly grouped by authorship. However, the psalms of the second and third sections (42-72, 73-89) are mostly addressed to God-Elohim, our Heavenly Father, while the first and last two sections (1-41, 90-106, 107-150) are directed to the Lord Jehovah, our eldest spirit brother.

The book of Psalms is the most popular of the "Writings" (historical and poetical books) in the Old Testament. Almost half of the Old Testament quotations in the New Testament come from Psalms, and Jesus quoted it more than any other book. (See BD "Quotations.") The book of Psalms has inspired countless readers as a classic work in world literature.

To best appreciate this work, study and ponder each psalm individually. Any one of the 150 psalms might be your favorite at this time in your life. As you later reread the book of Psalms, other psalms will inspire and uplift you, and any one of them could provide the special direction or answers you may need.

Bible Dictionary references: Psalms; Fear; Hallelujah; Hosanna; Hymns; Korah; Music; Organ; Selah.

Did David Write All of the Psalms?

No. Some psalms indicate authorship by individuals other than David, such as the sons of Korah (42-49, 84, 85, 87, 88), Asaph (50, 73-83), Ethan (89), and Moses (90). Many of the psalms in the last two sections (90-106, 107-150) have no information of authorship. According to Jewish talmudic tradition, Adam, Melchizedek, and Abraham authored some of the Psalms. (Baba Bathra 14b). In any case, the book of Psalms is a collection of composite authorship that was assembled over centuries of time, down to as late as 200 B.C.

Scholars even question if all the seventy-three psalms with the title "Psalm of David" were written by David. It is not certain that the preposition "of" (in Hebrew le) means "composed by." The phrase "psalm of David" could also be translated as "psalm to David "(that is, dedicated to David), "psalm about David" (written about an event in his life), or even "psalm like David" (in the style or pattern of David's psalms). David was noted for his poetry and song writing (see 1 Sam. 16:17-23; 2 Sam. 23:1-5; 1 Chr. 16:4-36) and probably wrote most of the psalms credited to him. (See BD "David.")

Parallelism in Old Testament Poetry and Prophecy

Hebrew poetry comprises about one third of the Old Testament and extends beyond the so-called poetic books (Job, Psalms, Proverbs, etc.); it is especially prominent in the prophetic books (Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc.).

The ancient poets and prophets recognized that their works were usually received and transmitted orally. Although written copies of their works (usually in the form of parchment scrolls) would have been available from generation to generation, most Israelites would not have had copies in their own homes. Temple or synagogue scrolls were usually not readily available, and in times of war or religious persecution they would have been suppressed or destroyed. Rather than relying upon written records, the ancient Semites were trained to memorize long oral passages. The development of their oral retention allowed them to pass on religious records, poetry, psalms, family histories, and other important information.

The ancient poets, prophets, writers, and scribes would assist their followers by organizing their material into a more easily remembered form. Old Testament authors often used key phrases or words as verbal flags to alert the listener to important passages that would be coming up shortly in their presentation. They also used memory devices or patterns that made the poems easier to remember and still allowed the composer spontaneity of expression.

The most common characteristic or pattern in Hebrew poetry was the use of parallelism. Two thousand years after Hebrew had ceased to be a common spoken language, Bishop Robert Lowth rediscovered this memory aid and poetic style in 1753. Later studies have expanded his ideas and have made major strides in understanding Old Testament poetry.

Parallelism is the most significant and distinctive quality of Hebrew poetry. In parallelism, a thought, idea, grammar pattern, or key word of the first line is continued in the second line. There are two basic types of parallelism, grammatical and semantic. Grammatical or "form" parallelism is often difficult to identify, especially in non-Hebrew translations. However, semantic parallelism is more easily recognized in English as it is a "theme rhyme" where the thought or meaning in one line is related to an idea of another line in a variety of parallel patterns:

(a) A fool's mouth is his ruin, and

(b) His lips are the snare of his soul. (Prov. 18:7.)

(a) An ox knows his owner, and

(b) An ass his master's crib. (Isa. 1:3.)

This most common form of parallelism might be compared to the two rails of a railroad track, because although close together, the repeated ideas reinforce each other and provide a more complete perspective of the major concept.

Many themes, messages, doctrines, and ideas are repeated throughout the scriptures. Repetition is a necessary educational process, whether in learning a new vocabulary word or in understanding complex religious doctrines. By using synonymous parallelism, the ancient authors could repeat their messages and reinforce the learning and memory of their listeners.

(a) When pride comes, then comes disgrace:

(b) But with the humble is wisdom. (Prov. 11:2.)

(a) If you are willing and obedient, you will eat the good things of the earth:

(b) But if you refuse and disobey, you will be devoured by the sword. (Isa. 1:19, 20.)

This form is very common in Proverbs, and the use of opposites clarifies both extremes. It might be compared to a black silhouette that brings the exact outline of a figure into sharp focus as it is placed on a white background.

Through antithetic parallelism, the poet mirrors the opposition of all things found in life (see Eccl. 3:1-8). As in life, where sensitivity to ugliness and suffering can lead one to better appreciate beauty and goodness, so also in poetry, the sharp contrast of opposites brings the desired idea or message into sharper focus.

(a) Like clouds and wind without rain

(b) Is the man who boasts of a gift he does not give. (Prov. 25:14.)

(a) Though your sins be as scarlet,

(b) They shall be white as snow.

(a1) Though they be red as dyed wool,

(b1) They shall be as fleece. (Isa. 1:18.)

These comparisons are usually recognized by the prepositions "like" or "as." Often, symbolic, emblematic parallelism is like a shadow that can be clear and distinct or hazy and vague.

Symbolic representations allow subtle images and the listener's past experiences to enrich his understanding. Like parables, they allow each listener to comprehend the parallelism according to his or her own background and insights. Thus, every listener can immediately relate to the material and yet still be challenged to develop a new perspective of possible additional meanings.

Note how three types of parallelism are all used in the example above:

red as scarlet emblematic

antithetic

white as snow emblematic (red to white) synonymous

red as dyed wool emblematic (your sins can

antithetic be forgiven,

white as fleece emblematic (red to white) your sins can

be forgiven)

(a) Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil:

(b) For thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. (Ps. 23:4.)

(a) I have nourished and brought up children,

(b) And they have rebelled against me. (Isa. 1:2.)

The two lines of the couplet are often loosely connected as the second line continues or completes the thought of the first. Like a belt and buckle, synthetic parallelism joins or blends two ideas in any of several possible relations.

Sometimes difficult to identify, synthetic parallelism encompasses good educational psychology, as it generates and answers questions, completes statements, and amplifies ideas. If the first line of a verse seems incomplete or if it causes you to want to know how or why that statement is true (for example, why should I not be afraid in the shadow of death?) that line probably begins a synthetic parallelism.

Blessed is the man

(a) Who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,

(b) Nor stands in the way of sinners,

(c) Nor sits in the seat of the scornful. (Ps. 1:1.)

(a) Ah nation of sin!

(b) A people laden with iniquity!

(c) A brood of evildoers!

(d) Children that are corrupters:

They have forsaken the Lord. (Isa. 1:4.)

By presenting a variety of ideas that radiate about a central theme, this parallelism is often an advanced combination of synonymous and synthetic parallelisms and is like the spokes of a wheel, combining to provide a complete message. Sometimes the central idea (or hub) of these ideas is expressly stated, as in the first example above (qualities of a blessed man). Other times no central theme is mentioned; or a vague general theme or summary might be stated, as with the second example, and the listener must still organize the component parts within a general framework (rim) and complete the model (the wickedness of the society).

Notice in both examples above how the poets provided additional memory or mnemonic aids. In the first, the verb sequence is natural and easy to picture and remember: "walks," "stands," "sits." In the second, the size of the group decreases in each line: "nation," "people," "brood," "children."

Through composite parallelism, the poet expands an idea beyond its simple meaning into its varied component parts. Complex issues are presented in as many facets as the poet wants to develop. He provides the ideas, definitions, and interpretations that give the listeners a more complete understanding of the whole theme.

(a) Ascribe to the Lord heavenly beings

(b) Ascribe to the Lord glory and strength

(c) Ascribe to the Lord the glory of his name

Worship the Lord in holy array. (Ps. 29:1-2.)

(a) Your country is desolate

(b) Your cities are burnt down

(c) Your land is devoured by strangers before your eyes

It is desolate; as overthrown by strangers. (Isa. 1:7.)

The main point and the ideas (or steps) leading toward it can be joined in various combinations. In the first example above, the climax presents a new idea in contrast to the introductory lines. The first three lines stress the majesty of God to the listener, and in the fourth the listener is exhorted to worship God. In this psalm, David develops respect toward the Lord by stressing varied manifestations of divine glory. However, he wants the listeners to do more than just fear the Lord, so he shifts emphasis in the last line and challenges the listeners to worship God in reverence. This poetic style is much more effective than simply saying, "Worship God because he is almighty."

In the second example, the major ideas and key words ("desolate," "strangers") are contained within both the steps and the climax. Thus, the climax is not a surprise but a summary.

Sometimes the theme statement is given first and then followed by the repeated term (a phrase or word) with its attached phrases:

The daughter of Zion is left

(a) Like a booth in a vineyard

(b) Like a hut in a cucumber field

(c) Like a city beleaguered. (Isa. 1:8.)

This progressive model of parallelism is like a set of steps that lead to or descend from a main point. To help distinguish this from composite parallelism, look for a word or phrase to be repeated in each line leading to (or from) the climax.

This complicated form of parallelism is often made by combining a composite form of semantic parallelism with a more obvious example of grammatical parallelism. Grammatical parallelism deals with the structure of the original Hebrew and the syntactic or metrical similarities between lines. Grammatical parallelism is usually present in most semantic parallelisms, but it is often disguised by the English translation. In climactic parallelism, watch for a word, phrase, grammar unit, or other form to repeat itself in each line.

By using a number of close, successive steps, the poet channels the listener's attention toward a culminating point. This climax could be a summary of the earlier mentioned ideas, or it could be a new idea derived from the context of the earlier ones. In any case, the poet uses climactic parallelism to lead the listeners toward a major theme or idea.

(a) We have escaped as a bird

(b) from the snare of the fowlers;

(b1) The snare is broken,

(a1) And we have escaped! (Ps. 124:7.)

(a) Ephraim shall not envy

(b) Judah,

(b1) And Judah

(a1) shall not harass Ephraim. (Isa. 11:13.)

The poet can develop and then introvert as many ideas as he desires:

(a) Make the heart of this people fat,

(b) And make their ears heavy,

(c) And shut their eyes.

(c1) Lest they see with their eyes,

(b1) And hear with their ears,

(a1) And understand with their heart,

And convert [return], and be healed [heal themselves]. (Isa. 6:10.)

(abc) Come to the house of the God of Jacob, . . . and we will walk in his paths

(d) And he shall judge among the nations, . . .

(ef) And they shall beat their swords into plowshares,

(e1f1) And their spears into pruninghooks:

(d1) Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, . . .

(a1c1b1) O house of Jacob,. . . let us walk in the light of the Lord. (Isa. 2:3-5.)

Chiastic patterns can be expanded to include many verses, whole chapters, and even (according to some authorities) groups of chapters. With the more elaborate patterns, a main theme or message is usually stressed in the center of the chiasmus; thus it might be compared to an hourglass, with the focal point being in the middle. The separate halves of the chiasmus can also be in parallel patterns (synonymous, antithetic, synthetic, etc.), so this becomes a very sophisticated style of Hebrew poetry.

Chiastic parallelism is a common literary and public communications style used by Israelite poets and prophets. Just as contemporary students in public speaking classes are taught to organize their talks, ancient Israelite poets would use chiasmus along with other forms of parallelism to organize their messages.

Introverted parallelism is found in much of the inspired prophetic literature, suggesting the possibility that revelation was received by the prophets in this structured form. Chiasmus (and the other parallelisms included with it) transmitted sublime, divine teachings, most of which are relevant for God's children today.

Summary: For the people of Old Testament times, parallelism served not only as an oral memory device, but enriched the messages as it provided new dimensions of meaning. Today, an awareness of parallelism aids the reader in his comprehension of vague and repetitive biblical passages.

Why Is Old Testament Poetry So Hard to Understand?

Do not be concerned if you have a hard time understanding Old Testament poetry the first time you read it. Your understanding of the poetry in the Bible (especially in Isaiah) will increase as you read more of the scriptures. Most of Psalms and Proverbs, and Isaiah and other prophetic books are written in the poetic pattern of parallelism, and you will soon recognize the beauty and strength it gives to these writings and the rest of the Old Testament.

Old Testament poetry is hard to recognize and understand for the following reasons:

Musical Instruments and the Term Selah

(Ps. 3)

Why Are There Hebrew Letters Separating the Different Segments of Psalm 119?

This psalm is in a poetic form known as acrostic. In a Hebrew acrostic poem, each segment begins with successive letters of the alphabet. An example in English would be to have the first verse begin with the letter A, the second verse with B, the third verse with C, and so on. Since Hebrew has twenty-two letters in its alphabet, Hebrew acrostic poetry has twenty-two segments, each beginning with a different letter in alphabetical order. Psalm 119 is the most elaborate form of acrostic poetry in the Bible, with all eight verses in each segment beginning with a particular Hebrew letter. Other psalms (25, 34, 37, 111, 112, 145) and portions of other poetic books (for example, Prov. 31:10-31) are also in acrostic patterns. Since most of Hebrew poetry and psalms were transmitted orally, the use of acrostic patterns would help in the memorization and transmission of this material. Although acrostic poems were sometimes stilted or forced in order to fit the pattern, they provided "memory hooks" that allowed many more people to remember and cherish these inspired writings.

The "Songs of Degrees"

(Ps. 120-134)

These psalms are also called "songs of ascents," meaning songs of "rising" or "going up." These fifteen psalms may have been sung by Israelite pilgrims as they traveled up to Jerusalem for religious festivals. (See BD "Feasts.") In some translations they are called the "pilgrim songs" or the "pilgrim book of devotions." Another possibility is that priests and Levites may have sung these psalms during the festivals as they ascended the steps and courtyards approaching the temple, especially the fifteen steps leading from the women's court to the men's court. In either case, these psalms were part of the liturgy of the Jerusalem temple and ancient Israelite religious holidays. As such, they could be compared with the Easter, Christmas, or Thanksgiving hymns of our age.
