Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

The Song of Solomon

Rather than a psalm written by or about Solomon (as the title would suggest), this work is a short collection of about two dozen love songs or ballads. According to a notation made by Joseph Smith while working on his translation of the Bible, he did not consider the book to be inspired scripture. It is one of two biblical books (along with Esther) wherein the name of God is not mentioned. Although doctrinally not enlightening, the book can be appreciated through two avenues of study.

One can study the work as a collection of love ballads. The separation of the ballads and the identification of the singers (he, she, or a group of observers) are not clearly marked, especially in the King James Version. However, other translations, including the Revised Standard Version and the Jerusalem Bible, are quite helpful in assisting with this problem. Although quite different from love songs today, these ballads are authentic examples of oriental poetry. They vividly depict the love between a man and a woman. Open and descriptive, but never vulgar, they express the tender, emotional feelings between lovers. Using many images and comparisons, they describe the physical attractions the man and his maiden find in each other. Excitement, anxiety, loneliness, and other emotions are also portrayed by the woman and her lover. With simple innocence, these love poems entice us toward these oriental lovers as we see them through their own eyes and hearts.

A second study of the Song of Solomon could be to consider it as an allegory or representation of God's love for Israel (Jewish interpretation) or for the Church (Christian viewpoint). Latter-day Saints in particular have reasons to identify with this allegory. First, whether the maiden represents Israel or the Church, one should recognize that not every Israelite or Christian can claim this symbolized pure love from God—it is reserved for the covenant Israelite and the member of Christ's true church. Both these titles should apply to Latter-day Saints, and thus they should feel welcomed in the love and embrace of Christ. Secondly, there is one description of the woman in the Song of Solomon that is used repeatedly in the Doctrine and Covenants to identify the restored Church of Jesus Christ.

This description is found at the end of the poem in Song of Solomon 6:10-13. In verse ten, it is asked: "Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?" This is answered in the inspired dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 109:73, where "she" is identified with Christ's restored church, which will "come forth out of the wilderness of darkness, and shine forth fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners." Continuing with the biblical image, Joseph Smith adds that she will be "adorned as a bride for that day" when the Lord would unveil the heavens, transform the earth, and appear in glory. (D&C 109:74.) Further references in the Doctrine and Covenants to the Song of Solomon are sections 5:14 and 105:31, where the maiden is again identified with Christ's restored church and its hosts of members who are sanctified in preparation for the Millennium. (See also "Banners" article in Daniel H. Ludlow, A Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], vol. 2, pp. 21-22.)

One other reference to the maiden in Song of Solomon as the restored Church is found in Revelation 12:1-7. Here John describes a woman appearing in the last days with the sun and the moon. He records that she would deliver her child and prevail over Satan and that she is "the church of God, who had been delivered of her pains, and brought forth the kingdom of our God and his Christ. (JST Rev. 12:7.) Compare Isaiah's description of these events in Isaiah 66:5-13, where he records that suddenly Zion will be delivered by a woman and that she would draw Israel to her breasts.

Although the Song of Solomon appears to be simple love poetry, one can draw from it comparisons to spiritual matters, just as one relates moral and spiritual meaning to other allegories, parables, and stories of the Bible. These love ballads can be appreciated for their own intrinsic and poetic values, and they can also be expanded and applied to the Lord's descriptions of his restored church in the last days. (See BD "Song of Solomon.")
