Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Isaiah

The writings of Isaiah constitute the most important prophetic discourses of the Old Testament. Isaiah is quoted more in the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and among the Dead Sea Scrolls, than any other Old Testament prophet. Jesus also quoted Isaiah extensively as he began his ministry (compare Isa. 61:1-3 with Luke 4:16-21), taught the Jews, and visited the Nephites. In 3 Nephi, he evaluated the prophecies of Isaiah, proclaimed that all of them would be fulfilled, and commanded his followers to search the words of Isaiah. (3 Ne. 20:11-12; 23:1-3.)

Isaiah was born about 775 B.C. during the reigns of two strong Israelite kings. In the northern kingdom of Israel, Jeroboam II beautified Samaria and expanded his country's borders and influence to their greatest extent since Solomon's time. In the southern kingdom of Judah, Uzziah served as Jerusalem's most powerful king in more than a century. Wealth, social injustices, immorality, and growing pagan worship characterized both societies. This was also a time of peace for both kingdoms, since neither Assyria (to the northeast) nor Egypt (to the southwest) had strong rulers.

Shortly after Isaiah reached adulthood, the two Israelite kingdoms weakened just as one of Assyria's most powerful kings, Tiglath-Pileser III (or Pul, as he was called in the Bible), came to the throne in 745 B.C. Civil dissensions, rebel rulers, international warfare, and assassinations had disrupted the northern kingdom of Israel, while in Judah, Uzziah had become a leper, a social outcast, and a coregent king with his son after he tried to burn the priestly incense in the temple in 750 B.C.

Isaiah was called as a prophet about a decade later. In the year that King Uzziah died, about 740 B.C., Isaiah received a great vision concerning his calling (Isa. 6) and was soon recognized by both kingdoms as a prophet of the Lord.

Isaiah says very little about his background, family life, or personal feelings. He had at least two sons, whose names contained prophetic warnings (Isa. 7:3; 8:3). According to Jewish tradition, he was related to the royal family, and one of his daughters married King Hezekiah, the grandson of Uzziah. He suffered a martyr's death at the hands of the wicked King Manasseh, who had Isaiah encased in a tree trunk and sawn asunder with a wooden saw.

Isaiah and his contemporary prophets (Amos, Hosea, and Micah) exhorted the Israelites to return to complete obedience of the laws of Moses. According to his own writings, he did not perform many great miracles although he did promise a miraculous deliverance to Jerusalem (37) and prophesied health to Hezekiah and then gave him a sign or miracle by having the sun's shadow recede (38). His greatest power came not as a lawgiver (like Moses) and not as a miracle worker (like Elijah) but as a prophet and seer who prophesied about many future events in the history of the world.

Isaiah's warnings and prophecies cover almost three thousand years of Israelite history. They also foretell the first and second coming of the Messiah, the restoration of the gospel, the gathering of the house of Israel, the events and leaders before the Millennium, and some characteristics of the Millennium. The following is a brief summary of his writings:

Chapter Description, with major themes italicized

1-12 Warnings to ancient Israelites and their leaders with prophecies about later times and leaders (including the Messiah).

13-23 Prophecies concerning the foreign nations and their later representations upon the earth until the last days.

24-27 Isaiah's apocalypse: prophecies, psalms, and prayers about the judgment of the world and the blessings of Israel in the last days.

28-35 First judgment, then paradise: a warning to Israel of her sufferings and to the wicked world (Edom) of its destruction before the Millennium, when the earth will blossom as a rose and the righteous will be blessed with hidden knowledge and scriptures, noble leaders, justice, and peace.

36-39 Historical narrative of the Assyrian invasion and King Hezekiah.

40-47 Affirmation of God's power and glory with prophecies concerning his servants (both messianic and secular) who will deliver the righteous from death, wickedness, and oppression.

48-52 Israel, Israel, Israel: a call to scattered "blood Israel" to join with "covenant Israel" and to become jointheirs to the "land Israel" and the blessings of righteousness in Zion.

53 The great servant song of the Messiah.

54-58 Encouragements to Israel and the world to join the Lord's work, to trust in his ways, and to keep his commandments (such as the sabbath, morality, fasting, and charity) and to always turn away from sin.

59-66 Prophecies of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, including the gathering, the Restoration, temporal and spiritual blessings, the return of Christ, and the creation of a new heaven and a new earth.

It is assumed that Isaiah arranged his writings into their present order, although a scribe or disciple may have done so. Much of the historical material (especially chapters 36-39) is contained in 2 Kings 14-21 and 2 Chronicles 26-33.

Portions of Isaiah's writings (especially his history of Uzziah; see 2 Chr. 26:22) were later lost or corrupted by editing and deletion. Many sacred writings were lost during the fifty-five-year reign of Manasseh, who killed many righteous people and offered his own son as a human sacrifice. The Babylonian invasion and captivity resulted in other lost records. After the return from Babylon, Jewish scribes, led by Ezra, collected sacred writings, compared variant manuscripts, and prepared standardized copies. The accepted Hebrew translation (the Masora) of the Old Testament was a continuation of the Ezra tradition. The contents of the Greek translation (the Septuagint) and the translated biblical portions in the Book of Mormon (which came from the Brass Plates of Laban, taken from Jerusalem before the Babylonian captivity) differed somewhat from the Masoretic text, although the Isaiah material was basically the same in all three versions.

In spite of the passage of time and the ravages and pressures without and within Judaism, most of Isaiah's writings have remained relatively intact. They provide powerful warnings and prophecies to the world from an Old Testament prophet who was great like unto Moses (Deut. 18:15) and who communed with God (2 Ne. 11:2). (See Bd "Isaiah.")

Isaiah's Preface

(Isa. 1-5)

The first five chapters of Isaiah preview his major themes. He denounces the wickedness of Israel and holds out the promise of forgiveness and eventual restoration in the last days. Most of these concepts are found in the first chapter. Although there are indications that the first chapter and even the first five chapters were written later in Isaiah's ministry, they are deliberately placed at the beginning of Isaiah. The first chapter of Isaiah might be compared to the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, which was received later than other revelations, but was placed as the inspired preface to the book.

"In That Day"

(Isa. 2:11)

Isaiah almost always uses this phrase to refer to the last days or the dispensation of the fullness of times.

A Woman's Reproach

(Isa. 4:1)

In a Semitic society, the greatest disgrace for a woman was to be barren. Isaiah describes a time when women will support themselves financially, but seek a husband who will make it possible for them to achieve the honor of motherhood.

"Reverse Tithing"

(Isa. 5:10)

In verse ten the seriousness of the desolation in the fields is demonstrated by the terms used. Ordinarily, a farmer would hope to get a thirty-, sixty-, or even a hundred-fold increase from the seed he planted. But instead he would only get one tenth back, because one homer of seed (equal to ten ephahs) would yield only one ephah of harvest. This is a unique type of "reverse tithing."

Why Is Isaiah So Difficult?

(Isa. 6)

Students of the scriptures sometimes sense that Isaiah knew the answers to many important questions concerning the gospel and the last days. They ask urgently, "If Isaiah had the answers to our questions about the last days, why didn't he convey them to us in a simpler and more understandable way?"

Among the answers that could be given are the following:

However, the Lord desires that we understand the timing and fulfillment of some prophecies concerning our dispensation. In keeping with the principles of "line upon line, precept upon precept" (Isa. 28:10; 2 Ne. 28:30), he makes it possible for us to understand more as we are spritually prepared. Nephi said, speaking of the prophecies of Isaiah, "Men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to pass." (2 Ne. 25:7.) This knowledge strengthens our faith in his prophecies, and it challenges us to study his messages so we can be better prepared for the problems of our day.

Because many of Isaiah's prophecies are being fulfilled in these last days, we have a better opportunity to understand his writings than any other generation. We also have other scriptures and living prophets that enlighten us about Isaiah's words. Although Isaiah is difficult, even deliberately difficult, he is not impossible to understand if we will study the scriptures, review contemporary events, listen to the living prophets, and, above all, heed the promptings of the Spirit. His words can become clear to each of us.

Uzziah's Society

(Isa. 6:1)

Throughout King Uzziah's administration, Israel and Judah were wealthy and relatively powerful. Luxury had, however, brought about great social injustices—greed, envy, idleness, and drunkenness. The wealthy took advantage of the poor through heavy taxation. Rejection of the Lord and turning toward pagan gods became common. Religion became a matter of ritual and sacrificial offering. Immorality prevailed. Isaiah's call to the ministry came during the decline of Judah's and Israel's power, prosperity, and spirituality.

Promises for Israel

(Isa. 7-12)

Set in the midst of political problems, chapters 7-12 promise both an immediate military deliverance from Judah and a future redemption and glory for all Israel. The source of both victories will be the Lord—the Lord Jehovah, God of the Old Testament, for immediate protection, and the Lord Jesus Christ, God of the New Covenant, for eternal salvation.

Isaiah refers to the Lord throughout these chapters in varied, disguised references, including his Immanuel prophecy (7:14); the stumbling block prediction (8:14); and the inspired writings about the "everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace" (9:6), which motivated later great composers. He also foretold the noble justice of the Lord (11:2-4) and his righteousness and faithfulness (11:5).

These chapters also contain the prophecy that most of us think of first when we try to picture the conditions of the Millennium: "The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb," the leopard with the kid, and the calf with the lion. Wild and tame animals and children and poisonous serpents will play together as the earth is covered with peace and knowledge (11:6-9). Also, all Israel will be united and "Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim" (11:13). The Lord will be among us as we sing praises in that glorious day (12:5-6).

Syria and Israel against Judah

(Isa. 7:1)

During the reign of Ahaz, a major crisis occurred, the Syro-Ephraimite war (c. 734 B.C.). Pekah, king of Israel, and Rezin, king of Syria, threatened to capture Jerusalem and replace Ahaz with a king of their own choosing for the purpose of forming a tripartite alliance consisting of Syria, Israel, and Judah against Assyria. Isaiah revealed the plot to Ahaz and prophesied that such an alliance would fail; the prophet tried in vain to convince Ahaz to place his trust in the Lord rather than in foreign alliances. Instead, Ahaz made an agreement with the Assyrian monarch, Tilgathpileser III (Pul), and Judah became a vassal state, paying tribute to Assyria to escape the threat of Syria and Israel.

Strange Names for Isaiah's Sons

(Isa. 7:3)

Isaiah had at least two sons, She-ar-ja-shub (7:3) and Ma-her-shal-al-hash-baz (8:3). The meanings of these names were respectively "a remnant shall return" and "the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth," symbolic, at least in part, of Isaiah's message to his people. She-ar-ja-shub symbolizes the fact that a remnant of Israel will return to Palestine after their exile; Ma-her-shal-al-hash-baz symbolizes the warning to the northern kingdom, Israel, whose people and wealth were to be carried away by Assyria.

A note for the curious: the name Mahershalalhashbaz is the longest word in the King James Version of the Old Testament.

Gentle Waters versus a Flood

(Isa. 8:6)

As the Israelites rejected the gentle, flowing waters of Siloam (see Map 17), which represented the soft promptings of the Spirit, the Lord promised them instead the flood of the mighty Euphrates, which would come up to their necks. Then they might finally listen to the Lord.

Invasion toward Jerusalem

(Isa. 10:28-32)

Why Is the Eleventh Chapter of Isaiah So Important to Latter-day Saints?

In sweeping panoramic visions, the Lord taught Isaiah remarkable truths about our time. When Moroni visited Joseph Smith on the night of September 21, 1823, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah and told Joseph that "it was about to be fulfilled." (JS-H 1:40.) This important chapter describes people and events associated with the Millennium. It contains some classic verses about the wolf and the lamb dwelling together and how Israel will be gathered a second time.

Verse one carries over some of the ideas introduced in the previous chapter where the Lord warns Assyria of her pride and eventual fall. The time would come when the oppressed of Israel would have power over the oppressor. The mighty trees (or leaders) of Assyria would be hewn down (or humbled). Isaiah begins his prophecy in chapter eleven speaking of new trees (or leaders) that would come forth out of Israel to rule and bless the earth.

This verse appears to be an example of synonymous parallelism, a poetic device used by Isaiah in nearly every chapter. Apparently in this reference to two separate individuals (rod—branch; stem—roots) he is saying the same thing twice, but in slightly different words:

a. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,

b. And a branch shall grow out of his roots.

In Doctrine and Covenants 113 the Lord identifies two key terms used in this verse: the "rod" and "stem of Jesse." The "rod" is "a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim . . . on whom there is laid much power." (D&C 113:3, 4.) The "stem" is Christ himself. (See D&C 113:1-2.) Therefore, the first part of verse one could be translated: "And there shall come forth a descendant of Jesse and Ephraim who shall be powerful servant in the hands of Christ . . ."

Continuing the parallelism, the second part of the verse ("and a branch shall grow out of his roots") could read: ". . . yea, a helper from among his children shall come forth."

The term "branch" in the King James text comes from a Hebrew word that appears in only one other place in the Old Testament—Daniel 11:7. In Daniel's vision of the last days, he mentions a "branch" coming from "roots" ("roots" in Daniel is the same Hebrew word found in Isaiah 11:1). This "branch from the roots" would stand forth in the end of days as a leader against the evil king and army of the north. This wicked king would bring about an "abomination of desolation" in Jerusalem and exalt himself above God, until Michael would lead an army against him. (See Dan. 11:7-12:1.)

Many other scriptures prophesy about the "branch" or leader who will build a temple and fight against the wicked king and stand witness of the Lord's final victory in the last days. He is called by many names and titles, including: "my servant, the branch" (Zech. 3:8-9); "my servant David," a "king" over the Jews (Ezek. 37:21-28); "a righteous Branch and a King" in whose days Judah would be saved (Jer. 23:3-8); "a Branch of righteousness" (Jer. 33:15); "a leader and commander to the people" (Isa. 55:3-4); and "David their king in the latter days" (Hosea 3:4-5).

Modern prophets have also discussed this Jewish leader of the last days. Joseph Smith said, "The throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." (HC 6:253.) In his dedicatory prayer on the Mount of Olives, Orson Hyde prophesied, "Raise up Jerusalem . . . with David Thy servant, constitute her people a distinct nation and government, with David, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king." (HC 4:457.)

In summary, the servant ("rod" and "branch") of Isaiah 11:1 appears to describe the great Jewish leader of the last days who will be called David. He will be an instrument of the Lord to fulfill the divine plan of events before the Millennium.

Verses two through five describe some characteristics of this leader. The Spirit of God will rest upon him, and other spiritual gifts will be his. He will be led to reverence the Lord. He will judge righteously through the power of discernment. Like the prophets Joshua (Deut. 34:9) and Samuel (1 Sam. 16:7) and Jesus (John 7:24), he will not depend upon the physical senses of man, but upon the Spirit of God, and will be able to judge in righteousness and equity. (See 1 Cor. 2:10-16.) Indeed, "righteousness shall be the girdle [strength] of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins [sinews]." Just as a branch and its roots share identifying characteristics, the servant is obviously very much like his master, Christ.

These spiritual powers and promises also belong to Christ (D&C 113:2; 2 Ne. 30:9-11) as he is their giver. He promises to share them with his endowed and faithful disciples. (Alma 20:4; D&C 113:8.) As his servants live righteously and increase their spiritual powers, they become more and more like Christ. These verses therefore achieve a double fulfillment as they describe both Christ and his servants. (Compare Ps. 22, 110.)

Verses six through nine describe the millennial period of peace among animals (wolf and lamb, leopard and goat, lion and calf) and man and the animals (children and poisonous serpents). The earth will begin to fill the measure of her creation as righteousness will prevail and as the knowledge of the glory of God will fill the world even as the waters cover the sea. (See also Hab. 2:14.) Enmity between animals will cease and Satan will be bound as men's righteousness and knowledge increase. (D&C 101:26-34; 2 Ne. 30:16-18.) The gospel will be spread to all nations until "all the inhabitants of the earth shall embrace it." (DS 3:64-65.)

Another major figure of the last days is introduced in verse ten: a "root of Jesse, . . . shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek." The Lord identifies this "root of Jesse" as "a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." (D&C 113:5-6.)

This servant would hold the priesthood keys that would serve as an ensign for the Gentiles and result in the gathering of Israel in the last days. This servant is often identified as the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Although Joseph Smith demonstrated the characteristics of the "root of Jesse," he might not be the only "root of Jesse" in these last days. Many of the presidents of the Church have been related to Joseph Smith and all have held the priesthood and the keys of the kingdom that he held. The "root of Jesse" could also be that particular prophet who holds the keys when Christ returns to personally preside over his kingdom. In any case, the "root of Jesse" is a great leader in the Church of Jesus Christ in this dispensation.

Verses eleven and twelve elaborate on the gathering of Israel and the role of an ensign. The first gathering of Israel took place after the Babylonian captivity; the second gathering will see remnants return from all directions (as symbolized by different countries: Assyria—Modern Iraq; Egypt, Pathros—Egypt; Cush—Ethiopia; Elam—Iran; Shinar—Iraq; Hamath—Syria) and from various continents (islands of the sea). The Lord will also set up a church (or ensign) for the nations and the scattered outcasts of Israel.

Verses thirteen and fourteen show that after the dispersed of the Jews (Judah) and the remnants of Israel, including the ten tribes (Ephraim), return, they will work together and prevail over their earlier enemies to the east (Edom, Moab, Ammon—Modern Jordan) and west (Philistines—Gaza Strip). The old hostility between Israel (Ephraim) and Judah will cease as they unite their righteous efforts.

Various interpretations have been rendered for the term "tongue of the Egyptian sea" in verse fifteen. It might be the western arm of the Red Sea (or Gulf of Suez) near the Suez Canal. Another possibility is the delta (or tongue) of the Nile that protrudes into the Mediterranean Sea along Egypt's north coast. The most likely explanation would be the large inland sea created late each spring as the Nile overflows its banks and floods a large part of the valley, like a tongue sticking far inland. Isaiah 19:5-10 describes this event in greater detail. This prophecy has been fulfilled since the building of the Aswan Dam and the destruction of the traditional way of life along the Nile.

The Lord will also divert "the river" (usually understood to be the Euphrates River) into seven streams so travelers can walk across without getting their feet wet. Verse sixteen says that a highway will be prepared for the remnant of Israel coming from Assyria (the land on the other side of the Euphrates). Isaiah 19:23-25 prophesies of a highway all the way from Assyria (through Israel) to Egypt. Other prophecies also describe a great highway for the righteous in the last days. (Isa. 35:8-10; 51:9-11; D&C 133:27.)

Although this highway could be a literal, physical road, it may represent any means of transportation, such as an airway or railroad. The Lord did not create a literal road for ancient Israel, but he did prepare the way for them so they would reach their destination. He will do the same for Israel in the last days, and they will recognize his hand in their return. (Jer. 16:14-15; 30; 31.)

The eleventh chapter of Isaiah contains some marvelous prophecies of the last days. It enlightens modern Israelites about the roles of two great leaders who will prepare the way for the coming of Christ in power and glory. They may be the two saviors, or messiahs known in Jewish tradition as "Messiah ben David" (a redeemer descended from David) and "Messiah ben Joseph" (a redeemer descended from Joseph).

Isaiah also describes aspects of the gathering and how the Lord will prepare the way for scattered Israel to return. Ephraim and Judah will work together against common foes. They will lead the world to a universal knowledge of the gospel and toward the millennial period of peace and righteousness. Contemporary Israelites need to understand these prophecies so they can be directed and encouraged in their efforts toward establishing this golden age.

Prophecies to the Foreign Nations

(Isa. 13-23)

Isaiah not only prophesies to the house of Israel, but he also gives inspired warnings and promises to other nations. Most of these are found in Isaiah 13-23.

Isaiah first addresses Babylon, the ancient country that had ruled over the Middle East until the Assyrians had displaced her. (See Map 2.) Although Babylon was subject to Assyrian rule during Isaiah's life, it would gradually regain power and independence until the New Babylonian Empire would replace Assyria as the major power in the fertile crescent. (Compare Map 10 and Map 11.) Even during the Assyrian period, Babylon represented the world's best culture, learning, literature, and religion (much as the Greek culture was idolized during the Roman period). Isaiah uses the term "Babylon" to symbolize the world and its wickedness.

Isaiah also speaks to Moab (Jordan) and Syria, to the east of Israel. These peoples gloried in the downfall of Israel and the humiliation of Judah. They are warned of their impending destruction and promised a later restoration.

Isaiah then addresses the countries west of Israel. Chapter 18 talks of a strange land under the protection of God beyond Africa. As Hyrum Smith indicated in his last general conference address before his martyrdom, this land is America. Chapters 19 and 20 contain special promises to Egypt.

To fully appreciate the context and fulfillment of these chapters, one needs to have a fairly comprehensive understanding of the history of the Middle East over the past three thousand years. Since such a historical perspective is beyond the dimensions of this book, one can at least study the general outline of these nations as Isaiah presents it in these chapters.

Peace in the Middle East

(Isa. 19:24)

As late as the summer of 1977, hardly any expert on the Middle East would have dared predict that Egypt and Israel would complete a peace treaty within two years. Yet a modern, political miracle occurred after the November, 1977, visit of Anwar Sadat to Jerusalem. It culminated on March 26, 1979, when these two countries signed a formal peace treaty.

As of the summer of 1980, hardly any expert on the Middle East would dare predict that Iraq (modern country ruling the ancient area of Assyria), with its Soviet leanings and strong anti-Zionist and anti-Egyptian feelings, will ever sign a peace treaty and open commercial routes with Egypt and Israel. Yet according to Isaiah 19:24, it will happen.

Like a Woman in Travail

(Isa. 21:3)

A woman about to deliver a child is trapped by the last events of the childbirth. There is no turning back, and life and death hang in the balance. Isaiah uses such a graphic event to describe some prophecies shortly to be fulfilled. One may observe and even participate in the events, but they cannot be turned back, and anxiety, fear, and anticipation heighten the suspense of the moment.

Judgment of the World

(Isa. 24-27)

These chapters contain Isaiah's "apocalypse" or revelation in which he uncovers the ultimate destiny of the world and its inhabitants: the earth is transformed (24:19-20, 23); the spirits in prison are remembered (24:21, 27); death is conquered (25:8; 26:19); the wicked are punished (26:11-12; 27:7-8); the righteous are preserved (25:9; 26:8-9; 27:6, 9); and Israel and the righteous are gathered (24:13-15; 27:12-13).

Instruction and Promises from the Lord

(Isa. 28-35)

In these chapters, Isaiah first gives us some keys to acquiring knowledge from the Lord; then he promises Israel that sacred records will come forth to enlighten the righteous and to confuse the worldly (28-29). These chapters contain great insights on how we learn and grow in the gospel.

Isaiah then speaks to both ancient and modern Israel. He first warns the ancient Israelites of their misplaced trust in Egypt. The Egyptian armies would not protect Judah. Indeed, Egypt and all its allies would fall to Assyria (30, 31). Eventually the Jews would be gathered back to their land and restored to peace and plenty (32).

Isaiah's words then shift to the last days and some events surrounding the Second Coming as he delivers pronouncements upon the wicked world (33-34) and his famous "the desert shall blossom as a rose" prophecy with the promise of all righteous Israel being gathered to Zion (35).

What Is the Message and Fulfillment of Isaiah 29, Especially as It Discusses the Special Hidden Records?

Some possible interpretations might be:

Heavens Rolled Together as a Scroll

(Isa. 34:4)

At least three possible interpretations might explain this phrase:

King Hezekiah's Jerusalem

(Isa. 36-39)

King Hezekiah's Problems

(Isa. 36-39)

Isaiah was not always the best of friends with the king of Judah. Earlier (in chapter 7) he had warned Ahaz to worry less about Syro-Israelite invasion and more about the righteousness of his people. Instead, Ahaz allied with the Assyrians, who quickly conquered Syria and Israel and then deported the ten tribes. The kingdom of Judah was not conquered by the Assyrians, but they were required to pay Assyrian taxes.

After the death of Ahaz in 720, his son Hezekiah became the king. Hezekiah had already ruled together with his father and he had instituted some religious reform. After he became the sole ruler, he became even more zealous in counteracting his father's paganism. He became a close friend to the prophet Isaiah. Although the internal affairs and religious behavior of the kingdom of Judah were improving, the Jews were still subject to Assyrian taxes and armies. Sometime during this period, Hezekiah became gravely ill and feared for his life. After an early warning of immediate death, Isaiah promised Hezekiah fifteen more years of life and gave a miraculous sign to verify this promise (38).

Shortly thereafter, Hezekiah received envoys and gifts from Babylon. The Babylonians were also subjects of the Assyrians at this time, but they hoped to regain their independence and they cultivated the friendships of other rulers who might join in a rebellion against Assyria. Hezekiah tried to impress the Babylonians and showed off the wealth and riches of Judah. He was later chastised by Isaiah for this vanity and was told that the wealth and sons of Judah would be captured by Babylon (39).

Shortly thereafter, a new powerful king, Sennacherib, ascended the Assyrian throne and the plans for a rebellion were halted. Indeed, Sennacherib consolidated his power and ruled with great authority. About 704, he decided that tribute from Judah was not enough and that he wanted to conquer the territory and rule it directly. (2 Kgs. 18:13-36.) He destroyed some Judean fortified cities and brought his psychological warfare and vast army machine to besiege Jerusalem in 701.

In preparation for this inevitable assault, Hezekiah had strengthened the walls and built a tunnel to bring water within the walls. Hezekiah's tunnel was an ancient engineering wonder, but it and his other efforts were not enough to discourage the mighty Assyrians. In this time of need, he sought counsel and direction from Isaiah, who promised Jerusalem a miraculous deliverance from Sennacherib. After almost two hundred thousand Assyrians were destroyed by an angel of the Lord (perhaps through a plague), Sennacherib withdrew his army and Jerusalem was preserved, as promised by the Lord and Isaiah (36-37). This constituted perhaps the greatest political event in Isaiah's ministry. These chapters also bear witness of Isaiah's authority and the power of his priesthood.

The Lord of this Earth!

(Isa. 40-47)

These eight masterful chapters of Isaiah have inspired Israelites and Christians, composers and theologians, lay persons and ecclesiastical leaders for centuries. The first two chapters were used by Luke in his gospel, by Handel in the Messiah, by Brahms in his Requiem, and in the wellknown hymn "How Firm a Foundation." Each chapter merits hours of study and pondering.

These chapters present different attributes of God, such as: his role as a shepherd (40:11); his omnipotence, omnipresence, and omniscience (40:12-28; 41:1-4); his strength for those who trust in him (40:29-31); his care for Israel (41:8-16); his service to the world (42:1-9); his anger and judgments upon the wicked (42:10-25); his love and blessings for the righteous (43:1-10); his relationship with the house of Israel (43:8-13; 44:1-8); his preparation for the Millennium (43:14-21); his forgiveness of sins (43:22-25; 44:21-28); his names, titles, and roles (scattered throughout these chapters, especially in 44 and 45); and his final acceptance by the world as the only God of this earth (45:5, 6, 14, 21-23). Many other attributes of God are also mentioned in these chapters.

In the chapters 46 and 47, Isaiah turns from his earlier sublime teachings about the Lord and denounces the idol worshippers and those of Israel who do not worship the true God. He uses sarcasm (46:5-7) and sharp words (48:4-8) to impress his message upon his listeners.

Prophetic Past Tense

(Isa. 42:9)

Often when ancient prophets would speak of future events, they would use a verb form sometimes called the "prophetic past tense." That is, they would talk about the future as though the event had already happened. For example, one could talk about the still-future Millennium by saying: "And at the beginning of the Millennium the Church of Jesus Christ had already organized over 10,000 stakes and this number increased ten-fold in ten years. The Latter-day Saints were zealous in sharing the gospel with all people." Study Isaiah 42:9 with D&C 93:24 and see why a prophet would be so confident of the future that he would talk of it in a prophetic past tense.

Speaking to Israel

(Isa. 48-52)

In these few chapters, Isaiah defines the relationship of the Lord to various segments or types of Israelites and tells them how they can find strength in the Lord. He also includes some servant songs and promises about the gathering of Israel. All of these chapters were quoted in the Book of Mormon, especially chapter 52, which was quoted by Jacob (2 Ne. 8:24-25), Abinadi (Mosiah 12:21-24; 15:14-19, 28-30), and Jesus Christ (3 Ne. 20). These chapters helped many ancient Israelites understand their covenants with the Lord and his promises to them. Modern members of covenant Israel continue to find great inspiration in these chapters.

The Waters of Judah

(Isa. 48:1)

This phrase is clarified in the Book of Mormon. The additional phrase "or out of the waters of baptism" in 1 Nephi 20:1 was not in the original 1830 edition of the Book of Mormon. Joseph Smith included it in later editions as an inspired interpretation to help us understand the meaning of the phrase "waters of Judah."

The Servant Songs

(Isa. 49)

Special psalms, poems, or songs about some servants of the Lord are found in Isaiah 42, 49, 50, 52, and 53. Various identifications of these servants have been made. As you read the servant songs, see how any one of the identifications might be the one Isaiah is describing. These possible identities include:

It is perhaps helpful to identify exactly which person Isaiah might be describing, but it is even more enlightening to analyze the characteristics which these servants have and see how they are being developed in our own lives.

A Covenant People

(Isa. 49:8)

Modern Jews are often asked "Why are you the chosen people of God?" They sometimes reply: "It is not just because the Lord has chosen us but because we in each generation continue to choose the Lord as our God." What answer might Latter-day Saints give to this question?

The Great Messiah

(Isa. 53)

The servant song of Isaiah 53 is undoubtedly the most profound of Isaiah's writings. In verses 1-3, Isaiah briefly reviews Jesus' youth and public ministry. He concludes in verses 10-12 with some words about Christ's blessing in the eternities. However, Isaiah presents his most important concepts about Christ's role during mortality in the middle verses (4-9). These key verses highlight the atoning sacrifice of Jesus. Because of the Atonement, we rightfully call him Jesus Christ or Jesus the Messiah, since these honorary titles are derived from Greek and Hebrew words that refer to his role as our Savior.

Jesus is our Savior because he fulfilled the demands of justice and opened the gates of mercy, which lead to the resurrection and eternal life. Because of his perfect life as the Son of God and his perfect love for us, he bore our griefs (or sicknesses) and carried our sorrows (or sins). (Isa. 53:4.)

The law of justice works in relationship to the other laws of God in the moral realm. In essence, the law of justice might be explained as follows:

The law of justice requires that God must be a God of order and that he must be just and impartial. Because of the law of justice, God can make such statements as these: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10); "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

The law of mercy agrees entirely with the law of justice. However, the law of mercy introduces the possibility of vicarious payment of the penalty for laws that have been transgressed. In essence, the law of mercy might be paraphrased as follows: Whenever a law is transgressed, a payment must be made; however, the person who transgressed the law does not need to make payment if he will repent and if he can find someone else who is both able and willing to make payment. The law of mercy insists that the demands of the law of justice be met fully. As Alma stated, "Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." Alma 42:24-25.)

The law of justice made the atonement of Jesus Christ necessary. When Adam fell, he transgressed a law that had physical and spiritual death as its punishment. Thus, the law of justice demanded payment for the broken law.

The law of mercy made the atonement of Jesus Christ possible. In order for Jesus Christ to pay fully for the law Adam had transgressed, it was necessary that the Savior be both able and willing to make atonement. He was willing to make payment because of his great love for mankind, and he was able to make payment because he lived a sinless life and because he had the power to atone for the spiritual and physical deaths introduced by the fall of Adam and Eve. Because of this atonement, he is rightfully referred to as the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind. (See MD pp. 60-66; DS 1:126.)

Every person benefits unconditionally from two major aspects of atonement: the resurrection and the full payment for the original transgression of Adam and Eve. However, as Mosiah indicates, there are also some conditional aspects of the atonement, and in order to benefit from these a person must repent of his sins. Otherwise, "mercy could have no claim" upon the person, for the law of mercy is made active in the life of a person only upon the conditions of repentance. (Mosiah 3:25-27.)

In summary, Christ fulfilled many demands of the law of justice and brought into effect the powers of the law of mercy. These two laws are diagrammed in the following chart. Note how the law of mercy provides an alternate means of satisfying justice after a person has repented.

Isaiah's Hopes

(Isa. 54-66)

These last chapters contain Isaiah's messages to the whole world. His words go out to all people as he challenges them concerning their attitudes, relationships with others (especially the needy), and manner of worship. He also holds forth the promise of a millennial era when Christ will return to rule as King of Kings over a world of peace and prosperity.

The discourses in chapters 54-58 of Isaiah contain a promise of Gentiles and Israelites uniting and enjoying the fruits of the gospel. The whole world is invited to share these blessings as Isaiah reviews the divine purpose for all God's children upon this earth. He stresses faith, repentance, Sabbath and temple worship, prayer, charity, and fasting.

Chapters 59-66 are among the most optimistic and sublime of Isaiah's writings. To those who have turned away from wickedness, the Lord has beautiful promises of material and spiritual blessings. The awaited herald of joy, the Savior, is also promised in these chapters. He will release the captives from death and sin in his first coming (61) and become the great judge and king at his second coming (63). Although the wicked will be full of fear at that day, the righteous will await it with hope and prayer.

Isaiah concludes his important book of pronouncements and prophecies with a promise of a new heaven and a new earth (65-66). His words have inspired countless generations of Israelites in their efforts to prepare all of God's children to come and worship before the Lord (66:23).

Heaven Is Above the Earth

(Isa. 55)

Isaiah's ability to combine gospel insights with inspired poetry is beautifully illustrated in chapter 55. Isaiah hints at the premortal and postmortal lives of all people as he reviews how rain and the word of God come from his presence to this earth and then return, having fulfilled their missions—one physical and the other spiritual. He then suggests that we children of God have similar missions to fulfill as part of the Lord's eternal plan (12, 9). The following table outlines Isaiah's poetic style (chiasmus) and highlights his profound teachings:

Verse Outline Theme

1-3 A Invitation to come to the gospel through

baptism; to anyone who seeks eternal life.

4-5 B Leader and help promised to Israel.

6-7 C Return to the Lord (repent) and seek his

mercy.

8 D God's thoughts (plans) are not your thoughts

(plans).

9 E The heavens are higher than the earth (divine

plans are better than mortal proposals).

13 A1 The Millennium; we who return to God will be

an everlasting sign that God's plan works.

12 B1 We will be led home (heaven).

10-11 C1 Rain and God's word return to heaven, their

tasks completed.

9 D1 God's thoughts are above your thoughts.

Isaiah's message: We come to the earth and return (repent) so we can fulfill God's plan of immortality and eternal life and then serve as an everlasting witness of God and his plan, which is high above the plans of men and Satan.

Why Do We Not Always Feel Close to Our Heavenly Father?

(Isa. 59:1)

Sometimes God will leave his children alone in times of trial or sorrow (such as Jesus on the cross or Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail), but usually if we are separated from God, it is because of our own actions. Read Isaiah 59 to find some transgressions that could create a barrier between the Lord and us.

What Is a Cockatrice?

(Isa. 59:5)

Look up the term in the LDS Bible Dictionary (p. 647) and study verses five and six. Cockatrice eggs and spiderwebs might be compared with the devil (the serpent) and the bonds of sin. Isaiah is describing how people give themselves over to Satan's power.

Why Would Our Sons Marry Us?

(Isa. 62:5)

Joseph Smith in his inspired translation changed the word "sons" to "God." This not only clarifies the phrase but it also makes a better synonomous parallelism between the four parts of the verse so that they now compare as follows:

(a) As a man marries a virgin,

(b) So does God marry [make a covenant] with us;

(a1) As the groom rejoices over his bride,

(b1) So does God rejoice over us.

Who Is Talking to Whom in This Chapter?

(Isa. 63)

Isaiah 63 is a dialogue between Isaiah and the Messiah, but there are no quotation marks to separate the speakers. See if you can identify Isaiah's question and the Lord's response in verse one, and then Isaiah's second question in verse two and the Lord's answer in verses 3-6. Verses 7-19 are Isaiah's response. The importance of this chapter will become more clear after studying the following Bible footnotes: 2b and 3c, 3b and 4b, 9b and 9c (including D&C 133:53 and Abr. 1:15), 14d, 16a, and 17a.

Why Would Christ Come from Edom in the Last Days?

(Isa. 63:1)

By using some of the Bible aids, we can find two good possible answers. First, look at Map 7 or 9 and find Edom or Bozrah in the area southeast of the Salt (or Dead) Sea. Anyone coming from this area to Jerusalem would usually travel north along the King's Highway through Moab and then swing west to cross the Jordan Valley and climb up the mountains.

Secondly, review footnote 1b and see how the term "Edom" (later called "Idumea") symbolically represents the "world" as revealed in Doctrine and Covenants section one.

Thus Isaiah's describing the second coming of Christ as being from Edom could have two meanings:

The next verses in Isaiah 63 describe how Christ's robes have been soiled as he has come from the wicked world and has cleansed it.

Why Does Isaiah Usually Mix Bad and Good News Together in a Chapter?

(Isa. 66)

Isaiah often begins a chapter in a negative tone as he rebukes sinners and their wickedness. He then holds out a promise of blessings and restoration as the people repent. But he does not end on a high, optimistic note; instead he usually concludes with a sober admonition or warning. This pattern could be diagrammed as follows:

See if you can identify this pattern in Isaiah 66.

This pattern is also found in the collection of all sixty-six chapters of Isaiah. Chapter 66 summarizes the book of Isaiah and provides a last promise and warning to Israel.
