Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Jeremiah

The book of Jeremiah is important for many reasons. First, it is one of the largest books in the scriptures (second only to Psalms). Second, it contains many warnings and prophecies for the House of Israel, especially the Jews. Third, it presents the personality and burdens of a prophet in greater depth than any other book.

The contents of the book include prose and poetry, history and biography, warnings and prophecies. The book has three sets of records and an appendix:

The material in the first two dozen chapters is organized in probable chronological order, as these prophecies and warnings were delivered during the reigns of the three major kings, Josiah, Jehoiakim, and Zedekiah. (See BD "Jeremiah"; "Josiah.") Chapters 25-45 are also roughly chronological, but they overlap the earlier chapters (25-27 revert to the time of Jehoiakim and 27:12 to 29:32 are again during Zedekiah's reign). More importantly, they include prophecies of the last days and many biographical insights into the life and struggles of Jeremiah. The next set of prophecies (46-51) deal with various foreign nations. They were originally given at different, scattered times throughout Jeremiah's ministry and later arranged into their present order. The last chapter contains much of the historical material found in 2 Kings 24-25 and serves as a historical conclusion to the book.

It appears that the first set of chapters (1-24) was probably prepared by Jeremiah and written by his scribe, Baruch. It includes Jeremiah's insights and feelings about his calling as a prophet. These expressions open up his personality by showing his love for the people (8:18-22), his sorrow for their condition (9:1; 13:17; 14:17), and his pleadings on their behalf with the Lord (14:7-9). By reading the following selections, one can begin to appreciate his attitudes about his call and his feelings for the burden he carried as the Lord's spokesman to a wicked generation:

1:4-10 His calling and initial hesitancy.

5:14 His words would condemn the people.

8:18-22 His love for Israel.

9:1 His tears shed for Israel.

10:19-24 His rejection by society and petition for divine counsel.

11:18-20 His petitions for judgment upon those who threatened his life.

12:1-4 His expression of personal righteousness (compare Job 31) and the

Lord's response (12:5-6).

15:10-18 His personal frustrations (compare Elijah in 1 Kgs. 19:4) and the

Lord's response (15:19-21).

16:1-9 His lack of a (second?) wife and family; he was not to mourn

during the destruction.

17:9-10 His self-judgment.

17:14-18 His request for vindication from the Lord.

18:18-23 His life threatened by a conspiracy.

20:7-18 His burdens as a prophet.

23:28-32 His conflict with false prophets.

By understanding the feelings and problems of this great prophet, one can study the lives and writings of his contemporaries and see why Habakkuk questioned the Lord about justice (Hab. 1), why Urijah lost his life for giving the same prophecies as Jeremiah (Jer. 26), why Zephaniah called for a great day of judgment from the Lord (Zeph. 1), and why Lehi feared for his life and took his family out of wicked Judah (1 Ne. 1).

Jeremiah is an Old Testament prophet of particular interest to Mormons because he lived and preached in Jerusalem during the same time period as Lehi, the founder of the primary Book of Mormon colony in the Americas. Both prophets had a clear understanding of the destruction awaiting Jerusalem and, since they actively preached this destruction, they were threatened and persecuted.

Both men also received insights into future events concerning the Israelites, and, in particular, they prophesied about a later gathering when the Israelites would return to their promised land and be recognized as the Lord's chosen people. Both prophets anticipated a partial return of Israelites or Jews after the Babylonian captivity and foresaw a later and more significant return when the Messiah would come in power as Israel's great deliverer.

Most Mormons are aware of Lehi's preachings concerning Israel and the last days, but they are usually unfamiliar with the insights Jeremiah had in these matters.

Of special interest to Mormons is the fact that some of Jeremiah's prophecies have been accomplished, although the Jews have not yet recognized their fulfillment. Mormons should also better appreciate how the Lord has prepared the world and the Jews for the manifestation of these prophecies, how they themselves can recognize some prophecies now being fulfilled, and how they can be aware of future events concerning the gathering of the Jews.

Jeremiah was apparently a young man (1:6) when he received his prophetic calling about 627 B.C. (1:2). As he preached to the remnants of the Israelite tribes then living in the Judean countryside, he spoke mainly to members of the tribe of Judah. He was a Levite, but his priestly family lived in the tribal area of Benjamin, and both these tribes had many people living near Jerusalem. Although the northern ten tribes had been "lost" for almost one hundred years, descendants from most, if not all, of the other tribes of Israel were also scattered among the inhabitants. Since the tribe of Judah was so numerous, and because it supplied the kings and the leadership for the whole area, the combined group of Israelites became known as Jews. In fact, the first scriptural reference by a prophet of the term "Jew" is in the book of Jeremiah (34:9).

These Jews were soon to face strong threats to their existence as a kingdom and as a people when the Babylonians sought to control their country. At first, the Jews did not feel threatened by the Babylonians, since peace and plenty had been prophesied by generations of false prophets. In fact, after the days of Isaiah and the righteous King Hezekiah, the Jews had entered into a state of complete apostasy. Hezekiah's son, Manasseh, ruled for over fifty years and not only encouraged this religious retrogression, but offered one of his sons as a human sacrifice. Manasseh's grandson, Josiah, became king at the age of eight, after his father was murdered because of his wickedness. Twelve years later, Josiah began some religious reforms by cleansing Judah and Jerusalem of their idols. He even had the bones of the priests of Baal burned upon their altars.

It was during this religious reform and in the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah that Jeremiah received his call. Five years later, while the temple was being repaired, a copy of the Torah (the Law) was found among some rubble. After it was read to Josiah, he was so shocked by the extent of the apostasy among the Jews that he immediately ordered all idols in the land to be destroyed and instigated more rigorous religious reforms. The temple was purified and the Passover celebration was reinstated. (2 Kgs. 22-23; 2 Chr. 34-35.) The royal reforms remained external, however, as the people were not converted from their false practices. When Josiah died, nineteen years after he began his reforms, the Jews quickly reverted to idol worship. (2 Kgs. 23:31-37;2 Chr. 36:1-21.)

Jeremiah then recorded many prophecies about Israel's later return and restoration in the land. The second portion of his writings (25-45) also included some important prophecies about the Jews in the last days.

Jeremiah is a major prophet because of his many writings. His writings are also interesting because of the personal insights they provide, but he is important for yet another reason. In the New Testament, Jesus was asked if he were another Jeremiah. (Matt. 16:14.) There are many comparisons between these two great servants of our Heavenly Father. They both foretold the end of a Jewish state (587 B.C. and A.D. 70) and the destruction of Jerusalem and her temple. In both cases the doom of the city was followed by a dispersion of the Jews. Both were charged with blasphemy because they criticized the formalized religion and the corrupted temple ritual of their times. They both questioned the external sacrifices when internally the people were wicked. They were both ridiculed by the leaders of society and often ignored by the masses. They were both falsely accused and imprisoned. And (if the traditions about Jeremiah's death are true), they both sealed their witnesses with their own lives.

Jeremiah is an important prophet because of his writings and his life. His writings record why Judah fell and how it will be restored. His life shows the heart of a prophet and the model of a true servant of the Lord.

Who Are the Fishers and Hunters among the Israelites?

(Jer. 16:16-19)

In chapter sixteen of Jeremiah, after the Lord states the identification by which he is to be recognized by the Jews in the last days, he says that he will send fishers and hunters among the Israelites (16:16). Latter-day Saints would recognize these individuals as being missionaries of the restored gospel. The results of these missionary activities were mentioned in chapter three of Jeremiah as the Lord told Israel: "Return, O backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I am married unto you, and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion. . . . In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers" (3:14, 18).

Latter-day Saints have not yet developed these missionary activities among all the Jews. Jeremiah suggests that they will not take place until after the Lord's judgments have come upon the wicked children of Israel. The reasons for these punishments are given in Jeremiah 16:17-18. Such judgments in earlier Jewish history caused many Jews to repent and turn away from their heathen idols. Later generations of Jews sometimes forgot the consequences of sin, and this fact perhaps explains some of the persecutions they have suffered in their history.

After presenting the reasons for the Lord's judgments upon his children, Jeremiah gives a messianic vision of the Great Deliverer as portrayed in verse nineteen. His authority will be recognized worldwide as the nations (or gentiles, as translated in the King James Version of the Bible) of the earth would come unto him saying that their "fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit" (16:19). Then, finally, the people would recognize the hand and power of the Lord, and know that his name is Jehovah. The fishers and hunters (missionaries) would help in this conversion process.

Jeremiah's Prophecies on the Gathering of the Jews in the Last Days

(Jer. 16, 23, 30-33.)

Starting in verse fourteen of chapter sixteen, Jeremiah makes some prophecies concerning Israel's return in the last days. This return, he says, will be so impressive that the Israelites will recognize the hand of the Lord in it. They will refer to the miracle of the return as a means of identifying or recognizing their God—they will no longer know him as the Lord that brought them out of Egypt, but as the Lord who brought them from the land of the north and from all the countries where he had driven them.

Latter-day Saints who are students of Israeli history know that the Jews have been gathered home from the lands of the north and over ninety countries of the earth. These Jews, who automatically and immediately are accepted as Israeli citizens under the "law of the return," have returned from countries as far apart as New Zealand and Lithuania, Argentina and India, Canada and South Africa. Most of them have come from middle eastern or eastern European countries to the country of Israel. Shortly after Israel became independent in 1948, one hundred twenty thousand Jews immigrated from Rumania. Over one hundred thousand Jews left Russia, Poland, and Iraq to go to Israel. Over thirty thousand Jews moved to Israel from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Turkey, Syria, and Iran. (Martin Gilbert, Jewish History Atlas, pp. 97-99.)

As Jeremiah prophesied, many Jews have returned from the north and from the countries where they had been driven. They now dwell in their own land in the state of Israel. However, most Jews living in Israel do not identify the Lord as the causative factor behind their gathering. These Israelis would maintain that their country came into existence through political, military, social, and monetary means, not through any divine guidance. This appears to be a contradiction of Jeremiah's prophecy, as he stated that the Israelites would identify their Lord as the force behind their return.

This same type of apparent contradiction is present in many Book of Mormon prophecies concerning the specific gathering of the Jews to the Holy Land. The prophecies state that after the Jews begin to believe in Christ, then they will be gathered in from their long dispersion. Obviously, the Jews in Israel do not believe in Jesus as the Christ or as their Messiah.

If the Jews now gathered together in Israel do not recognize the Lord's hand in their return and if they do not believe in Christ, are they, then, fulfilling these prophecies of Jeremiah, Jacob, Nephi, and Mormon? The answer is probably not. However, they are fulfilling some of the lesser-known prophecies of Jeremiah and Book of Mormon prophets; the more famous prophecies mentioned above are yet to be fulfilled by a righteous group of returning Jews.

As Jeremiah prophesied concerning the gathering of Judah, he understood that a key element of this restoration was the attitude of the Jews to their Lord, Jehovah. The relationship between the gathering of the Jews and their attitudes toward Jehovah is presented in Jeremiah 23:3-8; 30:3-11, 21, 24; 31:1; 32:37-40; and 33:7, 8, 10-11, 14-16.

In chapter twenty-three of Jeremiah, the Lord first denounces the pastors, shepherds, or rulers under whose leadership the people had abandoned righteousness and incurred the exile. In verse three, he promises that he will gather his flock out of the countries and bring them back and make them fruitful. The Lord will then set up shepherds over them so that they will no longer fear men but will have trust in the Lord. A righteous Davidic king is promised them. (See Isa. 11; D&C 113; Zech. 3:8; 6:12; Ezek. 34:23-25; Hosea 3:5.) The Lord then mentions again the new identity he will have for the Israelites in the last days (23:8).

In chapter thirty, the Lord promises the return of Israel and Judah. He mentions a period of such fear and anguish that the gestures displayed by men would be comparable to these of a woman in childbirth. This period of time, ushering in the final deliverance, would be great in suffering and distress, but would free the Israelites from their yokes as they would serve the Lord their God and David, their king, whom he would raise up unto them (30:5-9). The Lord promises that he will save Israel, but his divine justice demands that Israel's sins will not go unpunished. Therefore, he will correct Israel "in measure" before Israel can be pardoned (30:11). Later in the chapter, the land and its prosperity is promised to Jacob's children. They will establish their congregation before the Lord, and he will punish their oppressors. Their righteous prince will be close to the Lord, and the Lord will accept them as his people. These events are to take place in the end of days or, in other words, during our dispensation (30:18-24).

Chapter thirty-one contains prophecies about the restoration of the northern kingdom. The promise of restoration as given to Jerusalem is found in chapter thirty-two (see especially verses 36-44).

Chapter thirty-three is a good summary of the prophecies of the last days because it repeats many of the prophecies given earlier in Jeremiah. For example, the Jews and Israelites will return and be cleansed from their iniquities (33:7-9). The people will give thanks to their Lord, and he will bring forth a righteous leader for them (33:10-16). The Lord will remember his covenant with Israel. Davidic kings and Levites will continue to live and rule among the people as assuredly as day follows night. The Lord will not forget the promises he made to Abraham, Jacob, and David (3:17-24).

These prophecies of Jeremiah are open to us if only we will study them. However, they are basically an outline of the events of the last days. Further information about them is contained in the Book of Mormon. (See 1 Ne. 19:15-16; 2 Ne. 6:11; 10:7; Morm. 5:14.)

When one quickly reads Jeremiah and the Book of Mormon prophets and then recalls their prophecies concerning the gathering of Israel in the last days, he remembers that when Israel accepts the Lord (or recognizes Christ as their Messiah) they will be gathered in. This general understanding is basically correct as one surveys the prophecies concerning the whole house of Israel and their gathering.

However, a more precise study of the scriptures reveals that some rather specific correlations can be established between the relationship of the Israelites to their Lord and the gathering back to their land. This is particularly true for one branch of the Israelites—the Jews. One of three conditions mentioned in the Book of Mormon scriptures listed above must precede any gathering of the Jews: (1) that they no longer rebuke Christ; (2) that they come to a knowledge of Christ; (3) that they begin to believe in Christ as their Messiah.

Although any of these conditions could precede a gathering of the Jews, the Lord will not accept the inhabitants of Israel as his people until they believe in him as their God. When they are righteous and God-fearing, he will restore them to the lands of their inheritance and protect them from their enemies. In other words, although the Lord might lead the Jews back to their land under various conditions, he will not recognize them as legitimate heirs of the land until they properly worship him. Jeremiah recognized this clearly (32:37-41). The Book of Mormon provides more insight into these relationships; it indicates that some Jews will come to a knowledge and belief of their Messiah before they are gathered, while others will come to this knowledge and belief after they are gathered to their land. (Compare 2 Ne. 10:7 with 3 Ne. 20:13.)

Understanding this fact helps answer two questions that Latter-day Saints have as they attempt to understand the events of the last days: (1) Why are most Jews, who are returning to Israel, nonreligious Israelites who do not recognize the Lord or his hand in their gathering? and (2) Why will great punishments come upon the Jews in the great and dreadful day of the Lord if they are his chosen people? The truth is that nonreligious, nonbelieving, and even "wicked" Jews are today fulfilling prophecies. As they reject the Lord and his laws, he will justly punish them in the future. Knowing this, we can better appreciate the fulfillment of some of Jeremiah's prophecies.
