Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Lamentations

These five hymns of sorrow express the feelings of Judah when Jerusalem and the temple were destroyed by the Babylonians in 587 B.C. (See BD "Lamentations.") They continue as a part of Jewish liturgy and are recited late each summer in remembrance of the destruction of the temples of Solomon and Herod, which occurred on the same day (ninth of Ab) six hundred fifty-seven years apart. Lamentations 4:1-13 is quoted below in a modern translation prepared by the Jewish Publication Society. Compare this with the King James Version and try to appreciate the genuine remorse being expressed.

1 Alas!

The gold is dulled,

Debased the finest gold!

The sacred gems are spilled

At every street corner.

2 The precious children of Zion;

Once valued as gold—

Alas, they accounted as earthen pots,

Work of a potter's hands!

3 Even jackal offer the breast

And suckle their young;

But my poor people has turned cruel,

Like ostriches of the desert.

4 The tongue of the suckling cleaves

To its palate for thirst.

Little children beg for bread;

None gives them a morsel.

5 Those who feasted on dainties

Lie famished in the streets;

Those who were reared in purple

Have embraced refuse heaps.

6 The guilt of my poor people

Exceeded the iniquity of Sodom,

Which was overthrown in a moment,

Without a hand striking it.

7 Her elect were purer than snow,

Whiter than milk;

Their limbs were ruddier than coral,

Their bodies were like sapphire.

8 Now their faces are blacker than soot,

They are not recognized in the streets;

Their skin has shriveled on their bones,

It has become dry as wood.

9 Better off were the slain of the sword

Than those slain by famine,

Who pined away, [as though] wounded,

For lack of the fruits of the field.

10 With their own hands, tender-hearted women

Have cooked their children;

Such became their fare,

In the disaster of my poor people.

11 The Lord vented all His fury,

Poured out His blazing wrath;

He kindled a fire in Zion

Which consumed its foundations.

12 The kings of the earth did not believe,

Nor any of the inhabitants of the world,

That foe or adversary could enter

The gates of Jerusalem.

13 It was for the sins of her prophets,

The iniquities of her priests,

Who had shed in her midst

The blood of the just.

Why Did the Israelites Raise Their Hands in Prayer?

(Lam. 3:41)

Many scriptures suggest the raising of one's spirit, soul, voice, or heart toward God (for example 2 Kgs. 19:4; Ps. 25:1; 143:8; Enos 4; D&C 25:13; 27:15; 30:6; 31:3; 35:26). The Israelites also included the physical act of raising their hands as they prayed.

David compared the incense and sacrifices of the tabernacle-temple with his own prayers and the lifting up of his hands (Ps. 141:2). These actions were all brought before the Lord and were raised up toward him. The raising of one's arms was similar to the ascending incense.

Solomon raised his hands as he dedicated the temple (1 Kgs. 8:22). Isaiah wrote that the Israelites stretched forth their hands in unanswered prayers (Isa. 1:15). Enoch, when he had stretched forth his arms in prayer, received an answer from the Lord (Moses 7:41).

Additional associations with the raising of hands in prayer is explained by Hugh Nibley:

What H. Leclercq calls "that magnificent gesture" of raising both hands high above the head with which those in the prayer circle began their prayer was, as he notes, a natural gesture both of supplication and submission. It was specifically a conscious imitation of the crucifixion, and that brings to mind the significant detail, mentioned by the Synoptic writers, that the Lord on the Cross called upon the Father in a strange tongue: those who were standing by, though Aramaic was supposed to be their native tongue, disagreed as to the meaning (see Mark 15:33ff.), and indeed the Mss give many variant readings of an utterance which the writers of the Gospels left untranslated, plainly because there was some doubt as to the meaning. It recalls the cry of distress of David in Psalm 54:2: "Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth," and in Psalm 55:1: "Give ear to my prayer, O God. . . . (Hugh Nibley, "The Early Christian Prayer Circle," Brigham Young University Studies, Fall, 1978, p. 53.)

Modern Orthodox Jews still use their hands as they pray. They usually do not pray with folded arms, especially when they are praying out loud. If not holding a prayer book in their hands, they often have their hands in front of them while moving and even raising them.
