Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Hosea

Hosea seemed to be unlikely material for a prophet. His marriage to an immoral woman and her desertion did not provide the ideal family model for other Israelites. Rather than serving as a model, Hosea's family was a mirror that reflected the immorality, disruption, and lack of family ties then present among the Israelites. His family became a symbol of the relationship of the Lord with his chosen family, the Israelites.

The book of Hosea first develops the Hosea family relationships and then illustrates the same trends in the Lord's actions with Israel. The first three chapters relate that Hosea makes an unexpected choice of a wife with an immoral background, but they are able to start a family. The wife, Gomer, soon tires of family responsibilities and returns to her life as a harlot. Hosea keeps informed of her life, and when she is ready to return home, he is willing to buy her back, which he does with tender love and a sincere hope for an eternal relationship.

The next ten chapters show the covenant relationship between the Lord and Israel being broken by the people's wickedness. They would shortly become separated as Israel continued her wicked ways. But later, even many centuries later, the Lord would still keep in touch with Israel until some of her children were willing to return to him and be accepted in his house with all the blessings and promises of a righteous people.

The last chapter is an open invitation to Israel to return to the Lord to receive these blessings. The book could be outlined as follows:

I. Hosea's marital experience portrays God's relationship with Israel (1-3).

A. Hosea marries Gomer, whose three children are a sign to Israel (1).

B. Gomer rejects her husband, while he waits (2).

C. Hosea redeems his wife from her owner (3).

II. Hosea's words of judgment to Israel (and later Judah, 4-13).

A. Pride, idolatry, and corruption of Israel (and Judah) (4-8).

B. Judgments and captivity to come upon Israel as the Lord awaits her return (9-11).

C. The Lord's actions with Jacob (Israel) and his redeeming powers (12-13).

III. A call to Israel to repent and be blessed (14).

Hosea is difficult to understand and translate because of the poor quality of the Hebrew text. Even the earliest copies from the Dead Sea Scrolls show signs of a sloppy Hebrew transmission of the Hosea material. In fact, the Hebrew text of Hosea is probably more corrupt than any other Old Testament book. Many of the alterations may be accidental. For example, in the Hebrew text, some letters are transposed (like spelling "strength" as "strenght" or "bale" as "able"). Also, some similar consonants are confused with each other (as in English, writing "strength" as "strenyth" or "bale" as "dale"). Compare the following footnotes in the Bible to see some of the possible changes as the text is "straightened out" or modified:

Footnote (alternate

King James Version meaning)

4:18 with shame do love deeply love and

dishonor

5:11 commandment filth (or vanity)

13:14 repentance compassion In spite of these questions about Hosea's family and the poor Hebrew text, the book of Hosea gives hope and promise to Israelites as they return to the Lord. Hosea's symbolism of a renewed marriage covenant between the Lord and Israel was later repeated by the prophets Isaiah (40, 49, 51, 54, 61, 62, 66), Jeremiah (2, 3), and Ezekiel (16, 33).

There is also a lesson from Hosea for Latter-day Saints today as they see loved ones go the way of the world. We should not lose contact with them but wait, hope, and pray for their return to the family of the Lord as his chosen children. (See BD "Hosea.")

Why Would Hosea Marry a "Wife of Whoredoms"?

(Hosea 1:2)

The most obvious answer is because the Lord told him to. But why did the Lord want a prophet to marry an immoral woman?

One could ask a similar question today as one observes a young Latter-day Saint fall in love with a person with a very sinful past. When challenged, the member could respond with "Well, he (or she) has changed and I have received a confirmation through the Spirit that I should marry this person." Such a marriage with a person with an immoral past who has demonstrated an attitude of change and repentance could merit the Lord's approbation. Hosea's wife also seemed to be genuine in her early vows and marriage as she bore their first son.

But just because two people start off a marriage well is no guarantee it will succeed. Even where both parties have been moral and faithful prior to marriage, it happens all too frequently that one partner later becomes unfaithful and rejects the marriage relationship. This was easy for Gomer to do because of her earlier immoral experiences.

As Hosea waited patiently for her eventual return, his love for Gomer continued and he developed a greater sensitivity for the love which God has for all his children, especially those who turn away from him. Hosea could not force her back to him any more than the Lord will force us back into his company. (Likewise we should maintain love and patience for our wayward family members and friends.)

Through these experiences, Hosea developed love, sensitivity, patience, and understanding. Even though the acquisition of these traits came through sorrow and grief, they helped him become a more effective prophet.

The Names of Hosea's Children

(Hosea 1:4, 6, 9)

The names of Hosea's three children are unusual. The first son was called Jezreel, meaning "God (El) plants" or "God sows," just as God planted or began the house of Israel with great potential and promises.

The second two children were possibly not fathered by Hosea, although Gomer bore them while still living with him. The reasons for this speculation are that the record says the first child, Jezreel, was born to Hosea (verse 3) while the other two were simply born to Gomer (verses 6 and 8). Also, Hosea was told by the Lord that he was to take unto himself "children of whoredoms" (verse 2), and unless there were other unnamed children that fulfilled this promise, the last two named children seem to meet these requirements, partially because of their names.

The second child was a daughter named Lo-ruhamah, meaning "no mercy" or "no pity," an unlikely name for a legitimate child. The third child, a boy, was called Loammi, meaning "not my people," which could suggest an illicit parentage.

In any case these names also were a symbol to the Israelites, telling them that they had originally been planted by the Lord but that he would now show them no mercy because they were no longer his people. The names of these three children were a sign to Israel of the Lord's promises and warnings to them.
