Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Amos

Amos, the "burden bearer," lived in a small village six miles south of Bethlehem where he could look down upon the Jordan Valley and the Dead Sea. As a wool producer, he probably made trips into the northern towns of Israel and saw the religious and social corruption which he strongly rebuked.

Amos apparently appreciated that people do not like to be called to repentance. Instead of beginning his work with an immediate rebuke of the Israelites (as did Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Micah), Amos first addressed the neighboring nations that did not share any heritage with the descendants of Abraham. After denouncing these three foreign nations (Syria, Philistia, Phoenicia), he warned some of the other tribes descended from Abraham (and Lot) of the judgments of the Lord coming upon them. After warning Edom, Ammon, and Moab, Amos pronounced the Lord's word upon Judah and finally Israel. (See BD "Amos"; see also "History of the Palestine Area, 760-690 B.C.," on pp. 98-101 of this book.)

The third chapter of Amos is familiar to most Latter-day Saints because of the statement that the Lord reveals his word to the prophets (verse 7). This secret word of the Lord to Amos was a revelation about the wickedness of the people. Amos used this statement to answer the question, "By what authority does a prophet call a people to repentance?" Amos had outlined some examples of cause and effect relationships (verses 3-6) and concluded with the fact that if problems or judgments were coming upon a people, it would be because the Lord knew of their wickedness (JST verse 16). The Lord knew and revealed this message to the prophet Amos, who then reviewed the many ways the people merited divine judgments because of their wickedness (3-6).

The third and last section of Amos (7-9) includes five visions (locusts, 7:1-3; fire, 7:4-6; plumb line, 7:7-9; basket of ripe fruit, 8:1-3; and the Lord in the temple, 9:1-4), an account of how Amos was forbidden to testify any more in Bethel (7:10-17), prophecies of doom (8:4-9:10), and promises of a restoration, a return of some Israelites, and the Lord's blessings in the land (9:11-15).

Why Did Amaziah Confront Amos?

(Amos 7:10-17)

This short biographical segment of Amos is written in the first person, probably by the hand of Amos shortly after these events occurred. Amaziah, the apostate priest of Jeroboam II at Bethel, was alarmed by Amos's predictions. He accused Amos of conspiracy against the king and ordered him to leave, to return home to Judah, and to live and prophesy there. By telling Amos to "eat bread" (verse 12) in Judah, Amaziah was using an idiomatic expression meaning to "earn one's living," thus insinuating that Amos had assumed the role of seer for personal gain.

Amos replied that he was not a prophet by profession, but that he had been called from his pastoral livelihood by the Lord to prophesy unto Israel. As a sign of his prophetic calling, Amos denounced the false priest and predicted the doom of his family.
