Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Jonah

The story of Jonah is more familiar to most Bible readers than any other writing among the twelve minor prophets. Containing mostly historical narrative and very little prophecy, this short book reveals surprise after surprise in the attitudes and actions of an ancient Israelite prophet.

The first surprise comes when Jonah is told to preach repentance to a pagan nation (1:1-2). Usually the prophets prophesied judgments to the gentiles and saved their messages of repentance to be given to Israel, but Jonah was to go to the powerful enemy of Israel.

The second surprise is Jonah's reaction to the divine commission—he goes in the opposite direction (1:3). Earlier prophets had lost their lives in less bold actions against the Lord (see the story of Balaam in Num. 22-24 and the episode of the man of God from Judah in 1 Kings 13:20-24).

Instead of the Lord striking down Jonah, he preserved Jonah's life through a great fish he had prepared for this purpose—a third surprise (1:17, 2:10).

The fourth surprise comes when the wicked, war-loving, pagan Assyrians in Ninevah and its suburbs repent, and the Lord's punishments against them are stayed (3:5-10; see also "History of the Palestine Area," on pp. 98-101 of this book.)

The last surprise occurs as Jonah becomes upset at the Lord's mercy and asks the Lord to take his life (4:1-3).

A reader might ask why a prophet might exhibit such attitudes and then be so honest as to record them for posterity. There have been other great religious leaders who honestly admitted earlier, serious mistakes in their lives (Paul and Alma the Younger), but with Jonah we are not told how these experiences may have affected his later life and ministry.

Even though the story of Jonah as presently recorded was possibly written by someone long after Jonah's time (see BD "Jonah"), he must have told or written his story in order for it to become so well known. Also, the prayer of chapter two was probably recorded by him shortly after the event occurred.

Many Bible critics consider the story of Jonah to be an allegory or a parable. However, Jesus said that Jonah preached repentance to Nineveh (Luke 11:29-32) and that the episode in the whale was a sign of Christ's own death and resurrection.

The four chapters of the book are neatly organized as follows:

Chapter 1: Jonah's mission to Nineveh; his disobedience and the results.

Chapter 2: Jonah's prayer to the Lord.

Chapter 3: Jonah's mission to Nineveh: his obedience and the results.

Chapter 4: The Lord's discourse to Jonah.

More than a story about Jonah, this book illustrates the love and patience of God toward a weak servant and His children outside the house of Israel.

How Was Jonah Preserved for Three Days in the Belly of a Fish?

(Jonah 1:17)

Jonah's preservation could be considered as a fortuitous series of circumstances wherein a giant sperm whale wandered outside its normal habitat into the Mediterranean Sea and then swallowed Jonah and returned him to shore. Stories and examples of other mortals who have survived similar episodes within whales are given to illustrate the possibility of such an occurrence (for example, the story of the famous seaman, James Bartley; see W. Cleon Skousen, The Fourth Thousand Years [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], pp. 458-63).

A second explanation would be simply to consider this as another of the Lord's many miracles upon the earth. The use of a fish "prepared" by the Lord to preserve and transport Jonah should be no surprise.

A third and more likely explanation of these events would be to consider how Jesus used the example of Jonah in the New Testament. Jonah's three-day period within the fish was described by Jesus as a sign of his own death and resurrection. (Matt. 12:38-41.)

The story of Alma the Younger (Alma 36) is the best scriptural comparison to the episode of Jonah. It should be carefully studied along with Jonah 2. In both cases, the Lord used divine manifestations to force a zealous but misguided child into evaluating his relationship to God. Also in both cases, these children decided to thereafter serve the Lord. It would be better if God's children would commit themselves on their own to the Lord's service. But if necessary, the Lord will cause his children to know the direction of their actions long before they come before him in a final judgment and while they still have time to correct their behavior and give the great service of which they are capable.
