Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Micah

Micah contains many little messages assembled together without an easily recognized design.

The smaller segments of Micah are grouped into three collections found in chapters 1-2, 3-5, and 6-7. Each collection begins with an exhortation to the audience to "hear" the Lord's words (1:2; 3:1; 6:1). Micah then gives a series of judgments or warnings and finally concludes each message with a promise (2:12-13; 4:1-5:15; 7:14-20). The pattern of a warning followed by a promise is used by many other prophets. This pattern becomes the central theme of Micah as he warns that God will send judgment for Judah's sins, but promises eventual pardon and blessings.

In order to see how various smaller segments or literary units are combined into a larger message, the concluding promise (4-5) of Micah's second collection (3-5) is outlined below in greater detail. Portions of this promise were quoted by the Jews to the wise men and King Herod (Micah 5:2 in Matt. 2:5-6) and by Christ to the assembled Nephites and Lamanites (Micah 4:12-13 and 5:8-15 in 3 Ne. 20:15-20; 21:12-31.) Notice how in each literary unit there is often a combination of parallelisms. Read the verses and particularly try to match up the similar parts (A with A1, B with B1, etc.). Study each segment as a separate lesson or message and combine them to better appreciate the variety of the promises given to Israel.

Micah's words later helped preserve Jeremiah's life, as the elders of Judah quoted his warnings of 3:12. (Jer. 26:18.) Jesus also quoted Micah 7:6. (Matt. 10:35-36.)

First read this book for an overall impression. Then watch for key words and phrases, especially if they are repeated. Study the smaller segments, messages, and individual verses and appreciate their subtle meanings and poetic patterns. Finally, organize the separate elements back into a general theme or message and see how your understanding of the whole book (or chapter) has been enriched by a deeper knowledge of the component parts. Each time you come back to that portion of the scriptures, you will be able to glean new insights and meaning from the passages as your own spiritual level increases. Thus, the scriptures can be an always new source of inspiration and direction. Even in a short book such as Micah, great richness is available. (See BD "Micah.")

Micah 4-5

Detailed Outline

I. The temple of the Lord's house (4:1-5).

A. People will go up to the Lord's house in the top of mountains (4:1-2).

B. World at peace (4:3-4).

C. All people will walk in God's name (4:5).

II. The Lord will gather Israelite groups (4:6-7).

A. The "halted" becomes a "remnant" (Lamanites?).

B. Those cast out become a strong nation (ten tribes?).

C. The afflicted to be gathered (Jews?).

III. Blessings of Bethlehem (house of David) (4:8-5:4).

A. And then, the "tower of Edar" (from the Hebrew, only mentioned one other time in the Old Testament; see Genesis 35:21; near Bethlehem); your former glory will come (4:8).

B. Now the daughter labors and travails

But she will fail and be scattered to Babylon (4:9-10).

C. And now (or, then) nations will come against you,

But you will be gathered and strengthened (4:11-13).

D. Now the daughter is besieged and

Your judge (the Lord) is humiliated (5:1).

A1. And then, Bethlehem Ephratah,

Your formerly prophesied leader will come (5:2).

B1. He will leave Israel scattered

Until she delivers. (5:3).

C1. Then some of his brethren (missionaries?) will return

To the children of Israel (5:3).

D1. He (the judge) will protect and

His glory will be great (5:4).

IV. The judge and his forces (5:5-6).

A. He will provide peace when

The Assyrians come into our land and

Tread in our palaces (5:5a).

A1. He will deliver us when

The Assyrian comes in the land and

Treads within our borders (5:6b).

B. Seven shepherds and eight men (i.e., many leaders) will destroy Assyria (5:5b, 6a).

V. Power of the remnants of Jacob (5:7-15).

A. Remnant of Jacob

In the midst of the people as

Dew (soft) and as

showers (hard)

That come on their own (no one starts them) (5:7).

A1. Remnant of Jacob

Among the Gentiles as

him in the forest (usual setting)

Young lion among flocks (drastic setting)

Who strikes in power (no one can stop him) (5:8).

B. God's hand against the adversaries and

Enemies to be cut off (5:9).

Enemies [^1] destroyed (5:14).

God's vengeance upon the heathen nations (5:15).

Note: Many of these sets of parallelism are much stronger and clearer in the original Hebrew text because of similar sounds and word roots. For example, in section III, items A, B, C, D, and A1 all begin with the same sound, which is spelled two different ways (like "bow" and "bough" in English) with two different meanings. Other plays on sounds and words help identify the sets and their parallels.

Who Is the "Remnant of Israel"?

(Micah 2:12)

The term "remnant of Israel" or "remnant of Jacob" almost always refers to the descendants of Jacob who settled in America—that is, the Book of Mormon community of Lehi. These descendants are so identified in the Book of Mormon by Nephi (2 Ne. 28:2), Christ (3 Ne. 20:16), Mormon (Morm. 7:10), and Moroni (Book of Mormon title page).

This "remnant of Israel" should not be confused with the "remnant of Judah" *Isa. 37:31-32, Jer. 40:11, 15), which would be the Jews. Sometimes a "remnant" (without a modifying phrase) could refer to the descendants of the northern tribes preserved or returning from the Assyrian captivity (2 Chr. 30:6; Isa. 11:11, 16); or it could refer to those returning in the last days from Judah (Micah 5:3; Ezek. 6:8); or it could refer to both groups (Jer. 23:3; Isa. 1:9).

While reading the scriptures (particularly the prophetic portions), whenever you come upon the term "remnant" you should see if this term is defined or modified (remnant "of Israel" or "of Judah," etc.) in order to understand which group of Israelites is being discussed. If no modifiers are present, study the term in its context to see if it applies to any or all groups of Israelites in the last days.

Joseph Fielding Smith made the following statement about the remnants of Israel:

The remnant of the house of Israel spoken of in First Nephi, chapter 13, and Third Nephi, chapters 16, 20, and 21, does not have reference only to the descendants of Lehi, but to all the house of Israel, the children of Jacob, those upon this land and those in other lands. . . . Remember that all through the Lord has been speaking of the remnant of Jacob or Israel, and of the great promises made to the gentiles who are on this land and in all other lands, if they will only come into the Church and be numbered with the house of Israel. Their privileges would be to assist in building the New Jerusalem, and if they refuse, then shall the punishments come upon them. (DS 2:248, 250.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Military equipment cut off (5:10). This is a correct translation, since the words "city" and "enemy" come from the same Hebrew root. The term "enemies" is used here in some other English translations and makes a better parallelism. See 1 Samuel 28:16 and Psalm 139:22 for similar translations of the word.
