Victor L. Ludlow, Unlocking the Old Testament ( 1981)

Zephaniah

Zephaniah descended from the royal family of King Hezekiah and was a second cousin (one generation removed) from King Josiah, during whose reign he prophesied (1:1). Zephaniah lived in Jerusalem and may have been trained by the same teachers who influenced Josiah toward his religous reforms. Zephaniah's message was probably delivered before Josiah began his extensive reformation in 622 B.C. Even if he preached during the reformation, the Jewish masses did not respond, and Judah was rapidly approaching her day of judgment.

Zephaniah followed the pattern of most of the Old Testament prophets by organizing his material into three parts: judgments to Judah (1), judgments to other nations (2), and latter-day judgments and blessings for Israel (3). He borrowed ideas from earlier prophets, including the concept of the Day of the Lord (Amos 5:18; Isa. 2:7), the faithful remnant that would encourage a religious community in the last days (Isa. 11:11-16; 37:4-32; 46:3), the eradication of hostile nations (Amos 1, 2), and the rehabilitation of Israel by the Lord (Hosea 3, 6, 14).

For those on the earth who now await the "great day of the Lord" (1:14) or his "great and dreadful day" (Mal. 4:5), there is a voice of warning in Zephaniah and the other prophets. We are warned to be prepared for the judgments that will come upon the earth and her inhabitants. But there is also a voice of promise in these writings as we anticipate the great signs and powers of the Lord. To those who are wicked and unprepared it will be a "dreadful" day, but to those who are faithful and ready it will be a "great" day of the Lord. (See BD "Zephaniah.")

What Will Be the "Pure Language" after the Messiah's Second Coming?

(Zeph. 3:9)

One usually assumes it to be the undefiled language spoken by Adam. (See Moses 6:6.) From the early names in Genesis and those few names of the Jaredite community, it appears to be closely related to Hebrew and the other Semitic languages, but still a separate, distinct language. Perhaps a study of Hebrew, Arabic, or some other Semitic languages would help a person adjust to this millennial language.

However, a second meaning of a "pure language" is even easier for persons to work on before Christ returns. We can develop a "purified language" devoid of blasphemies, filthiness, and inappropriate terms. All our words should be clean and worthy of the Lord's ears at any time, whether he is on the earth or not. By purifying our own language today, we will be better prepared for the language of God, Adam, and the Millennium.
