# None of Them Is Lost

### None of Them Is Lost
Fiona Givens, Terryl Givens, The God Who Weeps (Salt Lake City 2012)
 
 

None of Them Is Lost

God has the desire and the power to unite and exalt the entire human family in a kingdom of heaven, and except for the most stubbornly unwilling, that will be our destiny.

“This is the father’s will . . . that of all which He hath given me I should lose nothing.”

God is personally invested in shepherding His children through the process of mortality and beyond; His desires are set upon the whole human family, not upon a select few. He is not predisposed to just the fast learners, the naturally inclined, or the morally gifted. The project of human advancement that God designed offers a hope to the entire human race. It is universal in its appeal and reach alike. This, however, has not been the traditional view.

Some Christians believed hell to be a more populous destination than heaven. The Bible had declared that “the gate is narrow and the road is hard that leads to life, and there are few who find it.” Just how few was a matter of recurrent speculation. One popular friar of the early eighteenth century, St. Leonard of Port Maurice, sermonized on “The Little Number of Those Who are Saved,” reviewing the opinions of church authorities from St. Augustine and Thomas Aquinas up to his own day. Most everyone he surveyed agreed that “the greater number of Christian adults are damned.” Non-Christians and unbaptized children weren’t even possible candidates for salvation. He relates one visionary account that put the proportions at two souls saved and three in purgatory for every thirty-three thousand damned to hell. Another source gave odds of three saved out of sixty thousand.

By mid-eighteenth century, two religious titans of the Anglo-Saxon world, former allies, were publicly debating the question of just how many people were destined for an eternity in hell. In 1738, John Wesley sermonized against the “blasphemy contained in the horrible decree of predestination.” His objection was that the doctrine consigned “the greater part of mankind [to] abide in death without any possibility of redemption.” Popular preacher George Whitefield published his response in 1740, attacking the idea that “God’s grace is free to all.” This was tantamount to “propagating the doctrine of universal redemption,” he protested, insisting that only a select few were chosen for salvation, while “the rest of mankind . . . will at last suffer that eternal death which is its proper wages.”

Whitefield’s language raises the question about what kind of thinking underlies our inherited notions about salvation and damnation. We have described our ascent to earth as a costly, sometimes harrowing, education in the school of eternal development. But we know that more than simple error is involved in our mortal experiences. Guilt is a real—and legitimate—human emotion, and it signals that sin is more than an outdated religious concept. With his reference to mankind’s “proper wages,” Whitefield was alluding to the doctrine of Original Sin, which he accused Wesley of denying. For if we all sinned in Adam, we would all merit damnation in consequence. According to that school of thought, it would be surprising if many were saved and few were damned, not the other way around.

However, if we reject Original Sin and inherited guilt as unreasonable, then what do we mean by salvation in the first place? Who is in need of rescue, and from what? If life is meant to be educative, and we are learning from our errors, why does the threat of divine retribution loom over our heads? Even if we admit that we are responsible for our own poor choices, why would God punish us for mistakes made along our path to moral growth and betterment?

Job’s visitor Elihu asked this same question, trying to fathom the link between Job’s behavior and his standing before God. His question still rings loud in our ears: “If you have sinned, what do you accomplish against him? And if your transgressions are multiplied, what do you to him?” Why do our actions, for good or ill, matter to God, in other words, and why would He choose to punish or reward accordingly?

We have already established that God is invested in our lives and happiness, because He chooses to be a Father to us. His concern with human sin is with the pain and suffering it produces. Sympathy and sorrow, not anger and vengeance, are the emotions we must look to in order to plumb the nature of the divine response to sin. In the biblical book of Judges, Israel repeatedly forsakes the worship of Jehovah, and suffers defeat and oppression at their enemies’ hands as a result. Eventually, the Israelites repent and cry unto the Lord for mercy. In reply, He reminds them of their recurrent faithlessness.

It is not the injured pride of a tyrant that we see here, but the pain of a suffering parent. “Ye have abandoned me,” He responds. Then we read, “and He could no longer bear to see Israel suffer.” (“His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel” in the King James Version.) In the language of scripture, this is God’s response to human sin, an underlying sorrow, not anger. Sin is pain, and the intensity of His response to sin is commensurate with the intensity of that pain He knows sin will entail, and in which He has already chosen to share. For He is the God who weeps.

Sin itself is a condition we assume when we place ourselves in opposition to those moral laws that undergird the structure of reality. This condition is naturally one of alienation from God, from those we love, and from “the better angels” of our own nature. Sin is not an arbitrary category God imposes. And it is not synonymous with simple error or misjudgment. This is a truth, like others we are examining, that is best revealed in the searchlight of honest introspection. We know the difference between regret and remorse. We regret giving erroneous directions that get the stranger lost. We feel remorse for the slander deliberately spoken. We regret an action that leads to harm. We feel remorse for choosing that action to inflict harm. Legitimate guilt, the kind we cannot explain away or therapeutically resolve, involves more than bad judgment or human error. The degree of guilt we experience is proportional to the deliberateness with which we cause hurt. Herein lies the clue to the meaning of sin, and the way beyond it.

The pain associated with sin is the natural consequence of our choices; it is not God’s retribution upon the wicked. God grieved over Israel’s pain for the same reason Job’s friends grieved over his: beloved human beings were suffering, and God’s perfect compassion made His participation in their pain inescapable. When Enoch saw God weeping, he learned it was humanity’s “misery,” the fact of their “suffering,” that drew forth heaven’s tears. God’s mourning for rebellious Israel was for their present misery, not an imagined future hell. The gift and power of agency mean we are free to create the conditions of our own existence—which can be a blessing or a curse.

As an inmate of a concentration camp, Corrie Ten Boom heard a commotion, and saw a short distance away a prison guard mercilessly beating a female prisoner. “What can we do for these people?” Corrie whispered. “Show them that love is greater,” Betsie replied. In that moment, Corrie realized her sister’s focus was on the prison guard, not the victim she was watching. Betsie saw the world through a different lens. She considered the actions of greatest moral gravity to be the ones we originate, not the ones we suffer.

One of Hollywood’s more sublime moments occurs in the classic film, Lawrence of Arabia. The British soldier, T. E. Lawrence’s only guide across the desert, has been murdered by the Arab Sherif Ali. Ali offers to take the place of the dead Bedouin. Lawrence proudly refuses Ali’s offer, insisting he can find his own way with the simple aid of his compass. At this point, an armed Ali snatches his compass, asking, “How if I take it?” Lawrence replies without a pause, “Then you would be a thief.”

The unexpected response jolts us because we are not accustomed to consider a death to be less significant than a theft. Unspoken, of course, is Lawrence’s real point. Yes, Lawrence would wander helplessly in the desert. He would suffer thirst, fatigue, and exhaustion, followed by a painful, lingering demise. That would be unfortunate, but, as with the prisoner pitied by Corrie ten Boom, his death would be a passing tragedy; by contrast Ali’s action, just as the guard’s, is a gesture of permanent self-definition. What is always at stake in any decision we make is what that choice turns us into. We may suffer the unfortunate consequences of other peoples’ choices. People may honor or abuse us, harm or nourish us. But for the most part, it is our own choices that shape our identity.

Percy Shelley’s mythic hero Prometheus makes the same point in the play Prometheus Unbound. Tortured beyond endurance by demonic furies, Prometheus responds to the final vision of pain with which the monsters threaten him, saying, “I weigh not what ye do, but what ye suffer, being evil.” This is the tragedy of sin, that we have created for ourselves (as well as for those caught in our path) a condition of pain and suffering. It has not been imposed from without, but is a product of our own choices. The great medieval poet Dante realized this truth hundreds of years ago, when he depicted the most vivid portrait of hell in world literature. No god or demons impel the damned to cross the river Styx to enter into their torments; “they are eager for the river crossing,” for their fate is but the natural culmination of their true “desire,” expressed through a lifetime of choices.

That is why the characters found in Dante’s hell are merely suffering the unfolding, the natural working out, of the decisions freely made in life. Paolo and Francesca, for example, were adulterous lovers. They chose to submit to the winds of passion that incited them to faithlessness; now they are weightless spirits, wafted to and fro eternally by the gusts that blow through hell. As they did not exercise control over their actions on earth, they cannot control the winds that buffet them now. No judge was necessary, and no God decreed their fate. If they are punished, it is a punishment of their own making.

We find this theme repeated throughout the circles of hell. Those who sowed discord and division, find themselves bodily sundered in twain. Despising unity and harmony, they literally inherit the disunity and disharmony upon which they set their hearts. Those who, in the Revelator’s words, were neither hot nor cold in life, but pursued a safe, middle path devoid of either good or evil, find themselves eternally in the press of a huge crowd, following a fluttering banner to and fro, never to find a place in hell, and without hope of heaven. Astrologers and false prophets walk eternally with their heads on backwards. Because they chose to look elsewhere than to the real source of truth, so will they forever be barred from approaching whatever truth they now behold. Through examples poignant and playful, Dante drives home the truth that hell is a prison we build for ourselves one brick and one choice at a time.

The experience of sin, then, is not an unalterable state we inhabit; it is a felt disharmony. The unhappiness of sin is nothing more than our spirit rebelling against a condition alien to its true nature. We have fallen out of alignment with ourselves, and with that God whose love we crave and whose nature we share. The separation from God is not a punishment inflicted by God, but the consequence of an existential reality of our own making. We have chosen to exist in a condition “contrary to the nature of God,” as an ancient American prophet named Alma explained. We are acting “contrary to the nature of that righteousness” which is the root of God’s identity and the source of His perfect joy.

God’s supreme happiness is not an arbitrary category of the divine nature; it is inseparable from the perfection of those attributes that He chooses to manifest through His actions—actions that He invites and empowers us to emulate. The alienation in need of repair is not a product of God’s arbitrary decree, or His anger or desire to punish. Neither is it purely a matter of human guilt or shame before the Divine Presence. It is a product of a freely chosen sinful condition that is incompatible with God’s holiness.

We experience this disharmony as guilt. We can treat guilt as an emotional inconvenience and tolerate or rationalize it until we grow spiritual calluses to deaden the pain. Or, we can treat guilt as a healthy prod to action, as a pain that signifies a deeper injury in need of remedy—an actual injury signifying real spiritual harm. Guilt is what we feel when we have positioned ourselves in opposition to laws and principles that exist eternally and independently of the mind.

Commandments are the expression of those eternal laws that will lead us to a condition of optimal joyfulness. They are the beacon lights of greater realities that define the cosmic streams in which we swim. Operating in harmony with those realities, as a swimmer who works with the current rather than against it, empowers and liberates us to fill the measure of our creation. We may ignore them in the illusion of utter self-sufficiency and independence. But we are then no more than a swimmer thrashing furiously, confident of our powerful strokes, but swept along nevertheless, a captive of the prevailing tides.

In a culture increasingly infatuated with the rhetoric of choice and freedom, we resist the obvious. We find ourselves in a universe pervaded by laws that define the relationship of action and consequence. Some are manmade: speed and you get a ticket; rob and you go to jail; break curfew and you’re grounded. Some are physical: let go of a rock and it drops; expose potassium to air and it forms hydrogen gas; mix baking soda and vinegar and you get a frothing pot worthy of the witch’s concoction in Shakespeare’s Macbeth. And some laws are moral: nurturing hatred cankers the soul; practicing kindness and forbearance develops serenity.

Parents and police officers alert us to the first category. Physicists and chemists may give us fluency in the second. But nothing short of trial and error will convert us to the unyielding strictures of the third. To be adept at the first entails outward behavior. Mastering the second challenges our mind. But to live in harmony with the moral law of the universe requires body and soul, heart and mind, the will and the affections of the undivided self. This is the meaning of Jesus’ words that living the highest and holiest law, loving God, requires “all your heart, and . . . all your soul, and . . . all your mind.”

For this kind of education, nothing short of total immersion in a world of choice and consequence will suffice, and sin is one of those consequences. No other path to perfection is possible, as Julian of Norwich learned. “I thought, if sin had not been, we should all be clean and like our Lord, as He made us. And thus in my folly, . . . often I wondered why, by God’s wisdom and foresight, He did not prevent sin.” And then the answer came to her, that “sin is behovely” [necessary and beneficial], but “all shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of things shall be well.”

Only by choosing the good and experiencing its fruit do we learn to savor and embrace the good. Similarly, only by choosing the evil and living through its consequences do we learn what evil is and why it deserves to be rejected. Or as Julian saw, “So pain endures for a time. Its role is to purge us, make us know ourselves, and it drives us to the Lord.” Therein lies the “needfulness” of sin, the part it has to play.

The first woman philosopher in England, Anne Conway, reasoned the same way. “Every sin will have its own punishment and every creature will feel pain and chastisement, which will return that creature to the pristine state of goodness in which it was created and from which it can never fall again because, through its punishment, it has acquired a greater perfection and strength. . . . Hence, one can infer that all God’s creatures . . . must be changed and restored after a certain time to a condition which is not simply as good as that in which they were created, but better.”

The question is, having established that we are the products of our own choices, and that they are etched into our very identity and determine our destiny, how do we step off the train, to attain that “better condition”? How do we create a new self, a new trajectory, and a new future? The simple truth is that we are imperfect beings, possessed of imperfectly developed wills, confronting a world constructed as an arena of challenge, opposition, and temptation.

The very real detritus of lives tainted by selfishness, ambition, and pride constitute the prison of sin in which we entomb ourselves. The burden of sin that has become habit, the self-perpetuating spiral of choices that further compromise our will and weaken our resolve, a character impaired by the accumulation of soul-damaging decisions, all conspire to make our predicament seem hopeless. In protesting his mother’s evil actions, Hamlet begs her to change her course, telling her the freedom to change still operates where habit is not yet set in stone. “Let me wring your heart,” he pleads, “for I shall, if it be made of penetrable stuff; if damned custom have not brazed it so, that it be proof and bulwark against sense.”

Most human hearts, we find, are made of penetrable stuff. Several catalysts to change open to our possible futures. We may find we are simply fatigued with the world, discovering its satisfactions so far beneath our expectations. “As long as I can conceive something better than myself I cannot be easy unless I am striving to bring it into existence,” says one of George Bernard Shaw’s characters. It may be simple love of others that motivates us to live kinder, gentler lives. Or it may be, as Clement of Alexandria believed, the memory of a more joy-filled way, “the recollection of what is better,” that leads us to repent “for what is worse,” retrace our steps, and “speed back to the eternal light, children to the Father..

Such intimations may be the impetus we need to examine our behavior and its consequences, in order to change, to align ourselves with principles of happiness, “the object and design” of our existence. We cannot ourselves transcend the consequences of our own past choices, or suddenly acquire a new human nature unshaped by our own history. The inevitability of sin means the inevitability of sinful habits and consequent alienation from God and His heaven. In His infinite love and compassion, however, God wills the reintegration of every individual into the Heavenly Family. The human freedom to sin thus collides with God’s desire to exalt and bless. The problem of how to reconcile this tragic collision is the problem of atonement, by which we mean, full and harmonious reconciliation. Any solution, any version of at-one-ment or reconciliation to God, must bring all who sojourn on earth back to God’s presence, but must do so without violating human agency.

Genuine moral agency entails necessary consequences. Choice is always choice of something. In John Stuart Mill’s classic treatment of the subject, human liberty requires the freedom “of doing as we like, subject to such consequences as may follow.” Those consequences may look like punishment or reward from our perspective, but they were chosen. That is how freedom operates, ideally at least. Consequences are chosen at the time actions are freely committed. To choose to indulge a desire is to choose its fruit—bitter or sweet—assuming, and this is a crucial caveat—that “men are instructed sufficiently” to understand what they are choosing.

Clearly, instruction is never perfect, the playing field is never entirely even, and a host of mitigating circumstances complicate and constrain the agency that humans exercise. We never operate on the basis of perfect understanding; we are never entirely free of social, cultural, and biological influences. Secondhand smoke of a thousand types complicates and compromises the degree of freedom and accountability behind human choice.

The underlying principle, however, does not vary: we are becoming what we love and desire. Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote, “We may think our tribute is paid in secret in the dark recesses of our hearts, but it will out. That which dominates our imaginations and our thoughts will determine our lives, and our character. . . . What we are worshipping we are becoming.” Every moment of every day our choices enact our loves, our desires, and our aspirations. And we are molding ourselves into the God or gods we thereby worship.

That is why all talk about punishment and rewards, about justice and merit and deserts, can be wrongheaded and misleading. We are not in some contest to rack up points. We will not someday wait with bated breath to see what prize or pain is meted out by a great dispenser of trophies. We cannot so trivialize life that we make of it a coliseum where we wage moral combat like spiritual gladiators, for a presiding Authority on high to save or damn according to our performance. Where would be the purpose in all that? He might take the measure of our souls at any moment and deal with us accordingly, saving Himself, not to mention us, a great deal of trouble.

How much more meaningful is a life designed for spiritual formation, rather than spiritual evaluation. All tests evaluate, and life is no exception. But the most meaningful and productive tests are those that assess with an eye to improvement, that measure in order to remedy, and that improve and prepare us for the next stage in an upward process of advancement. For these reasons, all talk of heaven that operates in terms of earning rather than becoming is misguided. Such ideas misconstrue the nature of God, His grace, and the salvation He offers.

The English minister William Law found himself “incapable of thinking otherwise of God than as the one . . . who can will nothing else to all eternity, but to communicate good, and blessing, and happiness, and perfection to every life, according to its capacity to receive it. Had I a hundred lives, I could with more ease part with them all by suffering a hundred deaths than give up this lovely idea of God..

Law correctly apprehended the nature of the weeping God of Enoch, and with these words he has revealed the key to the whole question of a restrictive heaven. Why, in other words, can a merciful God not simply open the gates to all and sundry? Humans can remit a penalty out of compassion or mercy—even when wrong is not acknowledged and forgiveness not asked; why cannot God do the same? Because only a simpleminded conception of heaven, as an exclusive celestial club with literal gates and wary porters, admits of such a question.

Heaven is not a club we enter. Heaven is a state we attain, in accordance with our “capacity to receive” a blessed and sanctified nature. A nineteenth-century scripture dictated by Joseph Smith echoed Law’s point in similar language. Describing the disposition of people after death, the visionary account reveals that some spirits “shall return again to their own place, to enjoy that which they are willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that which they might have received.” In other words, we acquire Heaven in accordance with a growing capacity to receive it.

What we conclude at this point is this: God cannot arbitrarily dispense a blanket “salvation” on the human race for two reasons. First, because heaven depends on our attaining a particular mode of being, a character and mind and will that are the product of lifelong choosing. Conforming to celestial laws, we become celestial persons. “That which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same,” in the language of scripture. Salvation, in this light, is the imitation of Christ—or, to make the concept clearer, the imitating of Christ. One is only merciful to the extent one extends mercy. One is only honest to the extent one practices honesty. One is only truthful to the extent one speaks truthfully, and so on. That is why, all good intentions and Christ’s grace notwithstanding, whosoever chooses “to abide in sin, . . . cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy.” Heaven is a condition and a sanctified nature toward which all godly striving tends; it is not a place to be found by walking through the right door with a heavenly hall pass.

There is a second reason our salvation cannot be simply awarded by divine decree. Even if it were possible, imposing a heavenly reward on those who do not choose heaven would be just that: an imposition on the “unwilling” and an abrogation of the moral agency on which all human life and earthly existence is predicated. It is because of the sanctity of choice that “we have no claim . . . in relation to Eternal things unless our actions & contracts & all things tend to this end.” We cannot expect heaven if we do not choose heaven, in simplest terms. This view of salvation does not preempt Christ’s grace. The opportunity to follow in Christ’s mold is utterly predicated upon a grace of which Christ’s death on the cross is the most supernal, but neither the first nor the final, instance. All of which takes us back to our earlier question: how can God rescue us from the prison of our own damaged will, and help us transcend the condition our poor choices—and out and out sins—have brought us to, without abrogating our agency?

We never feel the full brunt of our own choices, and we are never left to bear the full consequences of our own sinful behavior. What would normally be a self-perpetuating process leading from self-concern to self-absorption to self-obsession is interrupted, by a call to nobler things. A tenuous connection to the divine persists, a reaching after, tender mercies that call us back from the precipice, and beckon us to change course. One finds, wrote the psychologist William James, “that the tenderer parts of [our] personal life” connect us to a source of infinite tenderness “which is operative in the world outside” ourselves; a source that we “can keep in working touch with, and in a fashion get on board of . . . when all [our] lower being has gone to pieces in the wreck.”

These intimations of grace, these hints of a doom deflected, bear record of consequences that someone else has borne, pains another has suffered, where we ought to have. The atonement of Jesus Christ, His agony in Gethsemane and His death on the cross, is the only action by which the wounds of sin and hurt that rend the world can be repaired. The words of Isaiah describe the “suffering servant’s” mission: “to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; . . . to comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.”

This great healing of the universe is centered on the breach in our relationship with our God. That relationship is the most important one in which we participate. In some measure this is because it is the foundation of all human relationships of which we are a part, and which are impaired and crippled by sin. The majesty and mystery of Christ’s sacrifice have the palpable impact of eternal consequence, though we have only glimmers of understanding. There is a logic to the power of the Atonement, if no certainty as to its workings.

What we do know is that on a hillside outside Jerusalem’s city wall, two millennia ago, the man known to history as Jesus of Nazareth, and adored by His followers as the Son of God, submitted to be executed by a protracted, agonizing death on a cross. “I lay down my life for the sheep,” He said. “And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.” His death was a willing sacrifice that secured immortality for man. When He rose from the dead on Easter morning He was the first fruits of a universal resurrection He only could usher in. Endless life is no boon by itself, however. God’s purpose is to give us not mere existence in the eternities, but “an abundant life,” a life fully like His own. His design is not to extend our life indefinitely, but to enhance it permanently. That is why atonement involves much more than Christ’s death on a cross.

Jesus told His disciples that His blood was specifically “poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.” In the moments before His physical torments commenced on Calvary, the evangelist describes the incomprehensible anguish of soul that Christ suffered. As He collapsed under the compounded weight of human sin and sorrow, “an angel from heaven appeared to him and gave him strength. In his anguish he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat became like great drops of blood falling down on the ground.” The garden was aptly named; Gethsemane means place of the olive press, where “Ev’n God himself [was] pressed for my sake.”

What can it mean, that Christ’s blood was spilt for our sins, that “by his bruises we are healed”? Perhaps His perfect love means His identification with human suffering is so complete, that in one fell vision He comprehended the depth and range and terror of all our individual pain. Perhaps it is the almost irresistible power of His superabundant love manifest in His choice to suffer what He suffered, that transforms the sinner’s heart.

In some way He deflected the consequences of our own sinful choices, absorbing them Himself, willingly suffering the alienation even from His Father that His fearful words on the cross signified. Thereby He upholds and affirms human agency, by ensuring consequences follow choice—and we witness how terrible they can be, without ourselves experiencing their full onslaught. Somehow He “suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent.” In some manner and by some mechanism that the scriptures decline to explicate, Christ suffered for, on behalf of, on account of, and in the stead of, us. The question, however, remains: on what basis can the consequences of our choices be deferred or abated?

The law of moral agency, of choice and consequence, does not require that we entirely bear the burden of our own choices made in this life because those choices are always made under circumstances that are less than perfect. Our accountability is thus always partial, incomplete. Into that gap between choice and accountability, the Lord steps. Christ’s atonement provides a way to break the cycle of sin, and begin a new life-course (in ways large or small) with a newly forged disposition. Growing in the hard-won knowledge of good and evil, we are better able to choose in the greater light of a fuller understanding, or with a more unencumbered will.

The Greek term, metanoia, means a change or reversal of mind, purpose, or disposition. Repentance, in other words, means to re-decide, to choose afresh. But the mercy thus freely offered through Christ’s atonement, His gesture of supernal grace, cannot extend to the point of choosing on behalf of individuals. Repentance is therefore an ongoing process by which we repudiate unrighteous choices, acknowledging Christ’s role in suffering the consequences of those sins on our behalf, and choosing afresh in accordance with purified desire. And so we go on choosing, again and again. The process continues—perhaps aeons into the future—until in perfect harmony with the laws that underlie the nature of happiness (and thus the nature of God), we have reached a sanctified condition that permits a perfect at-one-ment with God. God’s desire to save is reconciled with the sanctity of human choice. Love and agency, justice and mercy, meet.

At least, that is the hope Christ’s atonement holds out for us. How many, in actual fact, will be partakers of the feast to which they are invited? Was Wesley or Whitefield right about the proportion of the blessed and the damned? The answer hinges on what we consider to be the time frame, and the circumstances, under which repentance and moral growth can occur. Exactly who, in other words, is eligible for heaven.

One reason for the horrifying statistics cited by the eighteenth-century friar was the understanding, commonplace from the Middle Ages forward, that two enormous classes of humanity were outside the saving grace of Christ: unbaptized infants, and non-Christians. For many centuries, Christian theologians defended the inscrutable justice of God and cared little for making His harsher decrees palatable to humans. But condemning biblical figures from Adam to Abraham, who happened to be born before the era of Christian hope, seemed patently wrong even to the most stalwart defenders of orthodoxy, so exceptions were made for them. Museums are full of paintings by the masters, depicting Christ leading a line of bearded patriarchs out through the underworld’s gates, in what theologians called “the harrowing of hell.”

Whitefield correctly saw that compromise could not be reached on this point without a radical reformulation of foundational precepts—such as Original Sin. Meanwhile, Wesley agonized over “How uncomfortable a thought is this, that thousands and millions of men, without any preceding offence or fault of theirs were unchangeably doomed to everlasting burnings!” He and others considered that unbaptized children could not be guilty before they had attained moral awareness—but what about the legions of those who had never heard of Christ or His gospel in the first place.

Most Christians have gradually come to agree that little children are not guilty of Adam’s sin—or their own sins until they are old enough to be morally responsible. In 2007, the Catholic Church claimed “serious theological and liturgical grounds for hope that unbaptized infants who die will be saved.” But that leaves two problems unaddressed. First, to exempt children from sin is not the same thing as to accord them an opportunity to grow and progress, to acquire the understanding, embrace those principles, and practice the virtue, that constitute true goodness and happiness. Godliness, sanctification, the imitation of Christ, all presuppose more than the absence of sin; perfection itself, as its Middle English roots remind us, means “completeness,” not just freedom from blemish. How does mere absolution from an Adamic inheritance itself integrate an individual into a process of profound transformation and progress.

This takes us back to our earlier point about how limiting, confining, and ultimately unhelpful is a model that sees damnation as our default condition, and simple rescue as the solution. Rescuing children from a condition they didn’t deserve and never really inherited in the first place doesn’t reveal a great deal about the meaning of their eternal nature, their brief lives, or their future possibilities.

Second, if it is not fair to consign children to hell because of their incapacity to either embrace or reject Christ and His teachings, neither does it make any moral sense to believe those never exposed to Christ and His teachings, or to any moral framework at all, would be consigned to hell—or lack the opportunity to grow toward heaven. Surely an infant is the most deserving object of our compassion, and therefore of God’s compassion. If any justice reigns on high, it seems, unbaptized infants would not be punished for dying before having the opportunity to accept Christ and His gospel.

The larger problem, however, is that vastly more people have lived, and will always live, outside the orbit of Christianity, never hearing a sermon, seeing a missionary, or reading a Bible, than have died in infancy. The multitudes that covered the earth before Christianity made its appearance, all the inhabitants of nations past, present, and future where Christianity is virtually unknown, the countless children reared in secular homes—the numbers of these uncatechized throngs dwarf the number of children who have died unbaptized. The largest portion of humanity would still fall outside the gospel’s reach.

And, as with the children, the problem facing the non-Christian runs deeper than anything a simple blanket amnesty can resolve. The question isn’t whether they can be excused or forgiven, in light of their ignorance. The point is not that all humans are condemned unless they find a compelling excuse. The issue, rather, is that all come to earth in order to participate in an educative and transformative process. If the whole mission of Christ and His atonement is to enable change, to render repentance and personal transformation possible, to empower and sanctify, then what are we to say about the billions who have lived in obliviousness to such power and grace? The question is not how can they be rescued from damnation, but how can they be elevated or ennobled, given their inability to participate in all that His grace makes possible?

We must recognize at this juncture that only two options were ever really on the table. The first is that Christ and His gospel do uniquely empower us on our path to perfection and immortality; Christ really does embody the solution to the twin barriers to human progression: sin and death. The second possibility is that Christ and His sacrifice are not really the unique means of furthering God’s plans for humankind. If the latter is the case, then the entire Christian enterprise is well intentioned but not of vital importance. Valuable perhaps across a spectrum of societal and personal functions—from famine relief to community building to moral improvement and psychological consolation—but ultimately, when all is said and done and the earth has come and gone, inessential and incapable of fulfilling its own promises.

If, on the other hand, the first is the case, then the enormous efforts legions of missionaries and evangelizers have expended through the centuries to execute the “Great Commission,” to preach the gospel to all nations, tongues, kindreds, and peoples makes sense. In fact, no enterprise could be a more worthwhile undertaking. But these efforts are obviously woefully inadequate to the task of redeeming the whole of humankind. Christians are supposed to believe that Christ and His gospel are essential to mankind’s eternal growth and happiness, but admit at the outset that the overwhelming majority of the human family will be forever handicapped by the accidents of history, cut off from eternal happiness because of when and where they were born.

Offering the hope of an amnesty for infants while ignoring the rest of humanity represents a rather limited defense of God’s mysterious justice. It also suggests that His plan was not very effective to begin with, limited as it was to such a relatively small pool of humanity. God seems scarcely deserving of His title if this is the case. Such a God would be severely lacking in either the desire to promote a universal happiness, or the capacity to do so.

So we have a dilemma. Granting opportunity only to those who accept Christ in the flesh seems patently unfair and inefficient. Giving amnesty to all the rest of humankind makes of Christ’s life and sacrifice a magnificent gesture but a superfluous or redundant one. A reasonable conception of God and His plan for us demands a third possibility.

In the early Christian centuries, Origen had taught that God would somehow find a way to redeem all of His children from the effects of sin. He never worked out the details of how that would come about, and his belief in “universal salvation” was soon declared a heresy. For centuries heaven seemed sealed shut against all save the elect, or the fortunate few believers. By the eighteenth century, the same impulse that increasingly resisted a decree of universal damnation, was in some quarters returning to Origen’s vision of a universal redemption.

Some Christians organized themselves around just such a belief. “God, whose nature is Love, . . . will finally restore the whole family of mankind to holiness and happiness,” proclaimed one group in 1790. He would never have created the human race, argued the influential Charles Chauncy, “unless He intended to make them finally happy.” His infinite wisdom, patience, and compassion would succeed, eventually, in persuading even the most recalcitrant to accept His mercy.

This generous vision still left unaddressed the question of how the multitudes that died outside the Christian pale­—or before ­baptism—­would be fitted for eternal life. The general solution clearly had to extend into the life to come beyond the veil of death. “’Tis true,” Chauncy conceded, God “will not, in this state, prevail upon all willingly to bow down before Him as their Lord. . . . May He not, . . . use means with sinners in the next state, in order to make them good subjects in the moral kingdom of God?”

Charles Beecher thought such a third way was the only reasonable alternative to mass damnation on the one hand, and a superfluous atonement on the other. A more comprehensive program than the one executed by missionaries among the living must be envisioned. In 1863, he was convicted of heresy for such a belief. The ecclesiastical court ruled that Beecher “weakens and undermines the doctrine of future punishment by teaching that the offers of salvation are made to men after death.”

Beecher’s position is the only reasonable one. If hearing and believing the message of Christ is essential to all mankind’s eternal happiness, then that opportunity must be available beyond the confines of mortal life. Why not, asked missionary Parley Pratt, insisting the dead “not only live, move, and think but might hear the gospel. . . . We reason from what we know.” In the “spirit world societies are made up of all kinds.” Many presumably “have lived in part of the spirit world . . . where the key has not yet been turned nor the gospel preached.” If this is true, then the fact would explain Peter’s claim that “the gospel was preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit..

Peter’s cryptic allusion represents the Christian Bible’s single most stupendous moment of liberality and generosity. The eighteenth-century revolt against organized religion was in large measure a protest against the narrowness of its vision. As the philosopher and author Gotthold Lessing phrased it, “accidental truths of history can never become the proof of necessary truths of reason.” What he meant was, God could not hide the Savior’s advent in a Bethlehem stable, and require all humans across time and cultures to recognize its universal import. Paul’s words suggest an original conception of a ministry that would extend not just across borders, but across death itself.

The belief that the work of ministry includes the departed, animates the Latter-day Saint practice of tracing the roots of their families into ages past and performing gospel ordinances on their behalf. “The work of love in remembering one who is dead is a work of the utmost unselfish love,” wrote the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard. “If one wants to make sure that love is completely unselfish, he eliminates every possibility of repayment. But precisely this is eliminated in the relationship to one who is dead. If love nevertheless remains, it is in truth unselfish..

Referring to the performance of sacraments on behalf of the deceased, Krister Stendahl expressed “holy envy” for a practice so conspicuously rooted in love for one’s ancestors. We see in this undertaking, with its hints of ancient origins (1 Cor. 15:29), acts of devotion performed across a veil of silence, a reaching after our dead in the hope of uniting them to us.

If we are serious about our prospects of life beyond the grave, then we should not shy away from making a considered effort to understand what kinds of continuity with this life make sense. If God’s dominion does not end with our death, why should the progress of the human soul? The particular potency of the challenges we face—our bodily weakness, the instincts and passions that consume us, the press of evil all around us—make a life of virtuous aspiration very like a race through quicksand. However, it is just these conditions of mortality, like the world of Darwin’s honeybee, that are especially conducive to growth and progress.

Life may well give us, in a concentrated dose, the soul-stretching most necessary to our long-range spiritual development. That would explain the urgency for acting in the here and now to pursue the path of virtue. For those with the understanding and capacity, procrastinating repentance does not just prolong our pain and forestall our happiness; it may greatly prolong and complicate the process when repentance does begin. But even for those who live and die in obliviousness to God’s eternal purposes, death does not freeze the soul in time.

In God’s universe nothing is stationary. For the last two centuries, we have known that the stars and planets are not arrayed in a perfect celestial order, a once and forever system of static harmony. When William Herschel plied his magnificent telescopes in the late 1700s, he observed a universe in process of continual disruption, upheaval, and transformation on a colossal scale. As suns died and faded away in one quadrant of the galaxy, whole star systems sprang into being in another. If God takes as much care with the destinies of human souls as with the planets they inhabit, surely they too gain in splendor and glory through the cycles of eternity.

What challenges and conditions may come when we have passed into that undiscovered country, death, we cannot know. What we do know is that Jesus spoke in simple, hopeful terms about the people for whom He died. “This is the father’s will . . . that of all which He hath given me I should lose nothing, but raise it up again at the last day.” Surely, the work of redeeming and exalting that He began before the earth was formed will continue after it passes away.

In the language of conventional Christianity, will all be saved? Put another way, will anyone be eternally consigned to hell? If our intended destiny is to become like our Father in Heaven, “joint-heirs with Christ,” then anything short of that eventuality is damnation. As cycles of poor choices may tend ever downward in mortality, so may they hereafter. For redemption to be permanently beyond reach, however, one would have to choose to put oneself beyond reach.

Hell, in the sense of permanent alienation from God, a stunting of one’s infinite potential, must exist as an option if freedom is to exist. That anyone would choose such a fate is hard to imagine, and yet some of us choose our own private hells often enough in the here and now. The difference is that at present we see “through a glass darkly.” Our decisions are often made in weakness, or with deficient will or understanding. We live on an uneven playing field, where to greater or lesser degree the weakness of the flesh, of intellect, or of judgment intrudes. Poor instruction, crushing environment, chemical imbalances, deafening white noise, all cloud and impair our judgment.

Hardly ever, then, is a choice made with perfect, uncompromised freedom of the will. That, we saw, is why repentance is possible in the first place. We repent when upon reflection, with a stronger will, clearer insight, or deeper desire, we wish to choose differently. To be outside the reach of forgiveness and change, one would have to choose evil, to reject the love of a vulnerable God and His suffering son, in the most absolute and perfect light of understanding, with no impediments to the exercise of full freedom. It is not that repentance would not be allowable in such circumstances; repentance would simply not be conceivable. No new factor, no new understanding, no suddenly healed mind or soul, could abruptly appear to provide a basis for reconsideration or regret.

For us lesser mortals, who never attain such lofty heights of intellect and will, repentance and change continue as long as our striving does. God would not have commanded us to forgive each other seventy times seven, if He were not prepared to extend to us the same mathematical generosity. He seems determined to demonstrate that when we make regrettable choices we are not really choosing what the “better angels of our nature” want to choose. Come, try again, He seems to be saying, like a patient tutor who knows his student’s mind is too frozen with fear to add the sums correctly.

Why else would the Lord’s strategies be so rife with interventions and second chances? Samuel was called three times in the night, before he recognized his Lord. It took a bright light and a voice from heaven to capture Saul’s attention. Who knows how many other potential disciples will find their road to Damascus only on the other side of life’s veil? Why should God not there as well as here persist in His efforts to gather His children, as a hen its chicks? Why not believe that “His hand is stretched out still?” If we fall short of salvation, it will be because our cumulative choices, our freely made decision to reject His rescue, have put us beyond His reach, not because His patience has expired.

The idea is certainly a generous one, and it seems suited to the weeping God of Enoch, the God who has set His heart upon us. If some inconceivable few will persist in rejecting the course of eternal progress, they are “the only ones” who will be damned, taught Joseph Smith. “All the rest” of us will be rescued from the hell of our private torments and subsequent alienation from God. “All except” the intractable will be saved, for God will force no man to heaven.

The book of Malachi ends with a cryptic prophecy of Elijah’s return to the earth, when He will “turn the hearts of parents to their children and the hearts of children to their parents, so that [the Lord] will not come and strike the land with a curse.” Jewish tradition, full of anticipation and yearning, weaves this interpretation: At the coming of the great judgment day, “the children . . . who had to die in infancy will be found among the just, while their fathers will be ranged on the other side. The babes will implore their fathers to come to them, but God will not permit it. Then Elijah will go to the little ones, and teach them how to plead in behalf of their fathers. They will stand before God and say, ‘Is not the measure of good, the mercy of God, larger than the measure of chastisements? . . . [May they] be permitted to join us in Paradise?’ God will give assent to their pleadings, and Elijah will have fulfilled the word of the prophet Malachi; He will have brought back the fathers to the children.”

The beauty of this story is in its intimation that any conception of heaven worth pursuing is inseparable from reconciliation—not just to God, but also to our loved ones, those of our household and those of generations past. One might even read this prophecy, as indeed we do, as suggesting that the living may co-participate in the ongoing work of human redemption. We do not just share good tidings with the living. We can seek out our ancestors in a gesture of remembrance and respect, pray for their welfare, perform on their behalf those sacred ordinances that signify their participation in the family of Christ.

If Christ truly preached to the spirits who had in former days upon the earth been disobedient, then it makes sense to assume that the great work of ministry continues there. We find it reasonable to believe, along with Paul, that “neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor heights, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God.” One is reminded here of the poet’s plea that “God, lover of souls,” will “complete thy creature dear O where it fails, / Being mighty . . . , being a father and fond..

As a mighty God, He has the capacity to save us all. As a fond father, He has the desire to do so. That is why, as Smith taught, “God hath made a provision that every spirit can be ferretted out in that world” that has not deliberately and definitively chosen to resist a grace that is stronger than the cords of death.

Chapter Five

 
 
© 2012 Terryl Givens and Fiona Givens 

Printed from Gospelink.com
