# His Heart Is Set upon Us

### His Heart Is Set upon Us
Fiona Givens, Terryl Givens, The God Who Weeps (Salt Lake City 2012)
 
 

His Heart Is Set upon Us

God is a personal entity, having a heart that beats in sympathy with human hearts, feeling our joy and sorrowing over our pain.

“For He has set his heart upon us.”

Is faith the beginning of a quest, or the end? Do “religious people” start out from a posture of belief and interpret the world through that lens, or do they weigh the evidence, and come around to God by way of conclusion? We must recognize at the onset that both militant atheism and fervent theism are the same in this regard: they are both just as likely to serve as a dogmatic point of departure, as they are to be a thoughtful and considered end point in one’s journey toward understanding.

In our experience most believers, like doubters, are continually adjusting their paradigms to make better sense of the world as they experience it. Belief is fluid. So is doubt. Disillusion and readjustment work in both directions. Those who come late on the road to Damascus, and see the light at last, remember all those times they ignored quiet promptings, and their paradigms shift accordingly. The past begins to make new sense, as they reinterpret those annoying doubts and second-guessings as the Lord’s gentle proddings. In contrast, those who find their faith unsustainable and so abandon their faith journey, move in the other direction. Those quiet intimations they once took to be God’s spirit, those countless minor miracles they took to be answers to prayer, they now interpret as passing moments of self-delusion, wish-fulfillment, and the stuff of mere coincidence.

The point is, neither the new believer nor the new doubter has necessarily progressed or reached enlightenment. Nor has either one necessarily forced the evidence to fit a preconceived model of belief or doubt. Rather, every time we turn our hearts and minds in the direction of giving meaning to our experiences, we are merely—and yet profoundly—arranging the evidence into a pattern—the pattern that makes the most sense to us at a given point on our journey. Evidence does not construct itself into meaningful patterns. That is our work to perform.

In times long past, of course, belief in God was as natural and inevitable as breathing. Up until a few hundred years ago, atheism in the modern sense was unthinkable. The very possibility of skepticism is, within the Christian West at least, of rather recent origin. But the fact is, we now live in a secular age. What this means is that in today’s environment, belief in God is an option one chooses among many options. The last century and a half have seen the development of thoroughly secular explanations to account for Christianity, religious yearnings, conscience—even a Creator. For increasing numbers of people, these theories have provided powerful alternatives to traditional belief.

The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche gave an account of Christianity’s invention as a clever ploy by clerics. Resentful at their position at the bottom of the social hierarchy, they convince the high and mighty that weakness is the true virtue, and meekness the most desirable attribute. By so doing, they turn the tables on the rich and powerful, and make themselves—the religious—the morally superior ones. Christianity, in this view, was a brilliant strategy to make a virtue of necessity and reverse society’s power dynamics to the advantage of the oppressed.

Sigmund Freud devised influential explanations of the religious impulse as the vague memory of a world we experienced before language, when we had not yet developed a sense of selfhood and still felt at one with the world around us. The feeling of the eternal is therefore simply a buried memory of our infant condition, when we were safely cradled in our mother’s arms, before we even thought of ourselves as a being separate and apart from the larger universe. This blissful, if forgotten, sentiment of oneness with the greater world follows us through life, driving our quest for the infinite. As for the figure of God himself, he theorized, He was simply a childish projection of an authoritative father figure. Both Nietzsche and Freud believed humans to be innately aggressive and destructive. Conscience, they theorized, is a mechanism the mind has developed in order to turn our innate impulse toward violence against itself, thereby protecting and preserving society.

With his theory of natural selection, later called “survival of the fittest,” Darwin explained how random, incremental change over millions of years, leads to many species developing from one original source, and he proposed mechanisms and processes by which the giraffe acquired his long neck, and our species the miraculous human eye. He seemingly demonstrated that a god is not necessary to account for the plumage of the peacock or the variety of songbirds in the sky. In sum, he made it intellectually respectable to be an atheist. Why, then, do we need faith in God and things eternal?

Perhaps because the development of complex human beings, with self-awareness and lives filled with love and tears and laughter, is one too many a miracle to accept as a purely natural phenomenon. Perhaps because the idea of God is a more reasonable hypothesis than the endless stream of coincidences essential to our origin and existence here on earth: a planet precisely the right distance from the sun, so as to warm but not burn us; a rare, elliptical orbit, combined with just enough tilt to the axis, to give us endurable seasonal change; a nearby moon, of the perfect gravitational size to stabilize our rotation and provide the tides so essential to life’s rise; life-sustaining water, that violates the rule (true of other non-metallic substances) whereby it should contract when frozen, thereby not causing oceans and lakes to freeze solid from the bottom up; along with a stream of additional universal conditions ranging from the speed of light, to the ratio of protons to electrons, to the gravitational constant, all of which are required to sustain life.

One such coincidence was too much for the astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle. In the 1950s, he discovered that the existence of carbon itself—the basis for life on earth—depended on certain very precise details in nuclear physics. The revelation convinced Hoyle “that the universe was, in his words, ‘a put-up job.’ For Hoyle, the hand of intelligence had left clear fingerprints all over physics and cosmology.” As a result, he reversed “his earlier and vehement anti-God stance..

If those reasons are too rooted in arcane science and arguments about probability, there are other, more accessible evidences for finding belief in God a reasonable choice. Astrophysics may give a credible account of the origin of the stars, and Darwin might explain the development of the human eye, but neither can tell us why the night sky strikes us with soul-piercing quietude, or why our mind aches to understand what is so remote from bodily need.

In addition, “if it really is true that [the human] is merely the inevitable culmination of an improbable chemical reaction . . . involv[ing] ‘merely material’ atoms, then the fact that he has been able to formulate the idea of ‘an improbable chemical reaction’ and to trace himself back to it is remarkable indeed. That chemicals which are ‘merely material’ should come to understand their own nature is a staggering supposition..

Or, to phrase the dilemma another way, as physicist John Polkinghorne writes, “our surplus intellectual capacity, enabling us to comprehend the microworld of quarks and gluons and the macro­world of big bang cosmology, is on such a scale that it beggars belief that this is simply a byproduct of the struggle for life.” George Bernard Shaw said it a little differently: “My dog’s brain serves only my dog’s purposes. But my brain labors at a knowledge which does nothing for me personally but make my . . . decay and death a calamity.” Put another way, our minds are driven to answer questions that far transcend the bounds of our own lives. The human mind itself is far more powerful and capacious than any instrument necessary for mere self-preservation or the construction of huts or skyscrapers.

We strive to know what transpired in the first moments of the universe, to understand what is happening in black holes and comets across the galaxy, and to envision creation’s end when the last sun winks out of existence. Our intelligence does not behave as a mortal thing of time. The best sense we can make out of this riddle is that there is an independent, existing principle of intelligence within us. We believe this intelligence is impelled by an eternal identity and potential to move toward greater understanding of a far larger domain than the place and time of our birth. This is more than an intellectual puzzle to us; we find ourselves in a world where we sense we are more than casual visitors or drive-through patrons. We have a home, an origin, a purpose in mortality, and a future in the cosmos, bound to larger realities than merely natural processes. One of those larger realities toward whom we incline may reasonably be posited as God.

This conclusion seems warranted by another observation. Every craving that we experience finds a suitable object that satisfies and fulfills that longing. Our body hungers; and there is food. We thirst; and there is water. We are born brimming with curiosity; and there is a world to explore and the sensory equipment with which to do so. Other ennobling passions both encompass and transcend bodily longing. We crave intimacy and companionship; and there is human love, as essential to happiness and thriving as any nutrient.

The Greek playwright Aristophanes resorted to myth to explain the all-consuming power of this hunger, but he found his own resolution sadly insufficient. In his story, we existed in a distant past as double-creatures, with two heads, four arms, and four legs. With the strength and power we then possessed, we were tempted to scale heaven and to assault the very gods themselves. We were soundly defeated, and in reprisal, Zeus decided not to annihilate our race but rather to split us all asunder and let us suffer perpetually in our humbled and divided condition. In this severed state of incompleteness, mortal men and women walk the earth.

Aristophanes was surely half-joking, but he captures brilliantly our sense of incompleteness and longing for wholeness, for intimate union with another human being who fits us like our other half. Yet even when we find true love and companionship in the rediscovered other, the restoration that should fulfill us falls short; Aristophanes himself is baffled. It is as if, coming together, we are haunted by the memory of an even more perfect past, when we were even more whole and complete, and this suspicion lends an indefinable melancholy to our present lives. “These are the people who finish out their lives together and still cannot say what it is they want. . . . It’s obvious that the soul . . . longs for something else..

So, what can we make of this unsatisfied longing, this sense of a primordial loss that no human love can heal? Aristophanes could not answer the question he posed two and a half millennia ago, but an Elizabethan poet thought he could. George Herbert replaced the Greek myth with a different creation story—one in which human deficiency was not a curse, but a gentle nudge in God’s direction.

When God at first made man,

Having a glasse of blessings standing by;

Let us (said he) poure on him all we can:

Let the world’s riches, which dispersed lie,

Contract into a span.

So strength first made a way;

Then beautie flow’d, then wisdome, honour, pleasure:

When almost all was out, God made a stay,

Perceiving that alone of all his treasure

Rest in the bottome lay.

For if I should (said he)

Bestow this jewell also on my creature,

He would adore my gifts in stead of me,

And rest in nature, not the God of Nature:

So both should losers be.

Yet let him keep the rest,

But keep them with repining restlesnesse:

Let him be rich and wearie, that at least,

If goodnesse lead him not, yet wearinesse

May tosse him to my breast.

Herbert was saying in poetry what the early church father Saint Augustine had said more simply: “our hearts are restless till they rest in Thee.” Those who place their affections upon God, who find in Him an explanation of our deepest nature, with its self-awareness, its yearnings and strivings, do not find respite from all pain or from all questions. But they do find the only object that seems an adequate match to their infinite desire. Speaking of his own experience with God, the psalmist writes, “He satisfyeth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul..

Let us now proceed to a question that often disappears under an assumption. If God exists, does He deserve our worship? We think the question is entirely proper. Augustine reported approvingly that when asked what God was doing before creation, a churchman replied, “getting hell ready for those who pry too deep!” It has seemed self-evident to millions—as it was to Augustine himself—that if God is the author of the universe and all who people it, His status as our rightful Lord and sovereign is beyond any possible doubt. We have no right to question Him, His nature, or His purposes.

But sovereigns, like fathers, can have rightful authority to govern or direct us, with no claim whatsoever on our love—let alone adoration. We cannot prove God exists, and certainly cannot prove that any god who exists is kind and merciful rather than cruel or indifferent. But we can say that only the first type of god is one we would want to worship. We reject out of hand any suggestion that mere cosmic authorship or raw power should itself call forth our loyalty or devotion.

Let us be clear what this means, and what it does not mean. It does not mean we can simply choose the kind of god we want to worship, fashion this ideal god into an idol for our private temple, and assume this fantasy corresponds to anything real in the universe. We cannot create gods that match our desires willy-nilly. But it does mean two things: first, it means some gods are conceivable, both within and outside Christian history, who have no legitimate claim upon us. The Ammonite god Moloch required that adherents sacrifice infants to him by burning them alive. We can reject the worship of such a god without agonizing over our impiety—not because it is unreasonable to believe in such a god (though it may be), but because it is unreasonable to worship such a god. What of the God Christians have been called upon to worship from time to time?

Augustine believed in a god who had arbitrarily foreordained countless millions to damnation. But he insisted, with curious logic and no hint of protest, that if a child, “at the very outset of its life, is placed under a punishment . . . it has a great good for which to thank its Creator, for the merest beginning of a soul is better than the most perfect material object.” He considered any complaint on the subject “slanderous.” Some ask, “If it was Adam and Eve who sinned, what did we poor wretches do?” Augustine’s ready reply: “My response is brief: let them be silent.”

Theologian Peter Abelard agreed, as have countless others, that the very behavior in which God freely indulged, treating His creatures “in whatever way God may wish to,” would be “deemed the summit of injustice among men.” But that, he concluded, was God’s prerogative. French philosopher Blaise Pascal thought nothing could be “more contrary to the rules of our wretched justice than to damn eternally an infant, incapable of volition, for an offense . . . which was committed six thousand years before he was born,” yet he embraced “this mystery,—the most incomprehensible of all.”

The great reformer Martin Luther wrote centuries later on the subject of election by grace, saying God “ordains whom, and such as He will, to be receivers and partakers of his preached and offered mercy.” And that will, he continues, we have no right to try and understand because it is “the most profound secret of the divine majesty, which He reserves unto Himself and keeps hidden from us.” As for exactly why God does not save those it is clearly in His power to save, but rather blames man for what, in Luther’s words, we have no power to avoid, “it is not lawful to inquire.” This clearly perverse divine will, he concludes, is not to be understood. “It is only to be feared and adored!.

Eighteenth-century church-goers have trembled and generations of school children have wondered at the deity of Jonathan Edwards, whom he described in his classic sermon, “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God.” “The wrath of God,” he tells his audience, “is like great waters that are dammed for the present. . . .The God that holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a spider, or some loathsome insect over the fire, abhors you.” As for the unregenerate, he continues, “When God beholds the ineffable extremity of your case, and sees your torment to be so vastly disproportioned to your strength, and sees how your poor soul is crushed, and sinks down, as it were, into an infinite gloom; He will have no compassion upon you, . . . there shall be no moderation or mercy.”

By the nineteenth century, there was growing resistance to this divine tyranny and cosmic injustice. Two forceful examples come not from theology, but from two of the greatest novels of the era. The protagonist of Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn goes through an agony of indecision, faced with the chance to help his friend, the slave Jim, escape his bondage. But, given the laws of the land, and a culture that had little difficulty reconciling slavery and Christianity, Huck fears that by so doing he would offend God. “It would get all around,” he fretted,

that Huck Finn helped a [slave] to get his freedom. . . . The more I studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me, and the more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling. And at last, when it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being watched all the time from up there in heaven. . . . Well, I tried the best I could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung up wicked, and so I wasn’t so much to blame.

At last, he decides to do the “Christian” thing, and turn the slave in. He writes a note betraying Jim, followed by one last pang of remorse. “It was a close place. I took [the note] up, and held it in my hand. I was a-trembling, because I’d got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, and I knowd it. I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then says to myself: ‘All right, then, I’ll go to hell’—and tore it up.” So Huck chooses damnation over the God he was raised to worship.

In Fyodor Dostoyevsky’s The Brothers Karamazov, the agnostic Ivan makes a similar choice. A sensitive soul, he is wracked by pain at the harrowing accounts he has read of little children who suffer at the hands of savage overseers and cruel parents. He is dissatisfied with a God whose only response to their pain is to punish evil overseers and cruel parents. “What do I care for avenging them?” he cries. “What do I care for a hell for oppressors? . . . I want to forgive. I want to embrace. I don’t want more suffering. . . . And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket, and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as possible. And that I am doing. It’s not God that I don’t accept, Alyosha, only I most respectfully return him the ticket.” Any God whose only response to pain and suffering is to inflict more pain and suffering, is not a God Ivan can worship.

Our first point is that if gods such as Moloch, or the God of some Christians, exist, they do not deserve our reverence or our love. We, just as Huck or Ivan or countless others, would be justified in saying, “No, I will not bow to such a God.” At the risk of our own eternal annihilation, we would resist. We would not say, with Augustine, that existence under any conditions—including an eternity of undeserved torment—is more to be valued than non­existence. We do not concede that a god who creates us, or the entire universe for that matter, is beyond reproach or question by virtue of his power alone. We certainly do not accord earthly parents unchallenged prerogatives over their own children, even if they sire, rear, and nourish them.

Our second point is that if we find ourselves inclined to believe a powerful deity does preside over the universe, the assumption that he would be a more perfect embodiment of the morally good that we recognize and seek to emulate is not wishful thinking. Belief in a God who is more rather than less generous and forgiving, who will extend the maximum mercy He can, and impose the minimum justice He must, is not a fanciful hope. It is a logical and reasonable inference. Certainly, this God would be as far above us morally, as He would be intellectually. But it would make sense to look for a God who inhabits that true north toward which our innate moral compass points us.

For centuries, Christians were told they have no right to expect that their sense of what is just, or true, or right, is a reliable guide to what God considers just, or true, or right. Perhaps, the argument goes, they are simply incapable of understanding Justice, Truth, and the Right writ large, as seen from God’s perspective. But we are talking here of more than a simple difference in perspective. Of course our view is partial, and imperfect. The question is, have we good reason to believe we are even in the same ballpark as God when it comes to the values we hold dear? The idea that God’s thoughts are not our thoughts, His ways not our ways, has been used as a cudgel to beat into abject submission any who question a Deity’s right to save whom He will and damn whom He will, to bless or curse as He chooses, to have His own heavenly notions about what is good and right.

In actual fact, it makes little sense to recognize in our conscience a reliable guide to what is virtuous, lovely, and praiseworthy in the world where God has placed us, while suggesting He inhabits a different moral universe. It makes little sense to insist He endowed us with an intuitive grammar of right and wrong, while He himself speaks a different moral language. As the character in Elie Wiesel’s play, The Trial of God, protests, if our truth “is not His as well, then He’s worse than I thought. Then it would mean that He gave us the taste, the passion of truth without telling us that this truth is not true!”

The biblical story of the Fall indicates, on the contrary, that we are absolutely enmeshed in the same moral order as our God. Whatever momentous change the Garden of Eden story was meant to depict, the author wanted us to know it is not entirely in the direction of sin and loss. One consequence of eating the forbidden fruit, acknowledged by God himself, is a heightened human consciousness—and not just of their nakedness. Adam and Eve became more, not less, like God insofar as they came to see the same moral distinctions He did. This was precisely what He confirms, saying Adam and Eve have “become like one of us, knowing good and evil.” In all the centuries of Christian hand-wringing and breast-beating that have followed in the wake of the Adamic decision, this fact seems to have disappeared entirely. Humankind and God now share a common moral awareness, a common capacity to judge between right and wrong, a common capacity for love.

Though we may be in the infancy of moral development, as individuals and as a species, surely we are striving toward a perfect model that God already embodies. And while personal and collective progress may be shaky and uneven, some moral imperatives have only grown more sharply defined across time: we reject inhumanity, cruelty, caprice, and callousness. We prize kindness, we value tenderness, and we esteem compassion. Who can doubt the most transcendent instance of human love is a testament to a more perfect source, a love without limit? We are continuing, with tragic and devastating exceptions, on the trajectory inaugurated by Adam and Eve, becoming ever more like God, as we become ever more adept at discerning good and evil, and nourishing the wellsprings of human love. And in so doing, we grow more capable of discerning a kind and merciful God among His many counterfeits.

This tender face of the Divine is too often lost in casual readings of the Old Testament, obscured by the blood and smoke of Canaan’s conquest, but it is there to be found. When Moses fears God’s patience with a murmuring Israel has expired, he pleads on their behalf. God reassures him, “My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.” We perceive a bond more of intimacy than fear, when Moses replies, “If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.” Without your companionship, in other words, the promised land holds no promise, and no appeal. Not to worry, God soothes him. “I know thee by name.”

In more recent centuries, some prodigies of conscience have overleapt centuries of moral darkness to discern a God of great compassion and tenderness, even if it meant swimming against the current. Jonathan Edwards may have terrified thousands with his portrait of an angry God who held sinners over the pit of hell, like loathsome spiders over a flame. But his own wife was drawn to a different version of God. On one occasion when Edwards was out of town, a local preacher named Peter Reynolds came to visit Sarah and her children. He offered to have a prayer with the family, and she agreed. Perhaps, praying in the home of the famous preacher of fire and brimstone, Reynolds entreated God in tones he thought Edwards might have approved. In any event, Sarah was troubled. She recorded in her journal that while the reverend was offering his prayer, she found herself feeling “an earnest desire that, in calling on God, he should say Father.” Then she asked herself, “Can I, with the confidence of a child, and without the least misgiving of heart, call God my Father?”

Pondering led to yearning. She “felt a strong desire to be alone with God,” and withdrew to her chamber. In the moments that followed, “the presence of God was so near, and so real, that I seemed scarcely conscious of anything else. God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, seemed as distinct persons, both manifesting their inconceivable loveliness and mildness, and gentleness, and their great immutable love to me. . . . The peace and happiness, which I hereupon felt, was altogether inexpressible.”

Certainly we all, just as Sarah Edwards or Moses, would prefer to worship a God who is merciful and tender in contrast to one who is wrathful and unyielding. But the implications can be troubling, and a moment’s reflection suggests why the God of Augustine and Pascal and Luther and Edwards prevailed so long in the minds of so many. Tenderness suggests sensitivity. A loving heart, like an exposed nerve, is by definition susceptible to pain. Do we really want to believe in a God who is thus exposed, unshielded from human sin and evil? Not merely as God incarnate, Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Man who suffered, bled, and died—but as God, the Eternal Father, the Everlasting One, the Man of Holiness.

The Christian church’s first theologian, Origen, was sure this must be so. “The Father, too, himself, the God of the Universe, ‘patient and abounding in mercy’ and compassionate, does He not in some way suffer? Or do you not know that when He directs human affairs He suffers human suffering . . . on account of us.” Unfortunately, Origen’s vision of a suffering God was eventually overwhelmed by the God of the creeds, who lacked “body, parts, and passions.” For the suffering God was a possibility that horrified theologians.

The medieval poet Dante, in his graphic masterpiece the Divine Comedy, labored to convince his audience that pity of the damned was an unworthy emotion, a rebellion against God’s justice. The heaven-dwelling saint Beatrice explains why she is unmoved by the sufferings of the damned she sees all about her: “God, in his graciousness, has made me so that this, your misery, cannot touch me.” In this view, God’s unresponsiveness to the torments of the wicked is both a divine model worthy of emulation and a gift bestowed on the righteous (and goes a very long way to explain how generations of Christians could in good conscience blithely consign legions of heretics to agonizing deaths at the stake).

Even C. S. Lewis was sure of a future when love could no longer exact the desperate price it now does. In the heaven he imagines, one of the saved is pestered by her former lover, seeking pity in his misery. She responds, “Did you think joy was created to live always under that threat? . . . Can you really have thought that love and joy would always be at the mercy of frowns and sighs? . . . Your darkness cannot now infect the light.” What is true of lovers, Lewis intimates, is also true of God. To imagine a God literally troubled or grieving for His wayward creatures would be monstrous in this view, because it would make God hostage to the whims of those creatures. His perfect peace could be disturbed by the “wicked”; the darkness could “infect the light.”

The problem of vulnerability wrought by love was precisely the point made by the essayist Francis Bacon and by the psychologist Freud. “He that hath wife and children hath given hostages to fortune,” wrote Bacon. “We are never so defenseless against suffering as when we love,” said Freud. The novelist Graham Greene’s wise but flawed priest learns the same lesson, encountering his young daughter: “He was aware of an immense load of responsibility: it was indistinguishable from love.”

Is God hostage in some way to His limitless love? What is the nature of God’s responsibility toward the human family? The whole matter of God’s involvement with human concerns appears at times an unfathomable mystery. “Look at the heavens,” Elihu challenges a bewildered, suffering Job, “and see; observe the clouds which are higher than you. If you have sinned, . . . if your transgressions are multiplied, what do you do to him? If you are righteous, what do you give to him?.

With these questions, scripture shatters any comfortable assumptions we may draw from deity’s relationship to the human, the expectation that God owes us blessings when we are good and that He will inevitably punish us when we are not. Surely, if a neighbor appeared at our door informing us he had fed the poor and expected our gratitude, we would be puzzled. And if a colleague approached us with a confession that he had cheated on his taxes and awaited our punishment, we would consider him deranged. Whence comes the expectation, Elihu is asking, that God should have some inherent interest in our actions, good or evil.

Israel’s covenant with God presupposes some kind of mutual relationship. And yet with God, what reciprocity can exist? What possible reason could we have to expect reward for righteousness? What possible rationale can God have for noticing our sinfulness? What grounds have we to expect He should care at all? These rhetorical questions all converge in a thunderous, if unexpressed, “none.” But humans and their world do matter to God. Why that should be, the Psalmist could no more fathom than Elihu. He asked in comparable amazement, “What are human beings that you are mindful of them, mortals that you care for them? Yet you have made them a little lower than God, and crowned them with glory and honor.”

The answer to Elihu’s query, the astounding mystery of our relationship to the Divine, had actually been revealed in the very question a baffled Job had posed earlier. “What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him?” The astonishing revelation here is that God does set His heart upon us. And in so doing, God chooses to love us. And if love means responsibility, sacrifice, vulnerability, then God’s decision to love us is the most stupendously sublime moment in the history of time. He chooses to love even at, necessarily at, the price of vulnerability.

It is God’s response to the manifold creatures by whom He is surrounded, the movement of His heart and will in the direction of those other beings—us—that becomes the defining moment in His Godliness, and establishes the pattern of His divine activity. His freely made choice to inaugurate and sustain costly loving relationships is the very core of His divine identity.

The most remarkable religious document published in the nineteenth century may well be an ascension narrative in which the prophet Enoch is taken into heaven and records his ensuing vision. He sees Satan’s dominion over the earth, and God’s unanticipated response to a world veiled in darkness: “The God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and He wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains? And Enoch said unto the Lord: How is it that thou canst weep?”

The question here is not about the reasons behind God’s tears. Enoch does not ask, why do you weep, but rather, how are your tears even possible, “seeing thou art holy, and from all eternity to all eternity?” Clearly, Enoch, who believed God to be “merciful and kind forever,” did not expect such a being could be moved to the point of distress by the sins of His children. And so a third time he asks, “how is it thou canst weep?.

The answer, it turns out, is that God is not exempt from emotional pain. Exempt? On the contrary, God’s pain is as infinite as His love. He weeps because He feels compassion. As the Lord explains to Enoch, “unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood . . . and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of mine hands; wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?”

It is not their wickedness, but their “misery,” not their disobedience, but their “suffering,” that elicits the God of Heaven’s tears. Not until Gethsemane and Golgotha does the scriptural record reveal so unflinchingly the costly investment of God’s love in His people, the price at which He placed His heart upon them. There could be nothing in this universe, or in any possible universe, more perfectly good, absolutely beautiful, worthy of adoration, and deserving of emulation, than this God of love and kindness and vulnerability. That is why a gesture of belief in His direction, a decision to acknowledge His virtues as the paramount qualities of a divided universe, is a response to the best in us, the best and noblest of which the human soul is capable. A God without body or parts is conceivable. But a God without passions would engender in our hearts neither love nor interest. In the vision of Enoch, we find ourselves drawn to a God who prevents all the pain He can, assumes all the suffering He can, and weeps over the misery He can neither prevent nor assume.

This motif of the weeping God appears in other ancient traditions. In one Talmudic text, the passage made famous by Handel’s Messiah is markedly recast to suggest that God, burdened by the sins of the world, appeals to His people to console Him, not the other way around. “Comfort me, comfort me, my people,” the text reads. As early as the days of Noah, the pain of humankind “grieved him to his heart.” In this connection, it is significant that the God of the Old Testament asks His people to “make me a sanctuary, so that I may dwell among them.” In other words, the temple Solomon builds, like the tabernacle in the wilderness, is God’s sanctuary and place of refuge, not ours. For a being as good and pure as God to enter into this realm of darkness and depravity must be exquisitely painful on every level. His love impels Him to visit His people in their distress, and the temple is His shield and refuge from the full onslaught of worldly pain and evil.

God’s love is not metaphorical. It is not some impersonal analogue to the compassion we experience. Compassion, in its root meaning, signifies “to suffer with, or alongside.” In the story of Job, before his friends turn into miserable counselors, they are sublime examples of compassionate friendship. Job’s loss of family and wealth has been compounded by disease so severe it disfigures him to the point of nonrecognition. The story continues,

Now when Job’s three friends heard of all these troubles that had come upon him, each of them set out from his home—Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. They met together to go and console and comfort him. When they saw him from a distance, they did not recognize him, and they raised their voices and wept aloud; they tore their robes and threw dust in the air upon their heads. They sat with him on the ground seven days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to him.

For a full week of days and nights, Job’s friends do what genuine friends are called to do: their actions seem little enough, but they are sublimely great. They “suffer with”; they participate in Job’s anguish. This human capacity to suffer pain at the distress of a loved one is an imperfect shadow of the unfathomable grief a perfect being feels when His creations put themselves beyond His healing embrace. Some early Christians were sure even Satan never fell outside the orbit of a merciful Father and would one day be returned to fellowship. At the very least, a modern revelation declares that when Lucifer, Son of the Morning, rebelled against his God he was called “Perdition, for the heavens wept over him.” If the heavens wept over Lucifer at his fall, how much more must God’s heart beat in sympathy with those children whose presence on earth is proof they are neither rebels nor exiles from His love.

Divine vulnerability is most dramatically embodied in the figure and mission of the Christ. Jesus Christ has had unparalleled hold on the human heart because He fully shared in the human condition, a “glorious, yet contracted light” that “stole into a manger” in order to experience the entire sordid and suffering span of the human condition. The story of His life and ministry strikes us with wonder for two reasons. First, it establishes a real, shared intimacy that only fellow travelers in suffering can know. “In all their affliction, He was afflicted,” wrote Isaiah. Christ’s life in the flesh gave Him an empathy transcending the theoretical. Taking upon Himself human infirmities, “His bowels” were indeed “filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that He may know according to the flesh how to succor His people according to their infirmities..

Christ’s empathy then is not some inherent attribute of the Divine. It was dearly paid for, each day of His mortal life, filled as it was with all the trauma an uncomprehending world could inflict on perfect innocence. He knew the physical rigors of hunger and thirst, and the emotional deserts of loneliness and rejection. But perfect empathy would have to go beyond a life that simply paralleled our own, or that entailed only the particulars of His private, harrowing journey.

Emily Dickinson contemplated the pains of her own reclusive, burdened life, which paled to the point of nothingness when she compared them to Christ’s final friendlessness:

I SHALL know why, when time is over,

And I have ceased to wonder why;

Christ will explain each separate anguish

In the fair schoolroom of the sky.

He will tell me what Peter promised,

And I, for wonder at his woe,

I shall forget the drop of anguish

That scalds me now, that scalds me now.

Peter, of course, had promised Jesus he would never leave His side, never deny, never forsake Him. Yet before Christ endured the first of His physical tortures, His friends had fled, and the chief of His disciples had abandoned Him to face the night of horror alone. Dickinson saw her anguish as mere drops in the infinite sea of the suffering Christ’s loneliness. But it was not just His friends who deserted Him. To have an endless empathy, He would have to know a terror and abandonment and hopelessness beyond human conceiving, such that no mortal tongue could say, you don’t know what I have known, you haven’t been where I have been. Exactly how this would be possible, who can say, but that is what He would have to experience.

So at the close of His life, He hung on the cross to die, with no angels to sing Him home, no light shining at the far end of the tunnel. “I have trodden the wine press alone.” Who can imagine the oblivion into which He peered, the suffocating gloom, the infinite void? He who was present on Creation’s morn, the Light of the World, now faced a darkness beyond any night. And then, at the acme of His agony, He was sundered from the only solace in His pain-racked life, the only constant comfort in His suffering—His Father’s presence. The shock and horror of that final, insupportable abandonment is heard in His cry of despair, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”

The story of Christ’s life amazes for a second reason: it tells us something about a particular power only made manifest in vulnerability. The paradox of Christ’s saving sway is that it operates on the basis of what the world would call weakness. Christ aimed to “draw all men unto” Himself by His ignominious crucifixion, not His triumphant resurrection. We are drawn to the suffering Christ, not the victorious Christ. As the Christian martyr to Nazism Dietrich Bonhoeffer wrote a friend, “The Bible directs man to God’s powerlessness and suffering; only the suffering God can help. . . . The God of the Bible . . . wins power and space in the world by his weakness.”

This is the kind of vulnerability betokened by Ruth, the Moabite woman. Widowed and a Gentile, without prospects in her homeland, she devotes herself to her mother-in-law, Naomi, faithfully following her home to Bethlehem. There, an impoverished Ruth gleans grain in the fields of the wealthy landowner and distant relative of Naomi, Boaz. Seeing that Ruth has caught the notice of her kinsman, Naomi instigates a plan whereby Ruth can secure a marriage with him. Her plan is more than risky; it is potentially catastrophic.

Ruth enters into the threshing barn of the sleeping Boaz in the dead of night and by so doing, places herself in a hopelessly compromising situation with hazard to her reputation and life. She is foreign-born with no friend or protector, and no alibi, no story to tell a public, if Boaz simply wakes up and exploits the situation for his own advantage. Not a practice we would want our daughters to follow, but neither would we advocate our young son face a hostile giant without armor, without shield. The point in both cases is for us is to discern the moral in the apparent madness, the purpose behind such conspicuous risk.

The marvel, of course, is that the sole immediate purpose of Ruth’s actions is to make herself vulnerable. Vulnerability is her end. Her only objective is to make herself as exposed and defenseless as she can, so she can say to Boaz, “I am Ruth, your servant; spread your cloak over your servant.” In other words, here am I, yours to protect or destroy. I place myself in your hands. I hold nothing back, so you may know my trust is without bounds. But of course, in making herself so vulnerable, she reveals the exquisite beauty of her own character. “May you be blessed by the Lord, my daughter,” an awestruck Boaz responds. “For all the assembly of my people know that you are a worthy woman.” Worthy enough that Ruth, the woman from Moab, becomes a mother in Israel, ancestress of David the King, and of Christ the Lord.

We hear echoes here of another person, similarly made vulnerable, similarly blessed of the Lord—the mother of Christ herself. This time, no mother-in-law, but the angel Gabriel, directs a young woman, telling Mary she shall conceive a son. How can this be, Mary asks, since I am unwed, and a virgin? At this moment, we come to see that Christmas was rather different on the far side of our celebrations. Jesus’ nativity was our occasion for joy, but the Coventry Carol reminds us that even His birth came at a dreadful cost.

Herod the King, in his raging,

Charged he hath this day;

His men of might, in his own sight,

All children young, to slay.

Then woe is me, poor Child, for Thee,

And ever mourn and say;

For Thy parting, nor say nor sing,

By, by, lully, lullay

The holiest of nights redounded in terror for the mothers of “Bethlehem and in all the borders thereof.” So too was the annunciation itself a cause for angels to sing, but also for a young maiden to tremble with fear. She is perplexed by the angel’s visit. Gabriel responds, Fear not. He knows full well the terrible weight he is about to place upon her. For Mary, little more than a girl, is asked to subject herself to an unwed pregnancy, in circumstances beyond any possibility of understanding. She will face the certain prospects of dishonor, public humiliation, and possible death by stoning. Surely with more terror than delight, she replies, “Here am I, the servant of the Lord; let it be with me according to your word.” As with Ruth, the next recorded words she hears are “Blessed are you among women.”

Ruth, David, Mary—all esteemed progenitors of the Christ—are also types and symbols of His own offering. Only by opening themselves to the possibility of paramount harm to themselves, do they serve as vehicles of His grace. That vulnerability is both the price of the power to save, and that which saves. Luke records an instance when, in the press of a crowd, Jesus detects that someone has touched the tassel of His garment, and asks who it was. He is being jostled and bumped from every side and direction, says a baffled Peter, and He wants to know who touched Him? But someone did more than touch. She drew from Him a healing power. And He felt it flow out of Him. In this scene, too, we discern a greater meaning. Christ’s power to heal comes at a cost to Him. As Herbert wrote,

Not sealed, but with open eyes

I fly to thee, and fully understand

. . . at what rate and price I have thy love.

Whatever other meanings we may impute to Christ’s crucifixion, it was an act of ultimate self-surrender, the culminating scene of a sacrifice in which nothing was held back. This supernal act of vulnerability invited His own destruction, even as it drew millions to Him. It was Ruth’s exposure to risk that won the heart of Boaz. When Mary accepted a position of peril, she showed herself worthy to nurture the Christ child. That which made Christ’s death possible, also made it infinitely efficacious. God “wins power . . . by his weakness,” Bonhoeffer said. Only the remoteness of Golgotha in space and time, our dim and partial vision of its infinite cost, gives us now the freedom to respond with a heart that inclines or a heart that retreats.

Such weakness and the love behind Christ’s sacrifice cannot be bracketed as a unique act of condescension, supernal as it was. This vulnerability, this openness to pain and exposure to risk, is the eternal condition of the Divine. That was Enoch’s amazed discovery. The suffering that Gethsemane and Golgotha signified cannot be relegated neatly to one of God’s modes or persons. It was not just as the embodied Christ that He was “afflicted in all their afflictions.” The shadow of the cross is long enough to heal the past and anticipate the future, but whatever the philosophers say, God does not exist outside time. He is not some cosmic ventriloquist, or a magic jack-in-the box, assuming human form once or twice a thousand years to speak, then reverting back to ineffable substance, now popping back into a human universe to interact with His creations.

We may inhabit realms as different as those of fish and fowl; we may swim while He soars, and breathe a different air. But when God speaks from heaven, or His angels minister, a wing breaks the water and heaven and the sea touch. We share the same universe, the same existence that continues through time. God’s love, His vulnerability, are a permanent condition of who He is. For God the Father, as for the Son, whatever power or influence He wields over the hearts of men, it is not the power or influence known to the world. Neither here nor hereafter will God exert “control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men.” God draws men to heaven “by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; By kindness, and pure knowledge.” His realm of influence is everlasting, but “without compulsory means it [flows unto him] forever and ever.”

• • •

If vulnerability and pain are the price of love, then joy is its reward. That was the lesson Adam and Eve learn in the Garden, but the principle was rooted in the heavens. As surely as the dark gives meaning to the dawn, so does pain give meaning to pleasure, and sorrow to joy. All that we love, all that we strive for, all that we relish, we know only by contrast. The lesson of Creation is that the world acquires its meaning only through differentiation. It is in separating the light from the darkness, that God’s work of the first day is complete. And so He continues day by day, making a distinction between what is of the heavens, and what is of the earth, where the water flows, and where the land begins, the domain of the stars and the province of the moon. And He pronounces His work complete, only when He separates the man and woman, then draws them back together in a relationship of mutuality that gives vitality and fruitfulness to what is human. All that exists in our world of meaning must exist in paired opposition.

In the Garden story, good and evil are found on the same tree, not in separate orchards. Good and evil give meaning and definition to each other. If God, like us, is susceptible to immense pain, He is, like us, the greater in His capacity for happiness. The presence of such pain serves the larger purposes of God’s master plan, which is to maximize the human capacity for joy, or in other words, “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.” He can no more foster those ends in the absence of suffering and evil than one could find the traction to run or the breath to sing in the vacuum of space. God does not instigate pain or suffering, but He can weave it into His purposes. “God’s power rests not on totalizing omnipotence, but on His ability to alchemize suffering, tragedy, and loss into wisdom, understanding, and joy.”

Even more abundantly than His sharing in human sorrows, we find evidence of God’s delight in human happiness. There is the sense in Old Testament scripture that Creation itself is an overflowing of God’s own joyfulness. In Proverbs 8, a personified Wisdom sings of a moment, “before the beginning of the earth,” when she was witness to God’s designs. “When he marked out the foundations of the earth, then I was beside him, . . . and I was daily his delight, rejoicing before him always, rejoicing in his inhabited world and delighting in the human race..

The Lord Himself describes for Job His laying of the earth’s foundations, as a moment “when the morning stars sang together and all the heavenly beings shouted for joy.” It is as if God’s own nature spills over, and His gladness multiplies through a progeny that will share in His own capacity for joyful activity and love-filled relationships. In a more recent scripture, Christ proclaims that this was His purpose all along, and His central, even His only concern. For “He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world.”

The motif of a joy so abundant it required the creation of a world to accommodate it is manifest in the same overabundance that fills all creation. Jesus told the multitudes, “I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly (Ï€ÎµÏÎ¹ÏƒÏƒòÎ½).” The key Greek word here is perissone, which means “full to overflowing”; “present in superabundance.” God is a God of superabundance, as described by the poet Robinson Jeffers:

Is it not by his high superfluousness we know

Our God? For to be equal a need

Is natural, . . . : but to fling

Rainbows over the rain

And beauty above the moon, and secret rainbows

On the domes of deep sea-shells,

And make the necessary embrace of breeding

Beautiful also as fire,

Not even the weeds to multiply without blossom

Nor the birds without music. . . .

The naturalist Joseph Wood Krutch thought it was this very song of the birds that demonstrated an excess, a redundancy in nature. Birds sing to warn of danger, or to attract a mate. But they also sing for joy. One biologist has written, “To be a bird is to be alive more intensely than any other living creature, man included. . . . They live in a world that is always the present, mostly full of joy.” Joy itself is not necessary, useful, or productive to the workings of the natural world. In a universe limited by the economy of the essential, joy is proof of a surplus. In the grueling contest for survival, amidst the grind of animal existence, endowed with the biological machinery best adapted for reproducing his species, what time or need has the robin for inessential music? The song of the bird, like the joy of a human, is not a passive acquiescence to what is, an acceptance of the conditions of life. It is an energy-infused celebration of that life, a recognition of its giftedness.

The human body and human soul alike seem to be constituted by their Maker for the amassing of experience in ever greater variety and intensity. A dog or a carrion-eating bird will ingest anything capable of sustaining its beating heart one more day. But the human palate is refined enough to register infinite grades of difference among fine wines. Our sense of smell strikes us as almost entirely superfluous, since we don’t need it to hunt prey or be alerted to danger—but it does register the difference between a rose and a lily, the aroma of Christmas pine and fresh-baked bread, and it lets us know when we have escaped the smog of the city and can relish the cleansing air of the country. If we are made in God’s image, we can see His joyful nature reflected in the arsenal of access He gave us, to a variegated world of color and sound and texture and taste and smell.

Darwin was sure that even those spectacles of nature that overwhelm us by their beauty, from the peacock’s tail to the fragrance of an English rose, serve not man’s purpose but their own, which is survival and reproducibility. If anything in nature could be found that had been “created for beauty in the eyes of man” rather than the good of its possessor, it would be “absolutely fatal” to his theory. In other words, maple leaves in autumn do not suddenly transform into stained glass pendants, illuminated by a setting sun, in order to satisfy a human longing for beauty. Their scarlet, ochre, and golden colors emerge as chlorophyll production shuts down, in preparation for sacrificing the leaves that are vulnerable to winter cold, and ensuring the survival of the tree. But the tree survives, while our vision is ravished. The peacock’s display attracts a hen, and it nourishes the human eye. The flower’s fragrance entices a pollinator, but it also intoxicates the gardener. In that “while,” in that “and,” in that “but it also,” we find the giftedness of life.

Therein lies the most telling sign of a vast superabundance. Nature’s purposes and God’s purposes are not in competition but work in tandem. If the first works by blind necessity, the second works by generosity. And in recognizing that giftedness, we turn from appreciation to gratitude; from admiration for the world’s efficiency and order, to love of its beauty and grandeur. This movement is captured in the life of Wayne Booth, one of America’s greatest literary critics. He lost his faith in God as a young man, and then recovered at least a portion of it in his last years. A friend spoke at his memorial service and related one of his last conversations with the ailing scholar. “I had brought him lunch, and as we sat at the table sunlight fell upon a crystal in [his wife] Phyllis’s collection, scattering patches of rainbow color over the walls and ceiling. ‘There!’ said Wayne, ‘don’t you feel grateful?’ ‘It’s beautiful,’ I said, ‘and it makes me happy, but I don’t feel grateful. I wish I did. I’m glad that you do.’”

The difference between these two men, between appreciation of beauty, and feeling gratitude for that beauty, is the recognition of an agent behind the beauty. A person responsible for creating something admirable and delightsome, towards whom we feel love and appreciation. Booth’s friend understood this difference. As he explained, “Wayne’s . . . relation with this God was personal. . . . One of gratitude, gratitude for all that is good and beautiful.” Gratitude is an illogical response to a world that never had us in mind as an audience; but it is the fitting tribute to an original Creator who anticipated our joy and participates fully in it.

As the scripture says, “the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth; . . . Yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; Yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul. And it pleaseth God that He hath given all these things unto man.”

God’s desire, so manifest in the texture of the created order, is to enlarge the sphere of human joy, and we discover the marvelous truth that our joy is His joy. What greater motivation could there be for us to seek out and secure our own, our friends’, our families’ happiness, than to know it adds to His. Truly, God has made us His central concern, and as long as humans live—He will share in all our sorrows. But He also shares in all our triumphs and joys. For He has set His heart upon us.

Chapter Two

 
 
© 2012 Terryl Givens and Fiona Givens 

Printed from Gospelink.com
