Thomas S. Monson, Faith Rewarded: A Personal Account of Prophetic Promises to the East German Saints ( 1996)

Introduction

In July 1968, about five years after my call to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, I was assigned to supervise the European missions of the Church. It was this assignment that took me to East Germany, which was then under strict Communist rule, to visit the Saints who lived behind the Iron Curtain.

I wish it were possible to fully describe conditions in East Germany at the time when I first traveled there. The Communist party's hammer-and-sickle flag was displayed in each window of the ancient and war-ravaged hotel where I stayed. Church meetings were watched and monitored by the secret police. East German citizens were not allowed to leave their country without special permission from the government, and such permission was seldom granted. The feeling in East Germany was one of over-whelming oppression, with evidence of Communist rule all around.

I discovered that departure from East Germany was usually a day-long process, even for those of us who presented U.S. passports. Cement barriers, arranged in a zigzag fashion, had been erected in order to prevent drivers from using their vehicles to make a dash for freedom. We drove from one guard post to the next while East German police checked our passports and searched our vehicle. Some used mirrors to check the undercarriage of our car for stowaway passengers.

In the midst of this seemingly gloomy atmosphere, the faith and goodness of the East German Latter-day Saints was a welcome beacon. I was deeply moved by their plight, and as I addressed them in Görlitz late in 1968, I felt prompted to promise them that if they would remain true and faithful, every blessing enjoyed by Church members in any other country would be theirs. In April 1975, I offered a prayer to rededicate the land of East Germany, and in that prayer, specific blessings were requested and promises made. I felt prompted to promise the Saints that the day of the rededication of their land would be the dawning of a new beginning. I asked the Lord to open up the way to His holy temple. I pled that East German youth would be allowed to serve missions in other lands. Other blessings were promised, including the Lord's intervention in governmental affairs. At the time, it seemed nearly impossible that such blessings would ever come to the oppressed East German Saints. But I knew them to be good people, and I felt a reassurance that these things would come to pass if they remained faithful.

When my friends Thelma and Percy Fetzer learned I had been assigned to supervise the European missions, Thelma said to me, "Tom, I know you to be a good man, but when you come back from the German Democratic Republic, having met with our members there, you will be an even better man." In the twenty-eight years during which I have had close association with the people of the former East Germany, I have seen this to be true. Again and again my testimony has been strengthened as I have met with these good Saints and have heard and recorded fragments of their life stories.

Much of my recording has been in the form of personal journal entries highlighting my experiences with the East German Saints. Faith Rewarded is a collection of those entries, extracted from my personal journal. The earliest entry is dated July 12, 1968, and the most recent, August 27, 1995. I have not felt it necessary to add intervening text between the entries, which are arranged chronologically.

It is my hope that as you read these leaves from my journal, you will gain greater love and appreciation for a people who remained faithful in adversity, prayed fervently for the full blessings of the gospel, and were eventually rewarded with miraculous answers to their humble prayers.
