Thomas S. Monson, Faith Rewarded: A Personal Account of Prophetic Promises to the East German Saints ( 1996)

"They Sing with Their Hearts"

BLESSINGS, PROGRESS, AND INSPIRATION 1978-79

SATURDAY, MARCH 4, 1978

Frances and I flew to Berlin by way of Frankfurt, and after a moment of refreshment at the Schweizerhof Hotel in Berlin, we went across Checkpoint Charlie into East Berlin. Here we almost missed making contact with the Burkhardts. Since our planes had been delayed in arriving and arrangements had not been foolproof, Brothers Burkhardt and Richter had returned to the hotel. Brother Schulze, the second counselor, was the last one to leave the meeting, and by what to some would seem chance, he happened to recognize us in the rented cars we were driving. He stopped and advised us where we could rendezvous at the hotel. Had we not seen him, the entire visit would have been in vain, for we would have assumed that the Dresden Mission presidency had returned to Dresden. As it was, the sisters went to the opera and we participated in a lengthy administrative meeting relative to the future of the Dresden Mission. Those participating in the meeting were Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin, Regional Representative Dan Jorgensen, Henry Burkhardt, Brother Richter, Brother Schulze, and I.

SUNDAY, MARCH 5, 1978

Flew from Berlin to Frankfurt, staying at the home of Brother and Sister Wirthlin.

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 1978

Held a full discussion this morning relative to the Dresden Mission and how we might best serve our members in that part of Germany. In attendance were Theodore Burton, Joseph Wirthlin, Neal Maxwell, Gottfried Richter, Gary Schwendiman, Victor Brown, and I. We all recognize that the Dresden Mission is different from any ecclesiastical unit in the Church and has to be approached keeping this fact in mind.

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 1978

Met with the First Presidency this morning, accompanied by Neal Maxwell and James Faust, and presented my plan for the Dresden Mission. It consisted pretty much of carrying on as we are at present but with some effort toward amalgamation of two small districts—Zwickau and Karl-Marx-Stadt—and the provision of additional leadership opportunities, both here and in Dresden, for the mission leaders as well as district and branch leaders in Dresden itself. The First Presidency seemed to look with favor on the presentation and asked that I repeat it in the meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve. They indicated they would like me to carry on as a liaison with this delicate area of the world.

THURSDAY, APRIL 6, 1978

During our regular temple meeting today, I presented my formal recommendations relating to the Dresden Mission. The Brethren seemed to respond favorably to the recommendations. Elder Mark E. Petersen asked if I had any reluctance about crossing the border into East Germany. I told him, "Absolutely not!" He made the motion that I continue my assignment there. There were many who seconded the motion. They then recommended that I make a visit to that area at least once a year. The First Presidency concurred.

FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 1978

This morning we flew to Frankfurt and thence to Berlin, where we were met by Elder Charles Didier, his wife, Lucie, and Dan Jorgensen. We then entered Checkpoint Charlie and crossed the border into East Berlin.

At our rendezvous point with Henry Burkhardt and his counselors, we were advised by Henry that our former meeting in East Berlin had been monitored by government agencies and that it would be unsafe for us to convene our session at our own meetinghouse.

We met at the apartment of members, which was situated above a small bakery operated by the family. We had a lovely time and a choice meeting wherein we accomplished the instructions to Brother Burkhardt and his counselors relating to the decisions which the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve had made concerning the work in the Dresden Mission.

Such items included the combination of the Zwickau and Karl-Marx-Stadt Districts; the visiting plan of General Authorities and board members from headquarters; separation of the temporal and ecclesiastical side of Brother Burkhardt's work, with one phase coming under the direction of Regional Representative Dan Jorgensen and Elder Theodore Burton, area supervisor, and with the other phase coming under the direction of John Creer, the Presiding Bishopric's area supervisor situated in Frankfurt. Other aspects of the work were also discussed and decisions made.

I felt impressed to give a blessing to the owner of the bakery, Brother Wilhelm BrÃ¼ning. He had been suffering from diabetes and had recently had surgery on his foot which had been most painful to him. After this blessing, I was impressed to offer a blessing upon the home and upon the family. In attendance were the father and mother, a sixteen-year-old daughter, and nine-year-old son. A lovely spirit prevailed. I cannot help but feel that our Heavenly Father will reward the devotion of such choice members of the Church who live and who worship under such difficult circumstances.

Following our meeting, Frances and I returned to West Berlin, and Charles and Lucie Didier proceeded on to Dresden for the conference there. Dan Jorgensen returned with us. Elder Delbert L. Stapley has been gravely ill; hence, it was felt best that I be available to a telephone rather than in a Communist country, in the event he should pass away and the Twelve would need to be notified.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 24, 1978

This afternoon I met with Robert and Shirley Thomas, Sister Thomas being a counselor in the General Relief Society presidency, and Brother and Sister Shumway, to prepare them for their visit to the Dresden Mission. Naomi Shumway is the general president of the Primary Association. I believe these individuals will perform admirably in providing leadership help to our Saints in the Dresden Mission. I think back to the day when I asked Henry Burkhardt whether he felt it would be possible for us to bring the program to the Saints since the Saints could not leave East Germany to receive the program elsewhere. His answer: "Let us give it a try." The Lord has surely opened the way for such to be accomplished.

THURSDAY, MAY 25, 1978

Attended the regular temple meeting, after which President Kimball asked that I remain and meet with him and his counselors relative to a discussion pertaining to our Saints in East Germany and the inability of the Saints to receive temple ordinances. It was a very profitable discussion.

FRIDAY, AUGUST 25, 1978

After a lengthy delay in London, due to airline connections and an air controllers' strike over France, I arrived at 6:00 P.M. at Tegel Airport in Berlin. Regional Representative Dan Jorgensen and I crossed the checkpoint and met at a prearranged meeting place in East Berlin with Henry Burkhardt and his counselor, President Gunther Schulze. We reviewed in detail the matter of the inability of our Saints in East Germany to receive their endowments at the temple. We discussed a plan whereby six specified couples' names would be provided to David Kennedy, and he in turn would make an effort with the government to emphasize the importance of a one-time visit to the temple by every Latter-day Saint. The theory was that if we could establish a record of credibility, with about six couples going to the temple for their own endowments and sealings and returning to their homes in the German Democratic Republic, and then having perhaps six other couples go, the approximately eight hundred worthy but unendowed persons in the German Democratic Republic could receive these blessings. Alternate methods were also discussed.

In the late evening we returned to the checkpoint and to the Schweizerhof Hotel in Berlin. One never ceases to marvel at the faith and devotion of such men as Brothers Burkhardt and Schulze. We are very fortunate indeed to have them in positions of responsibility, directing our approximately forty-two hundred members in that nation.

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 1978

Held a meeting with the First Presidency relative to East Germany and the visit of David Kennedy to that country. Our desire is to open up a way for faithful members of the Church in that land to gain exit visas to have their sacred ordinances performed in the Swiss Temple, after which they would return to their homeland. Our hopes are high, but realistically, we feel our prospects for gaining the necessary approval are rather dim.

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 1978

Attended a full day of meetings at the office. The highlight of the day was the opportunity to perform the sealing ceremony for Brother and Sister Gunther Schulze of the German Democratic Republic. Earlier in the year I had met with Brother and Sister Schulze in a car in a parking lot one rainy evening in East Germany. We met in the car to avoid the ever-present and everywhere-to-be-found government informers. Brother and Sister Schulze were third-generation members of the Church. I felt impressed to ask them if they had ever been to the house of the Lord. They replied that they hadn't but this was one of their great desires.

"Would it be possible, if a letter of invitation were sent, that your government would permit you to travel to the United States to visit one of the temples of God?" I asked.

"No, no," they replied. "Our position is too sensitive here." I could see great tears welling up in their eyes.

We bade one another farewell that evening, and they had walked only about ten paces away from me when I felt impressed to speak to them, using the little German I know. "Bruder und Schwester Schulze, kommen Sie hier, bitte." They returned and stood before me. Through an interpreter I said, "I feel that the Lord would like to see you endowed in His holy house. You are worthy people; you are exemplary in the conduct of your lives; you are faithful in the pursuit of your Church responsibilities. Let's trust in the Lord. Let's let our faith exceed our doubt." I quoted that phrase from Stephen L Richards, "Faith and doubt cannot exist in the mind at the same time, for one will dispel the other." We knelt in the parking lot in the rain and poured out our hearts to God.

When I returned to Salt Lake City, we remembered both Brother and Sister Schulze on the prayer roll of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve; and when we advised the government that we would like him to come to our general conference in Salt Lake City, permission was granted.

Today, therefore, was a day of fulfillment.

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1978

Immediately following the Church Coordinating Council session, it was my opportunity to invite Brother and Sister Gunther Schulze from the Dresden Mission to meet with the First Presidency. It was an experience the Schulzes will never forget.

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 20, 1978

Flew to Berlin and spent the afternoon visiting about the city. We welcomed Dan and Elaine Jorgensen in the evening and prepared for our visit to East Germany.

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 21, 1978

Today we crossed Checkpoint Charlie, and after considerable difficulty with respect to our accommodation vouchers, we were permitted to gain entry into East Germany. We drove through the beautiful countryside on a sunlit day until we arrived at the city of Dresden. There we had the opportunity to meet in leadership session and in general session with all of the Saints in the northern portion of the Dresden Mission. Four hundred and thirty-six attended the general session.

We remained overnight at Dresden.

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1978

Met in a leadership session with the priesthood leaders of the Dresden Mission south area, followed by a general session where 695 were in attendance. Frances and I both participated in the many meetings. It was her first time to visit the Saints of the Dresden Mission, and I am very happy that she had this opportunity to do so. I always come away from the Dresden Mission uplifted and inspired with the faith and devotion of our members. I truly consider my assignment with this choice body of Saints to be one of my most cherished experiences as a member of the Council of the Twelve. I have complete faith and confidence in President Henry Burkhardt and his able counselors.

Before driving back to Berlin, we visited the small cemetery in Dresden. It was a dark night, and a cold rain had been falling throughout the entire day. We had come to visit the grave of a missionary who many years before had died while in the service of the Lord. A hushed silence shrouded the scene as we gathered about the grave. With a flashlight illuminating the headstone, I read the inscription:

JOSEPH A. OTT

Born: 12 December 1870, Virgin, Utah

Died: 10 January 1896, Dresden, Germany

Then the light revealed that this grave was unlike any other in the cemetery. The marble headstone had been polished; weeds such as those which covered other graves had been carefully removed, and in their place was an immaculately edged bit of lawn and some beautiful flowers that told of tender and loving care. I asked, "Who has made this grave so attractive?" My query was met by silence.

At last a twelve-year-old deacon, Tobias Burkhardt, son of President Henry Burkhardt, acknowledged that he had wanted to render this unheralded kindness and, without prompting from parents or leaders, had done so. He said that he just wanted to do something for a missionary who gave his life while in the service of the Lord. I thanked him.

We held a service at the cemetery and then retired to the location where I had earlier had the privilege to rededicate the land of East Germany. There we had a brief service with a mild rain descending. I recounted the experiences of the day the dedicatory prayer was offered and told of the sun bursting forth from its hiding place behind the dense clouds. I mentioned that the crow of a rooster and the ringing of church bells had heralded a new day for our church in that area on the day the country was rededicated.

Young Tobias Burkhardt, a deacon, quietly cared for the gravesite of Elder Joseph A. Ott, a faithful full-time missionary who died during his service in Germany.

We then returned to West Berlin after a rather arduous drive.

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 1978

This morning I had the privilege to meet with the First Presidency, there to discuss with the Brethren how we might provide the blessings of the temple to our worthy Saints in East Germany. I mentioned to the Presidency that the East German government has asked why we do not build a temple in their country for all of the socialist countries of Europe. They, of course, use the word socialist to refer to the Communist Bloc nations.

It appears as though the government will not permit its citizens to have visas to go to the Swiss Temple; hence, the only possible way we can provide endowment and sealing blessings for the Saints would be through providing a facility of our own in that country.

WEDNESDAY JANUARY 24, 1979

This morning I again met with the First Presidency to discuss the Dresden Mission and how our people might best receive their temple blessings. Due to their inability to leave East Germany, it may be necessary to provide some facilities there for such ordinance work.

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 1979

Took the plane to Berlin, Germany, where I had the opportunity to join Dan Jorgensen and Elder Theodore M. Burton. We had a special prayer at our hotel room, where I revealed to these brethren some tentative plans for a small facility to be erected in the German Democratic Republic for the purpose of temple work.

We then placed the temple drawings as inconspicuously as we could within Brother Jorgensen's briefcase and drove across the border into East Germany. There we met Henry Burkhardt and, by prearrangement, stayed at the home of one of our members, the family having vacated for the weekend.

Henry Burkhardt had tears come to his eyes when he saw the beautiful drawings of a projected building. He felt very good about the proposal and will respond to his government's invitation now, in that they had previously suggested that perhaps a temple could be built in that country, rather than our requesting permission for citizens of the German Democratic Republic to go to Switzerland.

In the evening we had dinner at the Schweizerhof Hotel and met briefly with President Dieter Berndt of the Berlin Stake and President Glen Roylance of the Germany Hamburg Mission.

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1979

This morning I boarded the plane in Berlin, Germany, for the long flight back to Salt Lake City. The planes on which I flew experienced a series of mechanical problems which were most unusual. As I boarded the British Airways plane from Berlin to England, we were told that the water pipes had frozen in the rest rooms, and therefore, we would need to deplane and board another flight. On the second flight, we were advised that the cold weather had broken some seals in the front landing gear; hence, it was necessary to board a third plane. Upon arrival in England, I discovered that the Pan American flight to Los Angeles was delayed a full hour because of the need to replace three tires on the jumbo jet.

Upon arrival in Los Angeles, after an eleven-hour flight, the plane landed just before the Los Angeles Airport closed because of fog. The flight was sufficiently late that I could not board my flight to Salt Lake City. The plane was waiting at the gate but was loaded, and as it taxied away, I could envision staying overnight in Los Angeles; however, after considerable delay, we were driven to Burbank, California, to board the Western Airlines flight to Salt Lake City. There was an additional one-hour delay here because the landing staircase could not be retracted on the new Boeing 737 plane. I finally arrived at Salt Lake City a little after midnight, realizing that I had been on the plane since eight o'clock that morning, plus a nine-hour time differential between Berlin and Salt Lake City.

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 14, 1979

Frances and I drove to Provo, Utah, to Walter Stover Hall, one of the Helaman Halls dormitories which houses young female students. Walter Stover, an immigrant from Germany, has been one of the most consistent and beneficent contributors to Brigham Young University over a long period of time. Each year the young ladies pay tribute to him by having a little dinner in his honor. Brother Stover's daughter and three grandchildren were with him. After a brief social period at the hall itself, we went to the cafeteria and had a lovely dinner served to us. Brother Stover and I were the two speakers.

Brother Stover has been a true friend to the Saints in Germany, having directed much of the work in that country following the devastation of World War II. He recounted the ravages which affected the land and the people during this period and then beautifully told the story of how the Dutch Saints had been asked, in the spring of 1947, to begin a welfare project of their own after they had received much-needed welfare supplies from the members in America. The proposal was welcomed with enthusiasm. The priesthood went to work, and within a short time every quorum had found a suitable piece of land for the project. The recommended crop: potatoes. At the various branches of the Church there was singing, speaking, and praying, at the end of which the potatoes were entrusted to the soil. Soon there came news of good prospects for the harvest, and cautious estimates were made as to how large the yield would be.

Walter Stover lived a life of generous service.

During the time the potatoes were growing, Walter Stover visited the Netherlands Mission in Holland. During his visit, with tears in his eyes, he told of the hunger of the Church members in Germany. They were in worse condition than the Saints in the Netherlands. Supplies had not reached the Saints in Germany as quickly as they had the Saints in Holland.

When Cornelius Zappey, the Netherlands Mission president, heard of the condition of the German Saints, he couldn't help but have compassion toward them, knowing how they had suffered. The thought came, and the action followed: "Let's give our potatoes to the members of the Church in Germany." I'm sure he worried, for the German armies and the Dutch armies had been in conflict with each other. The Dutch had been starving. Would they respond?

At long last the day of harvest arrived. A Dutch widow who had received a sack of the potatoes heard that the bulk of the potatoes was to be given to the members in Germany, and she stepped forward and said, "My potatoes must be with them." And this hungry widow returned her sack of potatoes. The trucks were loaded, and the Dutch Saints headed for the German border, only to find that they were stopped because of a ban which precluded sending foodstuffs from Holland to other nations. President Zappey prayed for inspiration from the Lord and then told the border guards that these potatoes were consecrated potatoes in that they had been grown by the people in their gardens for a specific charitable purpose and that had this not been the purpose, there would have been no produce grown after this fashion. Fortunately, the guards were persuaded to his point of view, and the trucks proceeded on into Germany, where they were welcomed with thanksgiving and rejoicing.

Brother Stover also told the young ladies of the terrible conditions which existed following the Russian occupation of Germany. I do believe that his message and his sincerity conveyed a viewpoint and a feeling to the young women which they will long remember.

The Berlin Dahlem Ward chapel is one of the buildings donated to the Church by Walter Stover.

I think one of Brother Stover's most unusual accomplishments was hiring an entire train in Germany. Following the war, the Saints had no transportation, but Brother Stover had that train pick up the members of the Church all the way through the cities of Germany, that all could meet together as sons and daughters of God.

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 28, 1979

Met today with Henry and Inge Burkhardt, who are in Salt Lake City for general conference, along with President Gary Schwendiman, who served as their interpreter. It was wonderful to see Henry again and to have an update on the most important work he is accomplishing in the Dresden Mission.

Brother Burkhardt indicated that the government authorities liked the building plans which we have submitted and, after indicating that Western money would be required to purchase materials, seemed to give the green light for us to proceed in our steps to have a suitable building in Karl-Marx-Stadt.

MONDAY, APRIL 2, 1979

Early this morning I held a meeting with Henry Burkhardt, Theodore Burton, Neal Maxwell, Joe Christensen, and others relating to the possibility of home seminary in the Dresden Mission. It appears that the materials could be simplified and reduced and become a course of study for adults, with young people becoming the secondary beneficiaries. Any program which is directed specifically to the youth is suspect in the German Democratic Republic.

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 11, 1979

Met early this morning with the First Presidency relative to matters in East Germany. Dan Jorgensen, Regional Representative, had prepared a position paper for Theodore Burton, and President Kimball had requested a copy of the same. This prompted President Kimball to desire further information regarding East Germany, which information I was able to supply.

TUESDAY, MAY 29, 1979

This afternoon I met with Brother Hans Schult from East Germany. I took Brother Schult in to meet President Spencer W. Kimball, which was no doubt the highlight of Brother Schult's life. He has been in Utah for perhaps fourteen days and has been to the temple for more than twenty sessions. I was much impressed with his spirit.

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 2, 1979

At 12:30 I had the privilege of performing the sealing ceremony for Brother and Sister Schult of the German Democratic Republic. He is the district president in East Berlin. Some time ago I asked the question, "Could a district president and his wife be invited to come to conference so that they might be endowed and sealed in the temple?" The answer: "Only if they go in lieu of a member of the Dresden Mission Presidency." Not wishing to give up any ground which we have earned with the government, I responded, "Let's see if we might submit a request for their permission in addition to a member of the Dresden Mission presidency." Such was granted.

I learned from Brother Schult a little background concerning this approval. He said that all of the religious leaders were called into a meeting in Dresden and asked how they might best honor the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of their country. The other religious leaders fawned over the government officials and waxed eloquent with praise. President Henry Burkhardt of the Dresden Mission called upon Gottfried Richter, his second counselor, to make a response in behalf of our church, whereupon Brother Richter quoted from the Doctrine and Covenants that governments were instituted for the blessing of people (see D&C 134:1). The government official was so interested in this direct revelation from God as contained in the Doctrine and Covenants that he indicated he was impressed. Some weeks later when Brother Schult, who was an engineer by trade, had his visa request denied by his local officials, the government officials in Dresden were asked to intercede, and as a result of the favorable impression made upon these officials in the anniversary ceremonies, one of the top leaders said, "It is in our best interest to allow Mr. Schult to go to America." We, of course, know that our Heavenly Father brought about the opportunity.

Later in the day I met with Theodore Burton and Gottfried Richter relative to matters in the German Democratic Republic and the building program which we are anxious to see move forward. The government has given tentative approval for our planned building in Karl-Marx-Stadt but indicated they are not ready to grant us permission to move forward yet.

At 3:30 in the afternoon I had the opportunity to visit with the son and daughter of Rudolph Cierpka, former president of our Berlin Germany Stake. Brother Cierpka was in Dresden as a medical officer at the time of the bombing near the end of World War II.

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 1979

I learned today that Sister Inge Burkhardt lies seriously ill in Dresden. She has undergone gallbladder surgery but has developed complications, including pneumonia. We are remembering her in our prayers.

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 1979

Departed this morning for a brief assignment to East Germany. I flew to New York City and caught the evening plane en route to Frankfurt, Germany.

SATURDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1979

Arrived in Frankfurt, Germany, early this morning and took the plane to Berlin. Although it was raining in Berlin and was a rather dismal day, I enjoyed walking through this beautiful city and awaited the arrival of Hans Ringger, a Regional Representative from Zurich, and John Creer, our director for temporal affairs in Frankfurt.

In the evening we held a strategy meeting and enjoyed dinner together.

SUNDAY, DECEMBER 2, 1979

Early this morning we crossed the border into the German Democratic Republic. I was amazed at the ease with which Brother Ringger effected our entry. There is something particularly pleasing about the way a native Swiss is able to maneuver in international circles. We then rented a car and drove to Leipzig, where we met with the priesthood brethren and later with their families. The furnace in the Leipzig building had failed and repair parts were unobtainable; hence, the meeting was held in the cold.

There was no lack of warmth, however, in the hearts of the members. They had their scriptures with them, sang with gusto, and reflected a spirit of devotion to the gospel. I was told that of the thirty-nine elders in this branch, thirty-seven are active and were present in the building. How I wished I could speak German so I could communicate with these good people in their own language.

We then drove to a meeting point outside Dresden where we joined Brother and Sister Schultz and then journeyed to the hospital where Sister Inge Burkhardt is a patient. Sister Burkhardt, the wife of our mission president in the Dresden Mission, has had a difficult time since her gallbladder surgery, which was followed by complications such as pneumonia. She has been hospitalized for almost nine weeks. She was able to walk to a waiting room where we joined our faith and our prayers in providing her a blessing. I indicated to her that this blessing was the principal reason for my coming to East Germany. This thought seemed to touch all present in the room. A good spirit prevailed, and after a time of greeting, we also gave a blessing to Henry Burkhardt.

I shall never forget the scene as we departed from the hospital grounds, when looking upward we saw Sister Burkhardt from her bedroom window waving farewell to us. We journeyed without incident back to Berlin and stayed the night at the Schweizerhof Hotel. I was pleased, however, to bring with me a report from Henry Burkhardt that government authorities look with favor upon our erection of buildings in Leipzig and Karl-Marx-Stadt. The only problem seems to be the insufferable delays of government red tape.

MONDAY, DECEMBER 3, 1979

Departed Frankfurt en route to New York City, remaining in New York City in the evening.
