Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Introduction

For more than half of the twentieth century, David Arthur Haycock has enjoyed a personal, intense, panoramic view of Church leadership. Closely associated with seven presidents of the Church in this dispensation, he has spent more waking time with the prophets of the Lord than have their families or other General Authorities.

Having worked with Church Presidents Heber J. Grant, George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, Harold B. Lee, Spencer W. Kimball, and Ezra Taft Benson, he affirms, "Each has had his own inspiration and his own mission. Each was raised up by the Lord for a special time and need. The Lord listens to them, and they listen to the Lord."

His experiences were one of a kind. In 1935, as a young missionary in Hawaii, he raised his hand with hundreds of other island Saints when President Heber J. Grant organized the first stake outside the continental United States. He sat at the bedside of President George Albert Smith and held his hand as he died. While serving as a mission president in Hawaii, he toured the islands with President David O. McKay. He worked for President Ezra Taft Benson when he served as Secretary of Agriculture in Washington, D.C. He accompanied President Joseph Fielding Smith to England for the first LDS area conference in 1971. He was alone with President Harold B. Lee when he died. He transcribed from President Spencer W. Kimball's dictation the declaration giving the priesthood to all worthy males of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

"I've had more tutoring and training from the real masters of life than anybody who ever went to college," Arthur is quick to say. For these singular servants, he has kept their journals, recorded their speeches, packed their suitcases, read their conference addresses when they were too ill to speak, and sometimes even shined their shoes. For more than fifty years, his life has been a unique odyssey in the company of prophets.

For Arthur, the experience has never been common: "I never took it for granted. Anybody else would have done the same things, and they, too, would have counted it a privilege. I am grateful for the opportunity to have been close by. I have shared their experiences all over the world, their joys and their disappointments. They lost loved ones. They were human, and I guess that is the greatest thing about it. They were real."

Arthur took his work seriously, though he quietly stayed in the background. He explains, "If you don't have the Brethren's total confidence, if they can't talk about anything or anyone, any situation or circumstance with you sitting there, it doesn't work." But his fervor and discretion in the position were always evident. Here was a man who loved his work and loved his boss.

His interests were never selfish. "What made the president happy made me happy," he says, "and anything that troubled him troubled me. I didn't have the responsibility or the stewardship that he carried, of course, but I felt responsible to help him do his work, any time of the day or night."

That was not idle commitment, for Arthur's job was more than full time. Serving these men and assisting them in their work was not just a job; it was his life. Though the job description changed with each president, Arthur's dedication to each prophet never wavered. In addition to keeping minutes, writing letters, scheduling, telephoning, organizing, filing, reviewing data, and writing and redirecting inquiries, he was also chauffeur, tour guide, valet, chef, doctor, friend, confidant, and security guard. He went on diets with President Spencer W. Kimball and ate boiled wheat with President George Albert Smith. He delivered Christmas gifts for President Harold B. Lee and bought watermelon, even out of season, for President Joseph Fielding Smith. Arthur was not involved in making a name for himself or in formulating policies for the Church. His assignment, as with other Latter-day Saints, was to serve the Lord every day, applying gospel teachings to daily experiences. That his service was to the president of the Church made the circumstances unique, but the principles were the same.

Each president had his own ways of operating that adapted to changes in the size and complexity of the growing international church. When assisting President George Albert Smith, Arthur would often accompany the president home for lunch, Arthur driving the president's car.

There was a time when crowds would gather outside the back door of the Tabernacle to chat with the president after general conference. Though security became an issue in the 1970s, President Kimball still charged into the crowd to shake hands at every opportunity because he loved being with the people so much.

Over the years, the pictures of Arthur standing beside each president show a gradual change—his hair turns from black to steel gray to snow white—but his countenance has never altered. He has stood stalwart and supportive of the prophets, committed to their singular mission and methods. Arthur is not weary from a life of church service. In the process of his daily work, he has seen and heard much and gained confidence in the total gospel plan. He is matter-of-fact, realistic, and fiercely loyal.

For more than fifty years, Arthur has had his eye on the progress of the Church. Certainly a life spent with latter-day prophets intrigues most members and observers who would like just a glimpse of what Arthur has seen. But his memories are not sensational. He didn't keep a journal or even notes on a calendar of his own. He does not describe himself as a major player. He has focused on facilitating the work of the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His loyalty and purpose is clear in each expression of love for these prophets and admiration for all they accomplished.

When Arthur sat down at his desk in the Church Ad-ministration Building on September 8, 1938, he had no idea what was ahead. For him, just getting a job at the Church had been a six-month crusade, and he was delighted to be one of a handful of full-time employees.

It would be another five years before Spencer W. Kimball or Ezra Taft Benson would be called to serve as apostles in the Council of the Twelve. President Grant presided over the largely North American church with its 750,000 members, eighteen missions, and 124 stakes. The Church office staff worked six days a week (until 1:00 p.m. on Saturday) and was spread out on all five floors of the granite administration building at 47 East South Temple Street.

Arthur's office in the Finance Department was located on the main level in a large room with bare floors, a rubber mat under each chair, and a central telephone on the counter. The staff took turns taking the calls. The Church offices had three phone lines and a small PBX board for outside calls and for the use of the Brethren. Three people ran the Missionary Department.

General conference was not yet broadcast on radio, though microphones had recently been installed in the Tabernacle. Television, still in its infancy, was not used for public broadcast of conference sessions until 1949. Instead of using the now-familiar red armchairs on the stand, the General Authorities, totaling twenty-six, sat on padded red benches. Every one of the authorities spoke at conference, and the meetings, with no broadcasting time constraints, lasted as long as the speakers chose to speak. "They could just get up and preach to the people as long as they felt prompted," says Arthur.

Years later, the sessions were timed down to the minute, including choir numbers or organ interludes to fill in if someone sat down too soon. When Arthur retired as secretary to President Ezra Taft Benson to preside over the Hawaii Temple in 1986, his third mission to the Islands, the Church offices had more than filled the twenty-eight-floor high-rise office building completed in 1972 at 50 East North Temple. Times had changed.

Arthur's first responsibility was preparing the paychecks on a manual Underwood typewriter for all Church employees. He also dispensed funds to missionaries all over the world. Parents brought or sent in money, which Arthur converted to marks, francs, guilders, or pounds sterling and then dispersed through the Church's International Exchange Agency to mission presidents.

At twenty-two he was one of the youngest Church employees. Hired by Arthur Winter, who had been hired by Brigham Young, Arthur Haycock was referred to as "the boy" by fellow employees Carl Carlson and Cannon Lund. In some ways the reference stuck. Thirty years later when he drove President Joseph Fielding Smith home after a full day at the office, the prophet remarked to his daughter, "He's a good boy."

Age was something Arthur came to understand well in his years at the Church. He learned firsthand, again and again, that the Lord has a timetable. He says, "I have watched great men be trained, mellowed, and molded by the Lord. Then I've watched them grow old, struggle, and die. It's a hard period when their health fails, and yet the Lord is always in charge and always with us. Each was prepared for a particular time, need, and circumstance. That's the way the Lord ordained it." Arthur saw six presidents of the Twelve called to preside over the Church. "Given the pattern, the president will probably always be an older man," he says. "They have years of training, often several decades, and a vast treasure of experiences before they are called to act as the Lord's chosen mouthpiece and preside over the whole Church."

Indeed, they have responsibility for all people. The magnitude of such a calling is unique to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And it should be, says Arthur: "These brethren are citizens of the world. They become that as the Church grows. They know the people, and the people know them and love them—they support and pray for them. Whether it is in a little hogan, an adobe hut, a new home in the suburbs, or a modest flat in a large city, it doesn't matter. The prayers and support of the members sustain these men who carry such a burden and responsibility."

But such devotion takes its toll. "They are out in front all of the time, and they get tired and worn," says Arthur. "I've seen many of the Brethren come and go, men whom I love and respect and admire and whom the Lord has called and sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators. To see them become weak and tired, unable to do things; to see great men, stalwart and dynamic, grow old is a challenge for us all. I have seen the pattern repeated time and again with Presidents Heber J. Grant, George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, Harold B. Lee, Spencer W. Kimball, and Ezra Taft Benson."

Of them all, only President Lee was taken while still in the height of his vigor. Presidents Joseph Fielding Smith, David O. McKay, and Spencer W. Kimball because of poor health played less visible roles in their later years as president. Arthur says: "I raced to President Joseph Fielding Smith's side, arriving at the home of his daughter Amelia and son-in-law Bruce R. McConkie shortly after the president died. I joined President Lee at the McKay apartment in the Hotel Utah, just next door to the Church Administration Building, right after President McKay died, and I assisted in notifying the other authorities. Just one of those experiences would have been the event of a lifetime!"

These men were not spared challenges. Elder Orson Hyde in an 1853 sermon spoke of the trials that come to those who do the Lord's work. He said, "It is invariably the case, that when an individual is ordained and appointed to lead the people, he has passed through tribulations and trials, and has proven himself before God, and before His people, that he is worthy of the situation which he holds." (Journal of Discourses 1:123.)

In 1957 Elder Spencer W. Kimball, diagnosed with cancer, went to a New York hospital for surgery on his throat. His close associate Elder Harold B. Lee counseled the physician, who was not a member of the Church, that this patient was no ordinary man, that the Lord had a work for Spencer Kimball to do. That he would lose his beautiful tenor singing voice was understood, but the doctor needed to preserve all he could of the larynx so Elder Kimball could continue to speak to the people. Following the surgery, Elder Kimball liked to joke that he had gone East and fallen among cutthroats. In later years, he did speak as president over the Church, with a raspy, easily recognized voice that eventually became so soft that a special microphone had to be attached to his glasses. "President Kimball knew much about sacrifice and suffering," states Arthur.

Arthur formed a bond with these men and with their counselors and associates. On Thanksgiving night, 1982, he received a call from President N. Eldon Tanner, first counselor to President Kimball. "Arthur, I got to thinking tonight about you," said President Tanner. "Did you have a good Thanksgiving? Did you have your family with you? How are they? How are you?"

Arthur recalls, "He was just like a kindly grandfather, and here he was a counselor in the First Presidency of the Church with such weighty matters on his mind. I asked how he was, and he responded, 'A little shaky, a little tired.' "

Just before retiring to bed two hours later, Arthur received another call from the Tanner home. President Tanner had died shortly after their conversation. "He had genuine interest and compassion for me, a secretary," says Arthur. "That's the sort of men I worked with all those years."

Indeed, Arthur's experiences reinforced to him over and over that the Brethren have their feet on the ground. He adds: "They don't make hasty decisions. Members may sometimes ask, 'Why don't they do this? Why don't they do that?' But I tell you, they make haste very slowly and very deliberately and very prayerfully. They are righteous and sensitive." Arthur often reflects on the advice President J. Reuben Clark, a counselor to Presidents Grant, Smith, and McKay, gave newly called Church authorities: "Don't take yourself too seriously!"

Arthur learned to be flexible and cool-headed while he served in his secretarial positions. Over five decades he saw tremendous growth. Every program, stake organization, auxiliary, mission, handbook, and statistic changed dramatically from the beginning of his tenure. Arthur had no handbook on how to do his job, and training was limited; he usually followed himself in the position.

Each of the presidents had his own personality, and Arthur had to adapt to each one overnight. Looking back, he remembers the Church presidents like this: "President Heber J. Grant had tremendous fortitude and foresight. Anything he set his mind to do he accomplished, whether it was pitching baseball or financing Church projects. He was deeply committed to his people and their welfare in desperate times.

"President George Albert Smith was the most Christlike man I've ever known. He was gentle, kind, and totally de-voted to mankind. He noticed only the good in others and was dedicated to organizations that helped develop strong character traits, like the Boy Scouts.

"President David O. McKay was tall and handsome. When he walked into the room it was just like electricity moving in every direction. Everybody's eyes turned in his direction, and he had the capacity to quickly touch people's hearts with his messages.

"President Joseph Fielding Smith was thoughtful, caring, and so very sensitive. He felt things so deeply and was easily touched by the littlest things. He had a sense of humor but he disliked having his picture taken, so I learned to place myself between him and any camera lens.

"None was more gracious, more hospitable, more capable or complex than President Harold B. Lee. He was always impeccably dressed, and he had an air about him that was inspirational. You could feel his presence in a small hall or a spacious auditorium.

"President Spencer W. Kimball had holes in his shoes—'worn out in the service of the Lord' he would say. He made time for everybody. When he was tired he would stretch out on his floor or his desk. He challenged the whole church to 'lengthen their stride' and in the process moved the work forward immeasurably.

"President Ezra Taft Benson is formal and very definite about the way he wants things done. He is sincere, kind, believing, and dedicated to the work. He was trained by the Lord with very individual experiences that have opened doors around the world and refocused attention on the Book of Mormon."

What impressed Arthur most about these men? These leaders who were focused on the enormous task of spreading the gospel to all mankind still found time to look after the individual, just as Christ did. They were generous with their time and their resources. Their busy schedules did not dictate their opportunities to serve. They had access to the whole Church system to get things done, and yet their contributions were often typical of the tools available to most: They listened, made calls, extended a helping hand and a willing heart, bore testimony of the gospel, and prayed for others.

Often Arthur was called on to give congratulations in behalf of the president for wedding anniversaries and birthdays. He answered volumes of letters. One little girl wrote asking the president to find a home for four little kittens. Two boys from Southern Utah wrote that their father was leaving their family, and they wondered what they could do. Mothers wrote, as did fathers, missionaries, and essentially anyone in the Church with something on his or her mind. Arthur would try to help, doing a little something here, a little something there.

Arthur describes the president's office as a solemn place: "People came with heavy hearts and burdens. I always felt that even if the answer was no, they had to go away feeling I had tipped the Church upside down to try to make it yes." He represented the president and was acting in his behalf, a responsibility he never took lightly.

Arthur witnessed hundreds of men and women called to key positions. "They didn't ask for these jobs. People in their right minds would never ask for one of these jobs. People know little of the demands that are made upon the leaders and their families, of the time and energy and strength required, and of the trials that come. It seems nice to be sitting up on the stand in the Tabernacle in big red chairs, but there is much more to it than that. I've sat with the leaders in meetings, and I know their hearts, their efforts and pressures, their great dedication and contributions."

Whenever a call was to be extended, Arthur had to devise some method to get the person in for an interview or on the phone without divulging the reason. It wasn't always easy. He has a story for almost every calling. A classic example is when President Joseph Fielding Smith called L. Tom Perry as a General Authority. Brother Perry, at the time a stake president in Boston, was coming to Salt Lake City for general conference, traveling by way of Arizona. Arthur missed him there but was told that Brother Perry's next stop was Brigham Young University, where he was going to see his son Lee. Arthur asked campus security to get Lee out of class, put him in the back of the police car, and wait at the entrance to the campus so he could point out his father when he passed. The plan worked, and the police stopped Brother Perry. Lee gave him the number to call. Arthur was waiting by the phone to set an appointment.

G. Homer Durham was tracked to a local mall, where he was walking for exercise with his wife when he was called as a member of the Quorum of the Seventy. Boyd K. Packer, an Assistant to the Twelve, was taken out of a meeting to be called as a member of the Council of the Twelve. Rex D. Pinegar, a mission president in West Virginia, was up in the hills, and Arthur tracked him all day before Brother Pinegar was near a phone and could be reached to return the call. Sister Michaelene P. Grassli, when called to the Primary General Presidency, was in a general board meeting, and the secretary said she'd give her the message to call. Arthur waited, called, and waited again, finally insisting she be interrupted and sent right over. She came.

Getting Elder Russell M. Nelson to a meeting with President Gordon B. Hinckley, counselor to President Kimball, was a memorable challenge for Arthur. Elder Marvin J. Ashton had taken ill in a conference session, and Brother Nelson, a renowned heart surgeon, had gone to the hospital to see that all was well. By phone he had reported the prognosis to President Hinckley, second counselor to President Kimball. But Arthur entreated him to go and talk to President Hinckley at his office at Church Headquarters. Brother Nelson questioned whether such a visit was necessary since he had relayed everything that he knew and President Hinckley kept such a full schedule. Arthur then suggested that President Hinckley had so many burdens that if Brother Nelson could lift just this much from him it would make a big difference. After the interview, Elder Nelson, visibly shaken, said, "Why didn't you tell me?" Arthur usually saw these people right before they were called and then right after. "It was quite an experience to see this side of Church leadership," he says.

Arthur describes the presidents of the Church as diverse in talents, size, experience, age, and personality; however, in their understanding and application of the gospel they were equals. These were not men caught up in their own importance. "They knew this was the Lord's assignment, and they took it," says Arthur.

Arthur is articulate about the service of the Brethren he has witnessed over the years: "These men have been called by inspiration but they aren't perfect. There was only one perfect man, and he was crucified. He had his Judas. Others have had those who have betrayed them. There are always those who are willing to say things about the Brethren that are only partly true or taken out of context. But I know that the Lord loves the Brethren. He has had them in his watch-care since they were born. He upholds them, sustains them, reveals his mind and will to them. He has called them to the work, and he magnifies and blesses them, and they lead under his counsel.

"These men leading the Church have broad responsibilities, but their testimonies are simple. President Clark advised the Saints more than fifty years ago, 'Believe that Jesus is the Christ, the head of this church, and that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God, that he saw and heard what he said he did.' Such testimonies speak of the expressions of faith of the members all over the world."

Says Arthur, who has met members everywhere, "No matter the language, the Saints know that God lives and that Jesus Christ, our Elder Brother, leads this church through a prophet on the earth. That conviction is in essence the strength of the Church today. Relying on that strength, the presidents of the Church and the other General Authorities direct the work forward."

Arthur has spent a lifetime with these presidents, their families, and their friends. He knows them as few other people do. He knows their hearts, their efforts, their problems, their convictions. He knows of their dedication and their untiring efforts to build the kingdom. "The General Authorities spend every ounce of energy, strength, and talent with which the Lord has blessed them to uplift the members and good people everywhere. That is their special assignment," says Arthur.

"I've laughed with them, I've cried with them, I've prayed with them, I've traveled with them, I've worked at their side," Arthur says. "I have great love and admiration for these men of God."

Arthur has watched at close range as the prophets have guided the work forward. His memories, many presented in this book, are of the diligence, charity, kindness, humility, and love of these seven presidents of the Church. Arthur has been in many sensitive sessions where weighty matters were discussed. He has known of changes before official announcements were made, and he was often the first to embrace a newly called leader. But his treasured recollections are of the warm handshakes, the quiet moments in sacred settings, the personal lessons learned in everyday activities, and the chance to follow the Lord's anointed in their teachings, their example, and their counsel.

He has been with Saints all over the world as they have sung "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." But it is the phrase "to guide us in these latter days" to which he gives the greatest significance when he says, "I can testify that if we follow the prophets, we will never get on forbidden paths. They are the Lord's servants and his mouthpieces upon the earth in these latter days."
