Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter One

D. Arthur Haycock: Prepared to Serve

Being able to take shorthand opened doors for D. Arthur Haycock and secured for him employment at the Church Offices in 1938. But those skills didn't come easy. As a student at South High School, he failed shorthand his first year in the course. "Your loops are too large," the teacher said. "Your figures are too irregular." Arthur could read his notes easily, but he enrolled again in the course for a second year and, under the tutelage of a new teacher, finished at the top of the class.

He hadn't always been interested in office work—but he had always worked. In his youth he labored in the fields topping beets and harvesting potatoes. Later, he and his brother had a paper route after school while his school chums cheered at football games and practiced for plays. He delivered packages in the summer for Keith O'Brien and the Paris Company department stores in Salt Lake City. The Haycock children supplemented the family income doing odd jobs at a very early age.

The oldest of four children, Arthur was born September 4, 1916, in Farmington, Utah. He was blessed with the first name David for his father and Arthur for his mother's brother; the blessing took place at the old rock meetinghouse in Farmington where the first Primary was organized. His father had emigrated to Zion with his family from Staffordshire, England, when only a baby. His mother, Lily Crane Haycock, was born in Herriman, Utah, a small community in the Salt Lake Valley.

The Haycocks settled in Bancroft, Idaho, when Arthur was small. As an infant and toddler, he had many close calls with death. As a baby, he nearly suffocated in his buggy but was rescued by his mother and a friend when he was already blue and not breathing. At three, while fetching some water, he dropped his bucket through a small hole in a bridge and slipped, falling headfirst into the canal below. His mother found him just in time, with his feet kicking wildly in the air.

Shortly after the incident, an aunt and uncle came to visit. A mechanic, his uncle offered to overhaul the Haycocks' car. Arthur appointed himself first assistant and in the process smeared his overalls with grease and gasoline. They were his only overalls, so he slipped them on again the next day. Playing outside with his friends, Arthur and the little group were playing with matches when one fell into his lap, and his clothes burst into flames. Instinctively Arthur hunched over to protect his face and started screaming. His uncle and mother came racing from inside, wrapped him in a blanket to extinguish the flames, and rushed him to the country doctor. Equipment and medical supplies were limited, and he was burned severely on his abdomen and his right thigh. With Arthur sedated by chloroform, the doctor scraped off the dead flesh. The boy's heart stopped during the operation; the doctor revived him. His arduous recovery was accompanied by periods of intense pain.

Arthur's right leg pulled up close to his body as the burn healed, and soon he could not straighten it. The muscles had contracted, and to extend the leg to its normal position was impossible, so the doctor decided to straighten it gradually over several months. With the help of the boy's parents, the doctor would press down on the leg, extending it about a quarter of an inch, and then bandage it in the new position. The process was eventually successful, and Arthur regained the use of his leg. Still, for six months, David, his father, carried him around on a pillow after the bandages were removed. Because of the accident, Arthur's right leg was always shorter than his left, though he disguised the limp well, wearing out his shoes unevenly. His mother, and later his wife, were able to distinguish his footsteps by his noticeable gait.

By the time Arthur was back on his feet, his father had been called on a mission to the Northern States. The family, now including younger brother Gordon and a baby sister, Donna Jeanette, moved from Idaho back to Herriman to be near their mother's family.

The Haycocks struggled for sufficient food and necessities. Arthur recalls not wanting to finish his scrambled eggs one morning. Waiting until his mother wasn't looking, he ran outside and dumped the food. When his mother came back, she asked if he'd finished his breakfast. Unable to lie, he told her he hadn't and that it was out on the ashes from the stove. She sent him to retrieve the morsels and then watched as he scraped off the ashes and finished his breakfast.

During those years Arthur herded cows, harvested potatoes, pulled weeds, gathered firewood in the canyon, and later hauled hay to help the family survive. The young family moved repeatedly as they searched for more reasonable accommodations. None of the places provided much comfort. Just before Arthur's father was to be released from his mission, Grandfather Haycock, a painter and paperhanger in Nephi, fell and died from the injuries. David was allowed to return home from his mission about a month early for the funeral.

Reunited, the family moved to Firth, Idaho, in the fall of 1924, a community Arthur remembers as hostile to Mormons. At first, the Haycocks rented the residence of the Baptist minister, a rather nice house with indoor plumbing, the first Arthur had seen. The luxury did not last long, for they were forced soon to find a smaller, less expensive home.

Arthur's father, a barber, worked in the one barbershop in town. Located in the largest building on the main street, the barbershop shared the facility with the movie theater, the grocery store, and a meat market. Upstairs was a roller rink and a dance hall. To add to the family coffers, Arthur was soon sweeping out the movie theater; his mother played the piano to accompany the silent films. She played soft, sweet music for tender scenes and military or melancholy music for others.

The Haycocks were recognized as stalwart Mormons in the community. Arthur was baptized in a canal and or-dained a deacon while in Firth. They attended meetings on the second floor over the mercantile store. In the winter, the room was heated by a pot-bellied stove that was only marginally effective. Snow drifts sometimes reached thirty feet high, making it possible for Arthur to touch the telephone wires on his way to school.

In the summer of 1929, the family returned to Utah, settling in Salt Lake City in the Liberty Ward, not far from the downtown area. Arthur attended South Junior High on 1300 South and State Street. Used to a four-room school with two grades in each class, he got lost the first day in the spacious building of a dozen rooms.

The Haycocks returned just in time for the Great Depression, which hit in October. Purchasing another barber shop at 1118 South West Temple, three blocks from their house, Arthur's father struggled during those years, earning about sixty dollars a month. Joining ROTC, which subsidized the purchase of school books, and taking summer jobs, Arthur contributed to the family income. While Arthur was at South Junior High, typing became one of his best subjects. When he advanced to the new South High School, one of the students in its first class, Arthur determined to expand such skills. South High was a two-year high school that offered students the option of a third year of postgraduate courses. Arthur chose to continue his education at South after graduating, and he took such commercial and business subjects as dictation, transcription, and bookkeeping. When he completed his courses, he could take dictation at 140 words a minute.

Certainly his school courses prepared him for his work. But his schooling also brought him in contact with a young seminary instructor, Harold B. Lee, who later became the eleventh president of the Church with Arthur as his secretary.

Arthur graduated from high school in a pair of $.98 white pants, his worn navy coat, and a $1.98 pair of white shoes with rubber soles. Ready to play a greater part in helping support the family, he joined the Civilian Conservation Corps quartered at Fort Douglas on Salt Lake City's east bench. Finding a uniform small enough to fit his frame had been difficult in ROTC, and the CCC faced the same challenge. Arthur worked in the warehouse, writing supply and food orders for thirty camps in the western United States. He was paid thirty dollars a month; he kept five dollars and sent the rest to his parents.

While serving with the CCC, Arthur received a mission call to Hawaii. He left the end of April 1935, arriving in Honolulu by ocean liner on May 5, four months before his nineteenth birthday. He would later return to the islands at different times with six of the presidents of the Church, serve there as a mission president, and serve as president of the Hawaii Temple.

Arthur's first experience in the mission field was not what he had expected. His companion took him on the streetcar to the end of the line, and then the two walked up to the top of a hill. Perplexed, Arthur could see no homes for tracting or people for teaching. That's when his companion stretched out in the tall grass and napped most of the day. Arthur read his scriptures to keep occupied and finally slept as well. "It was not what I expected," he later recalled, "and I have counseled missionaries and their leaders all over the world to give the finest companions to new elders so that they can get the spirit of the work immediately."

In spite of such experiences, his heart was in the work, and it stayed there. When the Hawaiian mission was organized as a stake, a major step for the Church since it was the first one outside the continental United States, Arthur was serving his mission.

President and Sister Heber J. Grant, President and Sister J. Reuben Clark, and Joseph Anderson, secretary to President Grant, arrived by boat in June 1935 to establish the stake. When President Grant and his associates traveled from Oahu to Kauai, Arthur joined them on the journey since he had been transferred to that island.

While he was on his mission, Arthur identified what he wanted to do with his skills and his life. He recalls being impressed with the activity and dedication of Joseph Anderson. He says, "I observed Joseph Anderson at work and made up my mind that I wanted that kind of job. Lacking education and contacts, it was only a dream."

Arthur served as secretary and stenographer in the mission home, his first taste of coordinating and keeping things organized in an office. He was later transferred to the big island of Hawaii to replace an elder who had contracted typhoid fever. Arthur and his companion walked everywhere, often more than thirty miles a day. To lessen the monotony between destinations, the elders practiced their Hawaiian. They lived in a small, one-room shanty attached to the side of the chapel. Backing onto the jungle, the place was rat infested and lacked all comforts. To shower, the elders stood under an old, wooden ice-cream tub with holes punched in the bottom to dispense their water—the rain.

The elders, who were called on to bless the sick, conduct meetings, and perform baptisms and special services, set out one day for a thirty-five-mile trek to the north end of the Kona territory to perform a marriage. Having had no breakfast, they nibbled on wild berries as they made their way toward the ranch. They hitched a ride for a five-mile stretch.

Originally they had hoped to stay with the branch president and his wife, but they received word that the wife had just delivered a new baby. They felt their arrival would be an imposition, so they had decided to stay with a Hawaiian sister whose meager resources forced her to live on sour poi and cold rice. The missionaries were not excited about the prospects.

Still, they trudged on. As they started across a massive lava-flow desert, a storm loomed in the distance. They watched as it moved closer and closer. The lava flow terrain provided no shelter, and they were forced to tramp through the rain, soaked to the skin. To keep up their spirits, they mused about their favorite foods, what they would eat right now if they could choose the perfect meal. The two missionaries, short Arthur and his gangly companion towering above him, settled on thick slices of bacon with fresh eggs fried in the grease.

When the storm hit, the branch president had gone out in his truck looking for the elders. He eventually found them, cold and weary, and took them to his home. While they were showering and changing into borrowed dry clothes, he fixed them dinner. Not knowing of their tastes but anticipating healthy appetites, he quickly slaughtered a wild boar he had killed in the mountains that day and fried the pork with fresh eggs. It was a testimony to Arthur that "the Lord looks after his servants if they will do their part."

Released from his mission in June 1937, Arthur was met at the boat in San Francisco by his parents and his sweetheart, Maurine McClellan. The two were married May 6, 1938, in the Salt Lake Temple. Then Arthur went to work at a Salt Lake hotel for ten dollars a week writing letters for hotel guests. He took dictation for messages to business associates, friends, or families and prepared final letters for the guests to mail. Then he changed jobs and went to work for the Salt Lake Tribune information desk for eighteen dollars a week. His job was to answer questions for those who phoned the desk and to give out sports scores.

With some time for dreaming, Arthur remembered President Heber J. Grant's visit to the Hawaiian mission and the activity of his able secretary, Joseph Anderson. Arthur determined to pursue a post at the Church offices, and every Monday on his lunch hour he walked two blocks to the headquarters to apply for a job. His persistence paid off. After six months he was offered a position in the Finance Department at $100 a month. That same day, he also received an offer from the FBI to become a special agent at a salary of $150 a month. But, he says, "my heart was with the Church and its work." He was delighted with the prospects of his new employment.

The Haycocks blessed their first daughter, Marilyn, on Sunday, September 3, 1939, the day Britain declared war on Germany for its incursion into Poland. Arthur was required to register for the draft, but his age and family status exempted him from an immediate call to military service. By 1941 tensions in the world had escalated, and the day the Haycocks blessed their second daughter, Judy, on December 7, 1941, Japan bombed Pearl Harbor.

Since Arthur was registered for the draft, he was advised that he could not remain in an office but would have to go to work in some war-related activity, either the mines, the smelter, or the railroad. He chose the railroad, as had fellow Church employee Gordon B. Hinckley. Dressed in overalls, blue work shirt, gloves, and a red bandanna, with his feet protected by steel-toed boots, Arthur reported for work in the Rio Grande shops and helped repair steam engines for 68 cents an hour. No dictation was taken here. The work was gruelling and dangerous, particularly for Arthur, who weighed only 119 pounds. But he knew how to work and soon advanced to the machine shop, where the employees repaired parts for the big engines. When the stationmaster, Gordon Hinckley, was transferred to the Denver headquarters, Arthur was offered his job, complete with a blue suit, brass buttons, and conductor's cap. He was responsible for the supervision of the station twenty-four hours a day with the help of two assistants. By the time the war had ended in Europe and the focus had shifted to Japan in the summer of 1945, Arthur was allowed to return to Church employment when he was recruited by Richard L. Evans to serve as office manager of the Improvement Era in 1945. Though he had an obvious future at the railroad, his interest was still with the growing Church. Little did he know it was just the beginning of decades of service.
