Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter Two

Heber J. Grant

Heber J. Grant was called as president of the Church two years after Arthur was born. In 1938, when Arthur began his Church employment, President Grant had been steering the Church for twenty years, bringing it through the Great Depression, getting it out of debt, and starting the welfare program.

The office arrangement at 47 East South Temple when Arthur began work there in 1938 was far less formal than it is today. The Finance Department, where he worked, occupied a large room on the main floor that was divided only by desks and files. President Grant would come through the office every day and hold an informal meeting to discuss financial issues with the supervisors. He always shook hands with everyone he passed, spoke to staff members, and showed genuine interest in their experiences and daily lives.

Not long after Arthur started in the Church offices, President Grant stopped at his desk on the way to a meeting with his counselors. Over six feet tall, he towered over Arthur's five-foot-six frame. A great patron of the arts in Utah, he asked Arthur if he would like to choose a painting for his home from his private collection. President Grant invited Arthur to follow him up to his private office on the fourth floor. All the office walls were covered with original oil paintings and watercolors by such artists as John Hafen, Joseph A. F. Everett, and James T. Harwood—artists whose names were becoming known for exceptional skill and mastery. Arthur recalls, "It was a gallery like no other in town." President Grant urged the newly married clerk to take his pick. Arthur's mind quickly flashed to his modest two-room apartment with little furniture and what a surprise was in store for his wife. After studying each picture, he picked out a watercolor by Everett titled "Autumn Grandeur," which depicted the east mountains of the Salt Lake Valley in the fall. President Grant, in his elegant handwriting, autographed the back of the painting for his finance clerk and dated the gift, May 15, 1942. The picture has hung in the Haycocks' living room for fifty years.

President Grant was known for his generosity. To help young artists finance their early careers, he had his daughters take painting lessons from them. He also purchased many of their works, which hung in his office until he gave them to friends and associates. The president often gave away books. Arthur recalls that missionaries, children, visitors from out of town, and others who met with President Grant invariably left the Church office building with a new book in their hands. The gift's value was enhanced by the signature of President Grant on the inside. His distinctive penmanship was a result of practice and dedication. Arthur learned to value these traits as he saw how President Grant had used them so effectively in his own life. "What I learned from the presidents," says Arthur, "is that this life is a testing ground to make each of us strong and effective. Their example was always the right example." President Grant gave his time as well as his means. For years he took groups of widows of General Authorities for rides up the canyon to see spring flowers or autumn leaves.

President Grant often told congregations of his efforts to achieve. He gave missionaries cards with quotations and poems that suggested effort, drive, determination in reaching their goals. He often told congregations of his own efforts to focus and achieve. When he was young he wanted to become a great baseball pitcher. He hung a peach basket on the barn door and threw the ball into that target day after day until he was successful ninety-eight out of one hundred times. He became the pitcher for the high-school baseball team and won the state championship. While serving as president of the Church, he decided to take voice lessons. When he visited the Hawaiian Islands in 1935, one of the Saints reported that when President Grant left by boat for the big island of Hawaii, the people gathered at the dock and sang "Come, Come Ye Saints." Even though his boat was fast leaving the port, President Grant sang with them as loud as he could until those gathered could no longer see him.

Definite in his opinions, President Grant would take a position and stick to it. Arthur remembers being in the Presidency's office when President Grant, President Clark, and President McKay were discussing calling someone to a particular position. President Grant said bluntly, "I don't know about that fellow." The other two were much in favor of him. President Grant continued, "No, he's stubborn; he's so stubborn that if he drowned in the Ogden River, he'd float upstream. We just have to get someone else."

President Grant was a man of decision. His resolute nature helped him guide the Church through the Great Depression. When financial institutions were collapsing across the country, he helped the Church keep its financial enterprises together. When banks were failing in 1929, the people lined up a block away from a Church-owned bank to get their money. The bank met each request. Most of the people redeposited their funds once they realized that the accounts were covered.

For Arthur, employment at the Church headquarters was all he had imagined. He walked to work from his home on First North, just a few blocks from the offices, and often ran into President McKay on the way. "I idolized him and the others," says Arthur. "I watched how hard they worked and how sincere they were. I had never seen such dedication. These were giants in aging bodies, men like Rudger Clawson, James E. Talmage, Melvin J. Ballard, Reed Smoot, John A. Widtsoe, and Charles A. Callis."

At first President Clark seemed remote. But as Arthur worked with him, he recognized this former State Department official and U.S. Ambassador to Mexico as a highly sensitive manager. He often said to Arthur, "I have had a hundred secretaries all over the world, and you are the finest."

During President Grant's tenure, only two secretaries, Pearl Johnson and Jeannette Hanks, worked for the Brethren, doing all the correspondence for the Council of the Twelve. Arthur observed that each of the Church leaders had a specific style of operation. For example, Elder Talmage became a little frustrated with the office staff one day when they could not find a certain letter that had been filed. He was so particular that he dictated every comma, colon, and semicolon. The secretaries finally suggested they make him another copy, which brought the reply, "I don't want another copy. I want that copy. I'm not so concerned about that being lost but that anything could be lost in our offices." They finally found the missing document—in the wastebasket.

The Church authorities were practical men. While their work was focused on the gospel, they understood day-to-day living in very pragmatic terms. When Arthur was faced with having to leave Church employment and take a job related to the war effort, he sought advice about what job to take. Elder Harold B. Lee counseled him, "I've found in this world, if you don't look out for yourself, no one else will."

Near the end of his life, President Grant's health began to fail following a slight stroke he suffered while he was in California at a Church conference. Weeks later Arthur was walking through the Onyx Room on the first floor of the Church Office Building when he saw President Grant sitting on the couch, squeezing a rubber ball in his right hand as part of his therapy to regain its full use. When Arthur went to shake his hand, President Grant extended his left hand. Arthur recalls, "There were tears in his eyes as he said, 'Well, they say I haven't had a stroke. But if I haven't, I surely did have its first cousin.' " That was the last time the two talked. President Grant died May 14, 1945.
