Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter Three

George Albert Smith

In 1947, two years after George Albert Smith began serving as president of the Church, the Church celebrated its centennial year. The commemoration of the arrival of the pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley included the dedication of the This Is the Place Monument and numerous other significant sites, the issuance of a centennial stamp, the traditional parade on July 24, a spiritual pageant ("The Message of the Ages") presented in the Tabernacle, a Scout jamboree at East High School, a recreation of the pioneer trek by the Sons of the Utah Pioneers, an exposition at the fairgrounds, and the presentation of a musical, Promised Valley. More than 185,000 people visited Temple Square during July of 1947. It was a season of grand events and tributes.

Joseph Anderson had served as secretary to both the president of the Church and the First Presidency since 1922, but the growing demands of the job necessitated getting additional help. Arthur had been working on the staff of the Improvement Era, but he was "loaned" to President Smith, ostensibly to help with the centennial activities. However, working in the president's office, Arthur soon realized he was being "checked out" for a permanent position. After two weeks, the magazine was notified to get someone else; Arthur had a new job.

To tell the story of the Latter-day Saints settling Zion, President Smith participated in a radio broadcast on the NBC network on the topic "The Rise of the New West," saying, "Unlike most other westward-bound emigrants of the time, these pioneers came not for wealth, but to create homes where they could worship God unmolested. . . . Bound by recognized ties of brotherhood and guided by Christian ideals, which were part of their very fiber, they knew how to live and work together without suppressing individualism." (Church News, July 26, 1947, pp. 1, 10.)

President Smith held a great reverence for his heritage. A member of the Mayflower Society, the Sons of the American Revolution, and the Sons of the Utah Pioneers, he had spearheaded the building of This Is the Place Monument at the mouth of Emigration Canyon to commemorate the trek of the Mormon pioneers. "Dedicating that statue was one of the pinnacles of his personal life," says Arthur.

In the dedicatory prayer, President Smith said, "While we dedicate this monument of stone, and while it has been embellished by the figures of thy children, we realize that these are all now at peace with one another. How can we, Heavenly Father, as we live in the world and enjoy the influence of thy Spirit, fail to be at peace with one another? Grant that we may remember the advice and counsel of thy Son when he was upon the earth, that we should love our neighbor as ourselves." (Improvement Era, September 1947, p. 571.)

World War II had recently ended, lights had started coming on all over the world, and the need for a great deal of healing was apparent during this period. "It was George Albert Smith's finest hour," Arthur says. "Here was a man who was as Christ-like as anyone who ever lived. Kind and gentle, he was a friend to everyone."

Named for his grandfather, George A. Smith, counselor to Brigham Young and cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith, President George Albert Smith had been significantly influenced by his family's contributions to the Church. "I know you appreciate the deep reverence I have in my soul for my own forebears," he would say as he took visitors to the window of his office in the northeast corner of Church headquarters and point out Ensign Peak. "Look at that peak with its clumps of foliage and bare land," he would say. "That's how the valley looked when my grandfather came here. There's no place in the world where you're more welcome than you are here."

As secretary to the president, Arthur did much more than office work. A daily companion to President George Albert Smith, he drove him home at night and anywhere he needed to go during the day. In those days there was no underground walkway from the Church Administration Building to Temple Square. Usually Arthur drove the president, and often his counselors, to the temple or the Tabernacle and would have the car waiting to take them back to their offices.

To get to Temple Square from the Church offices, Arthur had to drive a circuitous route. A narrow, one-way road cut through the Church offices block, but it ran east, away from Temple Square. Arthur would pick up his passengers behind the Church Administration Building and drive them almost around the block, back to the north entrance to Temple Square. "It was a rather roundabout route, but nevertheless the legal way to go," Arthur says.

One cold winter morning, with President Smith in the front seat and Presidents David O. McKay and J. Reuben Clark in the back, President Smith instructed Arthur to take a more direct route and go west instead of east. The guard at the entrance to the private road came running out of his station, blowing his whistle and waving his arms. Arthur ignored him. A few minutes later when Arthur came back with his empty car, the guard was waiting for him. "Didn't you hear my whistle?" he yelled. "Why didn't you stop? Don't you know you were going the wrong way on a one-way street?"

Arthur explained that the Presidency was late for their temple meeting. When that didn't seem to smooth over the infraction, he looked at the guard and said, "Well, the president of the Church told me to go that way and so I did. And if he tells me to drive this car up the steps of the Church Administration Building, that's where it's going."

Arthur was totally loyal. "I had to see and not see, hear and not hear," he explains. "I had to be aware of everything that was happening so I could help the president in any way necessary. But I was keenly aware I was just there to help."

Arthur watched President George Albert Smith's constant service to the people. It was clear that he made friends with everybody, and they weren't just casual acquaintances. His "hope to see you again," was no superficial parting remark; he meant it. His sincerity always came through whether he was writing to a head of state or to his grandchildren. When he met people or made new friends, he would have Arthur add their names and addresses to his list of correspondents and would sometimes keep in touch with them the rest of his life. He met the Queen of Tonga on a tour in 1938, and the two corresponded until she died. When her son became the king, President Smith wrote to him. That was his pattern. He traveled more than a million miles around the world in the interest of the gospel of Jesus Christ. "Wherever I have gone," he wrote in 1950, "I have found noble men and women." (Improvement Era, April 1950, p. 263.)

A sunstroke President Smith suffered while doing survey work at the University of Utah in 1918 had left him with only one "good" eye. Arthur read him his mail and took dictation for his letters. "In much of his correspondence, I saw him lift burdens from the shoulders of others and put them on his own," Arthur says. "If there ever was a man who consciously spread the balm of Gilead, it was George Albert Smith."

The two were going through the mail one day when Arthur burst out laughing. President Smith sat patiently and waited for him to quiet down. "What in the world was in that letter?" he asked.

Arthur told him, "There's a good soul who wants to know what your feeling is on cocoa and cremation. I can't think of two less related subjects." President Smith shot back, "Write and tell him they're both hot."

Arthur learned quickly that President Smith rarely got angry, "but," Arthur says, "he couldn't abide a man whose wife had put him through school only to be replaced by a girl at the office whose hair was always in place." This happened with a family that was very close to him, and though he made a special trip to Nevada to dissuade the man from leaving his family, he came back unsuccessful. "I never heard him curse," says Arthur, "but if he was going to really take after someone (like this fellow), he'd call him a 'first- class scrub.' That was the worst thing he would say about anybody."

President Smith enjoyed having someone to talk to, and Arthur had a good listening ear. In particular, President Smith liked to talk about growing up in Salt Lake City just blocks from Temple Square.

In his childhood, everyone in town had a little garden behind the house and a shed with a cow, and in the front there was a dirt sidewalk with an irrigation ditch by its side. All the neighbors took turns irrigating, starting at three o'clock in the morning. President Smith said the water in that ditch was just about the best water on earth. He would lean down on his hands and knees and take big, long drinks. One Sabbath he was a little late for Sunday School. He was drinking from the ditch when he noticed a shiny object on the bank in the grass. Curious, he reached down and picked it up. It was an empty 30-30 cartridge shell. Not sure what to do with it, he stuffed the shell into his pocket and hurried off to church. The children sat on the benches with their teachers. In that era the prayers were long; so were the talks and the songs. Ten-year-old George Albert was pretty restless by the time they got to the sacrament. That's when he remembered the shell in his pocket and wondered what he could do with it, thinking maybe he could trade it for some marbles. The boy next to him suggested that he use it for a whistle, which he promptly did. Puffing up his cheeks, he blew as hard as he could, and he was eminently successful. Chuckling, President Smith told Arthur, "It's been seventy years since that happened, and the teacher hasn't given back that cartridge shell yet."

Sometimes President Smith described feeling inadequate when at age thirty-three he was called to the Council of the Twelve Apostles. It was when he overheard two drunks discussing his appointment that he finally came to terms with the call. Quipped one, "I think it's more relation than revelation." The other responded, "Have you ever considered that the Lord doesn't care what you or anybody else thinks?"

But President Smith struggled with more than just the magnitude of his call. For many years he thought that his poor health hampered his ability to fulfill his calling—that the Lord had called him to work, not to be ill. He went to St. George and lived in a tent for a summer, hoping the desert climate would restore his strength. Says Arthur, "President Smith felt if he couldn't be well and do the Lord's work, he wanted the Lord to get someone else who could."

While lying on his sickbed in St. George, he dreamed he got out of a boat on the shore of a beautiful lake and began walking along a path that led to a grove of trees. His grandfather, George A. Smith, emerged from the woods and recognized his grandson, and the two hurried to each other and embraced. His grandfather weighed more than 300 pounds; George Albert only 155. His venerable grandfather said, "I've come to see what you've done with my name." At that moment, President Smith saw his whole life pass before him, and he said, "Grandfather, I have done nothing with your name of which you need be ashamed." President Smith often described the experience as a major turning point in his life. He put his health concerns aside and went back to work.

In 1948 he told those gathered at general conference, "After having traveled approximately a million miles in the world in the interest of the gospel of Jesus Christ, one of the frailest of my mother's eleven children, I testify that the Lord has preserved my life, and I have had joy beyond expression, and I have enjoyed the results of loving my neighbors as myself and all this brings happiness."

Over the years President Smith developed a dramatic sense of purpose and integrity. If President Smith said something, that's what he meant. "You could trust him completely," says Arthur. "You could expect that his actions were in concert with the gospel." President Smith talked about such dedication with others when he said, "You put me in jail and I would always look for an opportunity to escape. But if you put me in a room with doors and windows, unbarred and unguarded, and you draw a line and ask for my promise that I will never try to escape, I'll never step across that line."

President Smith was born and reared in the LDS Seventeenth Ward, one of the original nineteen wards in the valley. His home was located on West Temple Street, just down the block from the home of Church President Wilford Woodruff. The Smith and Woodruff families were close, and George Albert was particularly interested in the Woodruffs' granddaughter Lucy. Arthur recalls hearing President Smith reminisce about those years in his youth when Lucy would walk by his house on the way to her aunt's house to get potato water to make yeast. "He often went out and chased her," says Arthur. In school he sat behind her and dipped her pigtails in the inkwell because he liked her and wanted to get her attention.

One day George Albert and Lucy were sitting on the porch swing watching a crowd outside a rooming house for traveling salesmen, the current site of the Inn on Temple Square. One of the guests had made a small hot-air balloon out of a tin can, a handkerchief, and a candle. The invention was floating toward Temple Square when George Albert exclaimed, "Lucy, that is going to hit the roof of the Tabernacle." Sure enough, it did. The candle tipped over, and the Tabernacle's wooden shingles caught fire. George Albert rushed to the rooming house to call the fire department, and the fire fighters came charging up with their horses snorting. Arriving at the west entrance of Temple Square, they found the wooden gates locked. The fire chief instructed his men and the boys who had gathered around to run as fast as they could, leap, and plant their feet high on the gate. Their force knocked it down. The fire engine pulled up to the Tabernacle, and the fire fighters extinguished the flames before the roof was badly damaged.

George Albert used to take Lucy for rides in his father's buggy. Other suitors were also pursuing her, including one who used his father's brand new Studebaker buggy with leather interior and red wheels to put on quite a campaign. In the midst of it all, George Albert got his mission call to the Southern States, where J. Golden Kimball was serving as president. Going over to see Lucy and bid her farewell, George Albert realized she'd probably be married to someone else before his return. "I just wanted to say good-bye," he told her. Her reply surprised him: "George Albert Smith, if you think you're going to the Southern States without me, you're wrong. Let's get married and go together." They did.

President Smith and Arthur attended the 100th anniversary celebration of the Seventeenth Ward, where President Smith had grown up. The Haycocks had also lived in the ward when they were first married. Arthur describes the wonderful reunion: "Here was this local boy who was now serving as president of the Church. The people were all generous with their handshakes and warm wishes. At the end of the evening's commemoration, I slipped out of the chapel to get his overcoat. When I returned, I saw him leaning over, listening to a tiny girl about five years old. She was whispering, he was smiling, and her parents were trying to hurry her along. After she left, I helped him on with his coat, and we left with no further conversation."

The next morning as Arthur was reading President Smith his mail, the prophet leaned back in his chair and said how wonderful it was to go back to the ward of his youth and see so many of his friends. Then he looked at his secretary and asked, "Did you see that little girl and hear what she said when she tugged on my coat? She wanted to tell me something, so I leaned down and she whispered in my ear, 'President Smith, I love you.' Of all the wonderful things said and the friends I saw, that was the sweetest thing that happened."

Looking back on that discussion, Arthur says, "That little girl felt the spirit of the moment, and she sensed that here was her friend and she just had to express it. The incident reminded me of the song in Primary that no doubt this little girl knew: 'I think when I read that sweet story of old, when Jesus was here among men, how he called little children like lambs to his fold. I should like to have been with him then.' "

In his counsel to the Saints, President Smith was precise. To a crowd of BYU students on the Provo campus in October 1948 he said, "One of our difficulties in this world today is that too many of our Father's children do not believe in God. They have an idea that they can do just as they please and they throw their lives away. . . . The [pathway] of righteousness is the highway of happiness." (Church News, October 20, 1948, p. 2-c.)

That Arthur had skills in shorthand initially opened the door for his longtime secretarial position. At a conference in Denver with President Smith, he became intrigued with a new electronic recording device developed for use in court reporting. It used two wax cylinders; when the one cylinder got near the end, the other would automatically start recording so that there was a two-minute overlap, ensuring that none of the proceedings were lost. Arthur was used to a less sophisticated system. Delighted with the opportunity to try the new machine, Arthur put his dictation book into his pocket and watched, entranced, as the new invention did his work. When the two were in the car heading for the train station, President Smith turned to Arthur and said, "Well, did I speak too fast for you tonight?"

Arthur replied, "No, President, I got along just fine. As a matter of fact I quit altogether. The stake president had an incredible new machine to take down your talk, so there was no need for me to fuss with taking down the service in shorthand."

President Smith nodded and said, "I noticed that. I got to thinking what would have happened if the electricity had gone off, or if they had dropped the wax cylinder, or if it was cracked or just didn't work. You know, Arthur, I have always figured it's better to have the notes and not need them than to need them and not have them."

After this gentle reminder of Arthur's responsibility, he took everything down in shorthand, no matter how many recording machines were in operation.

Arthur was valuable not only for his dictation; he also knew his way around the railroad, from timetables to private cars. He and President Smith logged thousands of miles together and in the process met with bankers and business executives, church and community leaders.

President Heber J. Grant had increased the Church's visibility with his participation on boards of directors, talks given at various events, and association with many great financiers. President George Albert Smith continued the involvement. At the invitation of railroad officials, he always traveled in a private rail car, often the personal car of the president of the railroad. He enjoyed chatting with the stewards on the rail lines and had a funny habit of calling all of them "Bill," whether that was their name or not.

The Brethren usually traveled by train if their assignments took them long distances. In those years right after the war, the General Authorities rarely used the airlines, and they sometimes took their cars. But President Smith loved to fly. During the Depression he had flown in an open-cockpit plane, sitting on a mailbag, on one of the first flights to Las Vegas and then on to Los Angeles. Whenever he had assignments that gave him the chance, he'd take the plane.

President Smith served on the board of Western Airlines. While Arthur usually traveled with him, on one occasion President Smith flew to California alone. The next morning after he returned, while reviewing with Arthur the appointments for the day, President Smith sat back in his chair and closed his eyes. "I had an interesting experience flying home last night," he said. "It was foggy in Los Angeles when we took off. I thought we'd get above it, but we didn't and I was concerned. I knew we had some high mountains to get over; I just didn't know if we could.

"Being an officer of the company, I went up to the front to talk to the pilot, and I asked him, 'How do you know where you are going? How high are we? You have all these instruments, but how do you know you are on the right direction for Salt Lake?'

"The pilot told me that he wore his earphones to receive a signal that he would follow. He said that if he got off course to the right, he would hear dot-dot-dot. If he got off course to the left, he would hear dash-dash-dash. If he heard a steady signal, he knew he was right on course."

President Smith asked the pilot, "Are you sure your altimeter is all right?"

The pilot nodded, "Yes."

In a few minutes, the pilot set the plane down without a bump at the Salt Lake City airport.

Then President Smith told Arthur, "I've been thinking about that experience. I've likened that plane to the Church. The passengers are the members, and the pilot is the president. That pilot had earphones on, and he could hear the signals, but I couldn't hear anything. I could have gotten a parachute and jumped out over Nevada and landed on a cactus in the desert, but I decided to stay with the plane. I've concluded that if the people of the Church, the passengers, will stay with the plane and have confidence in the pilot, the prophet, who has on the earphones, who gets the messages and knows where they come from, they'll land safely as well." President Smith summed up the experience: "The prophet of the Church hears the message, and he knows the source."

To Arthur, such discussions were never commonplace: "Here he was, just thinking out loud with his secretary. It was almost a personal sermon to me. Imagine what a great blessing it was for me to hear him compare one of his real-life experiences to his personal charge to lead the Church and its members."

Arthur's position and its demands were a way of life for the whole Haycock family. Whenever the president needed to go someplace, Arthur was there to take him. One summer morning, the Haycocks had their car packed for a vacation to Yellowstone National Park when the phone rang. The children begged their father not to answer, but he did. President Smith needed to go somewhere, and being at his side was Arthur's job. The car was unpacked, and the trip was postponed.

Children always captured the attention of President Smith. A widower for thirteen years, he almost adopted Arthur's daughters as his own, taking them to Saltair to ride the merry-go-round, to festivities and picnics. He invited the Haycock family to come to his house one afternoon and gave the girls a basket containing a beautiful white pedigreed Siamese kitten. They called it "Ming Toy." Not long after, Arthur received a hysterical call at the office. "Daddy, come home quick! Ming has bitten her tail and we can't catch her." Then came the second call, "We caught her." But Ming had left a trail. With her tail bleeding, she had scrambled around the furniture and brushed the walls with her tail. Everything she had touched looked as if it had been brushed with red paint.

President Smith kept a stack of children's books in his desk and various denominations of new silver coins in his pocket. Sometimes, if he ran out of new coins, he'd have Arthur use some mercury to polish some old ones. Every youngster who came to see him got a shiny piece of silver and a book. At Christmas, President Smith and Arthur visited the children at Primary Children's Hospital and presented each of them with a coin, a book, and, if they wanted one, a blessing.

In the cold winter season, President Smith usually spent time in Southern California, and Arthur went with him. They stayed at a residence in Laguna Beach. One time Arthur left President Smith to rush home to check on his family. His wife, Maurine, had had a miscarriage and was flat in bed. Arthur was marooned in Milford, Utah, in a snowstorm. Finally he reached home, only to be called the next morning by President Smith with a plea to return quickly. He left that morning. Says Maurine, "They were difficult years, but we knew he was doing what the Lord intended for him, and he had our support."

When the Haycocks bought a new home in a subdivision developed for young families, President Smith insisted on visiting to "check things out." This was one of many instances when Arthur saw firsthand the practical interest of the Church leaders in the daily needs and circumstances of the Saints. President J. Reuben Clark came too, only to be dismayed that the home had no fireplace. "What are you going to do if the heat goes out?" President Clark queried. "How will you heat your home or cook your food if there's an electrical outage?"

President Smith's attention to other people was universal. He was a friend to everybody. Arthur recalls: "When I took President Smith home after work, he'd want to pick up those standing on street corners waiting for the bus. Sometimes I found myself miles from my home or his as I was dropping off the extra passengers."

One day President Smith and Arthur were looking out the window of the Smith home on Salt Lake City's east side when an old woman came by pulling a load of sticks. The prophet said to Arthur, "Look at that woman. Won't you get my car and take her home?" Arthur responded that he didn't know where she lived, she might not want to go home, she might not want to ride with him. But the president was firm: "You go and take her home. Remember, Arthur, she's somebody's mother."

President Smith suggested that Arthur take his car because he had seen Arthur's car in action. A 1931 Pontiac with a leaky vinyl roof and four well-worn tires, it was less than dependable. Arthur would park the car about a block away from the president's home and then walk to the house so that the president wouldn't see it. One evening, faced with a flat tire and no spare in the trunk, he drove home on the rim rather than disturb the president. Arthur's car would start on its own—sometimes. Other times it had to be cranked. One night, however, Arthur was in a hurry and had parked near the president's house. After they had finished their business for the night, President Smith insisted on walking him to the car.

"Oh, you don't need to," said Arthur, but President Smith was determined. Arthur prayed that the car would start, and it did. Then it promptly died. He got out and had to crank it. Since the car did not have a gas throttle, he had to lift up the hood, put a stick between the carburetor and the foot feed, and then run around and pump the gaspeddle, which would force the stick to fall out.

President Smith watched and paced, and Arthur got redder and redder. After two or three false starts, the engine finally caught hold. President Smith exclaimed, "I declare, I never saw a car started like that before!" "I declare" was one of his favorite phrases.

The president had a rubber mat under his office chair that would inch out on the nap of the carpet and up the wall with every movement. He'd say, "Arthur, what's the matter with this chair?" Arthur would give him a brief explanation about the nap of the rug and how every time he moved his chair the mat would slide and start creeping up the side of the wall. Every two or three days Arthur would have to pull the mat back into place, and President Smith would say, "Arthur, what's the matter with that thing?" Arthur would explain again about the nap and the movement of the chair, but that wasn't what President Smith wanted to hear. He'd just banter, "I declare, I declare, if it keeps this up we won't need that venetian blind."

Though a fastidious dresser, President Smith was not one for show. Once when he and Arthur passed a particularly well-dressed gentleman on the street, Arthur asked, "President, did you ever think of putting a hankie in your pocket like that?" He answered, "Yes, I thought about it once."

President Smith relied on his counselors and valued their expertise. Whenever he received a letter or discourse of substance, he would say, "I wonder what Reuben thinks of this?" and he'd be up on his feet and heading to President Clark's office. Arthur would race to open the door before the president reached it. President Clark, hunched over his work, would look up, strike his hand on his desk, and exclaim, "President Smith, you don't come to me, I come to you. You are the president and I am the counselor. When you want me, you call me." The reminder was soon forgotten when President Smith had another question and would say, "I wonder what Reuben thinks of this?" Arthur would leap for the door.

The president's style was simple. For breakfast he always ate steamed wheat. He liked it with warm cream and a dish of prunes. Arthur usually had Shredded Wheat or Wheaties. The president would say to Arthur, "You might as well cut the end off the broom or gather the shavings off the carpenter's floor as eat that. Why don't you have some of mine?" Arthur did, once, and much to his chagrin, the more he chewed, the bigger the wheat grew until he nearly choked. Everywhere the two went, they took a jar of wheat. The size of the jar depended on how long they were going to be gone. If they were out to dinner with others, Arthur would tell the waiter, "We're having roast beef, and he's having boiled wheat."

For lunch President Smith would have a soft-boiled egg, milk, homemade bread, and bottled fruit. At night he'd have a bowl of bread and milk with white seedless grapes. For a real treat he loved a chocolate shake or malt with a raw egg mixed into it. Arthur would have his shake straight—without the egg.

President Smith had a fine wit and a great sense of humor. In August 1950 he sailed to Hawaii for the celebration of the centennial of the Hawaiian mission. In the party were his daughters Emily and Edith, Elder and Sister Henry D. Moyle, and Arthur and Maurine.

They sat at the captain's table. While the others dined on steak and eggs for breakfast, pork chops for lunch, and prime rib for dinner, President Smith ate his regular fare of steamed wheat, boiled eggs, bread, and milk. Looking over the dinner menu one evening, he saw "Roast Capon in Burgundy" and thought he'd try it, since he'd grown fond of chicken dishes while serving on his mission in the Southern States. Emily nudged him, saying, "Papa, you don't want that; it's been cooked in burgundy." President Smith replied, "I don't care if it's been cooked in Australia. I still want it."

When the group arrived in Hawaii, word came that George F. Richards, president of the Quorum of the Twelve, had died. Arthur expected President Smith to turn around and go home, but after a lengthy telephone call with President Clark and President McKay, he determined to complete his conference assignment in the Islands and have his counselors carry out the funeral arrangements at home. To honor Elder Richards, President Smith dedicated the sessions in Hawaii to him. They also received word that Frank Evans, the finance secretary to the First Presidency, had passed away.

After being away a month, President Smith and Arthur were barely off the train when President Smith said, "I want to go call on those two widows." Their first stop was to see Sister Evans at the Eagle Gate apartments, where the president extended his sympathy and love. Having worked many years with Frank Evans, President Smith had great respect for his service to the Lord. Arthur recalls, "Since the couple had no children, he knew she would be lonely, and he told her she would be in his prayers."

The Richards's apartment was on the eighth floor of the Belvedere apartments, less than a block away. Betsy Hollings Richards had met President Richards when he was presiding over the Salt Lake Temple and she was working as a typist in the temple annex. After expressing his love for her and her husband, President Smith asked what he could do to help. She explained that before she married President Richards, she had been working in the index bureau of the temple. "If you could help me get that job back," she said, "I could make it." President Smith promised to do what he could, and the next day he secured her a job in the temple.

"This was President Smith doing what he liked to do most, comforting those in need and helping others," says Arthur. "His feelings for those suffering were real. Instead of rushing to the office to check his mail or going home to rest after the strenuous trip, he was concerned about those sisters who were alone, and he went to be with them."

It wasn't just Church officials that caught his attention. President Smith regularly visited the County Old Folks Home to shake hands with the residents. When ready to leave, he'd often comment to Arthur as he looked at the lonely people, "Isn't it strange that one mother can take care of ten children but ten children can't take care of one mother?"

President Smith also participated at the annual Old Folks Day at Salt Lake City's Liberty Park. "He was right at home with them," says Arthur. "He was a lot like Jesus, always ministering to the downtrodden, the aged, the ill, or anyone who was in need."

With President Smith, people came first. After attending some meetings in Denver, he and Arthur were hurrying to catch an overnight train for Salt Lake City when. a woman caught Arthur's arm just as he was getting into the car to go to the station. She said she needed to talk to President Smith, and Arthur replied that the president was tired. She pleaded that she would just take a minute. President Smith, hearing her request, went right over to shake her hand. Standing beside her were three small children. She pulled a camera from her purse, and Arthur snapped a few photographs of the young family with President Smith. A few days later, a copy of one of the snapshots came in the mail. It showed President Smith patting one of the children on the head. With the photo was a note from the mother: "I am sending you this picture because it is a graphic illustration of the man we believe you are. The reason we treasure it so is because, as busy as you are, in spite of the fact you were being hurried into your car and then to the waiting train, you still took time to shake the hand of each child. You are a prophet of God with time for everyone."

President Smith was as interested in youth as he was in the elderly. While in England as an apostle, he had become acquainted with Lord Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scout movement. President Smith, George Q. Morris and Oscar A. Kirkham were responsible for bringing the Boy Scout program to the Church. President Smith was proud of that association and served on the National Executive Board of the Boy Scouts. He loved to dress in full Scout regalia and often attended official functions to honor young men advancing in the Scouting program.

President Smith almost always spoke extemporaneously. On October 1, 1948, he bore his testimony to the Saints: "I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ. And I am thankful to know that we are all brothers and sisters. Thankful that he gives us all opportunities to so adjust our lives here that when mortality is complete and our work is done that we will go to dwell in his presence and enjoy the companionship of those we love forever." (Church News, October 6, 1948, p. 3-c.)

He advised the other General Authorities to speak from the heart as well. Elder Matthew Cowley was known for his inspirational messages that often focused on the blessings he gave, how the blind were healed, how the Lord cared for his children. At one conference session, Elder Cowley read his talk. Right after the meeting, President Smith called him in and said, "Don't let me ever catch you doing that again! You and the Lord do this. Don't get up and read. You get up and let the Spirit guide you."

On May 28, 1950, President Smith, Arthur, and Elder John A. Widtsoe went to Whitingham, Vermont, to dedicate a statue of Brigham Young at the second Church president's birthplace. In that setting, President Smith said, "We pray that thy Spirit may remain here that those who come to read the inscription on the monument may realize that thou art the Father of us all and that he whom we are gathered to honor was one of thy choice sons who was great enough to assume his responsibilities and carry a tremendous load during his long lifetime." (Improvement Era, September 1950, p. 694.)

He also dedicated the statue of Brigham Young that stands in the United States Capitol rotunda. The local Utah committee, appointed by the governor, had originally suggested that President Smith write out and read his speech and his dedicatory prayer. They told Arthur, "President Smith tends to go on and on, and we don't want Utah to be embarrassed." Arthur, angry, said he would present the request to the president. Before Arthur had finished repeating the request, President Smith said to tell them to get somebody else. "He knew, and I knew, and they soon knew no one else could dedicate the statue of Utah's premier pioneer and second president of the Church but the current president of the Church," Arthur explains. When Arthur reported President Smith's response, the committee backed off in a hurry. According to Arthur, "President Smith gave the most magnificent talk you have ever heard in your life. He didn't ramble; the Lord used him. He knew it and I knew it."

In his prayer at the ceremonies in Washington, D.C., on June 1, 1950, President Smith paid tribute to a nation founded on true principles: "We pray that this statue, representing as it does a great people and great principles, may be the means of encouraging others to think of thee and honor thee, our Father." (Ibid.)

The vice-president of the United States, Alben Barkley, and many other dignitaries attended the ceremony, and the United States Marine Band provided the music. President Smith and Arthur had visited with President Harry Truman earlier that day. President Truman had opened his desk drawer in the Oval Office and said, "Look, President Smith, I've got my Book of Mormon right here." Arthur wasn't sure whether that book of scripture was always so handy. He thought perhaps President Truman had a secretary who understood how to make visitors feel welcome.

Shortly after the end of World War II, President Smith spoke to those attending a large funeral in a little town near Tremonton, Utah, to pay tribute to the four Borgstrom brothers who had been killed within six months of each other while serving in different branches of the service. The family, military brass, state officials, and reporters from the national press, including Life magazine, filled the chapel. Tall, rugged General Mark Clark, commander of Ninth Army, based in San Francisco, presided. A separate honor guard accompanied each casket. "I thought they would never stop coming," says Arthur. "President Smith gave the most magnificent talk on the Church. He gave the parents comfort, and he had all those hardened army officers in tears."

President Smith spoke at many funerals. His message usually included this thought: "I mourn with you but also I congratulate you that you have had the companionship of this wonderful person all these years, and that it will continue through the eternities."

President Smith had a favorite phrase, "We are all our Father's children," which appears on his gravestone. He took a particular interest in the Lamanites and in the descendants of the Prophet Joseph Smith who were members of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. There was a great love between him and Israel Smith, president of the Reorganized Church. Whenever George Albert Smith went East, he stopped in Independence, Missouri, to see his distant relative. When George Albert died in April 1951, Israel attended the funeral in the Tabernacle.

On Monday, April 9, 1951, each of the quorums stood to sustain the new president of the Church. Arthur was seated between George Albert Smith, Jr., and cousin Israel. All three stood and voted for David O. McKay as the new president of the LDS Church. On the hotel elevator after the funeral, Israel turned to Arthur and said, "You know, I didn't deserve many of the kind things that were done for me by my cousin George A."

Many were quick to suggest that George Albert Smith was just wasting his time trying to work with the Reorganized Church. But, says Arthur, his response was always the same: "I'm an old man. In the normal course of events it won't be long till I go to the other side and see my cousin Joseph, and I want to be able to say that while I was in mortality, I did everything in my power to bring his own flesh and blood into the Church for which he gave his life, and I don't want to have to hang my head.

"And when I see Father Lehi, I want to say I did everything I could to bring his posterity into the Church. I don't want to hang my head because I didn't do all I could for him as well."

When he became president of the Church, one of George Albert Smith's first actions was to set up a plan to assist the Lamanites. His interest in their behalf took him to Washington, D.C., and to numerous reservations in Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Mexico, Hawaii, and Tonga. He blessed those who were sick, taught the gospel, sat at celebrations with tribal leaders, and paid tribute to his Lamanite friends. He met with councils in Idaho and agencies in New York to better conditions, broaden opportunities, and draw more attention to these Saints.

President Smith asked one of the newest members of the Council of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball, to be responsible for the Church's programs for the Lamanites. And Elder Kimball did. He developed such a love for the Lamanites that the Sioux Indians inducted him into their tribe and gave him the Indian name "Washti ho wombli," meaning "Good Voice Eagle" or "One who flies through the air and carries a good message." President Kimball, when called as president of the Church, asked Elder Boyd K. Packer to watch over the Lamanite people.

President Smith's sensitivity to the needs of people was especially important after the devastation of World War II. He sent Elder Ezra Taft Benson to Europe to administer supplies stockpiled by the Saints in the United States during the war. When he went to Washington for help in shipping the materials, President Truman agreed to provide a ship but couldn't imagine what the members could send, since the country had been on such meager rations during the war. President Smith said, "We've been saving the wheat, while you've been plowing it under. We've got our granaries and our storehouses full, and we just need a ship to get all we've set aside to our destitute members in Europe."

Once while on assignment to a conference in Southern Utah, President Smith and Arthur stayed at the home of a rancher who raised sheep and turkeys. Very successful in his enterprises, the rancher had little time for observing the Sabbath Day or attending church.

Still, when the two visitors came to breakfast in the morning, all the chairs had been turned out from the table in preparation for family prayer. The rancher's six-year-old boy took one look at the arrangement of chairs and started to giggle. He was obviously trying to figure out how he was going to reach the table from such a strange angle, and he kept trying to get his father's attention. But his father hushed him up as President Smith proceeded to kneel and pray. After the prayer, the little boy piped up, "Daddy, what was that man saying to that chair?"

President Smith led the Church six years. When he became too ill to go to the office, Arthur brought the work to him at home and stayed many evenings to keep him company. When the two men watched on television the 1950 October conference in the president's living room on Yale Avenue, President Smith, who had been an apostle since 1903, commented, "This is the first time I have ever seen the faces of the speakers at conference. I have always either been sitting down in those seats with the speakers up behind me, or I was sitting in the seats by the podium and the speakers were standing in front of me."

November 2, 1950, was one of the last times President Smith was able to leave his home. He was very patriotic, and Arthur took him to vote.

On February 4, 1951, while in LDS Hospital, President Smith, in the presence of his daughter Edith, dictated to Arthur the thoughts on his mind: "Last evening and last night were the hardest for me. I felt like perhaps my time had come. If it has, it's all right; if not I'd appreciate the continuing faith and prayers of the people. Tomorrow is the regular meeting in the temple, and I would like the Brethren to lay the matter before the Lord.

"George, Arthur, and Albert know where all my account books are and where all my papers are indicating what should be done with my finances. I am away from home and weak, and I want my family to face their problems, and there will be no better opportunity for this. I'd like in the disposing of my funds for those that are most in need not to be overlooked. . . . Arthur, I don't want you to leave until I've had a blessing. I feel perfectly quiet and at peace. I am willing to stay or willing to go, whatever the Lord says. There is a lot in the world to do, and we should all do our part."

Two hours later when President Clark came, President Smith continued: "I've had a bad day, and I don't seem to be making any gain. I've been so weak for several days, but I am grateful to be as well as I am. Tomorrow is the meeting in the temple; I want you to take a message to the Brethren. I've lived a long time, and I'm in the midst of difficulty without question, and I seem to be unable to gain my strength. It's been suggested that I go to some other part of the country to try and get my strength, but the headquarters of the Lord's work is here. . . . I have two counselors in charge so that if the president is sick they can carry on. If the president is sick, things will go forward anyhow.

"President Clark, I want you to know you have been so considerate and kind. I have a real affection for you. I have no desire except to help you carry on the Lord's work. . . . I don't think my girls have any idea how near I've been to the other side. I haven't felt like my work was done at all. When my work is done, I want to go. One of my regrets is that I have been unable to organize a library and dispose of it. . . . As long as I have the money, I want to pay my hospital expenses; I don't want the Church to do it."

Addressing his secretary, President Smith said: "Arthur, I want you to know that I have absolute confidence in your faith and integrity and in you as a member of the Church. My family feels for you as I do. The Lord bless you, and many thanks for your kindnesses." In response to his request, President Clark and Arthur then gave the president a blessing.

President Smith's fine sense of humor stayed with him to the last. Just a day or two before he died, Arthur stepped up to his bed and said, "President, you look a little weary. Would you like to lie on your other side? I'll help you turn over." President Smith looked up with a twinkle in his eye and said, "Arthur, as long as I'm telling the truth, I don't care which side I lie on."

President Smith's son, George Albert, Jr., had planned to visit his father on his birthday on April 4. Leaving Boston, where he was a university professor, he stopped in Chicago for a meeting and was going to catch the train for Salt Lake City. Early the morning of the April 4, it was clear that the president was going to live hours, not days. Arthur quickly located Albert and asked him to go straight to the airport. Arthur had arranged for the president's son to fly home on a Portland-bound plane that would make an unscheduled landing in Salt Lake City. President Smith was still conscious when his son arrived home. "It made all the effort worthwhile," Arthur recalls. "It was touching for President Smith and his son to have that time together."

President Smith passed away that day, on his eighty-first birthday. His family and Arthur were at his bedside.
