Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter Four

David O. McKay

Tall, charismatic, and eloquent in quoting the scriptures, Browning, Burns, or Shakespeare, President David O. McKay was a vibrant and independent leader of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Scottish in ancestry and yet comfortable with world leaders from the South Pacific to Switzerland, he made a great impact on people wherever he went. He had been prepared to lead the Church since his call as an apostle in 1906 at age thirty-two, and he was sustained as president in 1951 at age seventy-seven. His influence reached around the world as the Church entered a new international era.

Arthur remembers those days in April 1951 after the death of President George Albert Smith as the First Presidency was reorganized. David O. McKay called as counselors Elder Stephen L Richards, his longtime associate in the Quorum of the Twelve, and President J. Reuben Clark, his fellow counselor under Presidents Grant and Smith. He appointed President Richards as first counselor and President Clark,who had formerly been first counselor in the Presidency, as second counselor. Thus, he followed apostolic seniority, for President Richards had been ordained an apostle in 1917, while President Clark had been ordained in 1934.

Arthur describes the positioning of these counselors as "a stunning moment for church leadership." When President Clark stood at the solemn assembly to address the Saints, he explained, "In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one takes the place to which one is duly called, which place one neither seeks nor declines. I earnestly pray that I may be the beneficiary of your prayers, and that I may be able to do the things which I am supposed to do with an eye single to the glory of our Heavenly Father."

For Arthur, that declaration held great personal significance as well, for he was no longer secretary to the prophet and president of the Church. Instead, President McKay asked him to assist Joseph Anderson, who was secretary to the First Presidency. While President McKay began to lead the burgeoning Church organization with the help of his longtime secretary Clare Middlemiss, Arthur focused on transcribing Brother Anderson's dictation from wax cylinders. For Arthur it was a difficult transition, but he refers to it as an important learning experience. "No one has a hold on a position in this Church," he says. "We are all simply serving others."

In November 1952, Dwight D. Eisenhower was elected president of the United States, and he immediately nominated Elder Ezra Taft Benson as Secretary of Agriculture. President McKay gave his blessing to this patriotic service. In turn, Arthur was offered a post as an administrative assistant to Elder Benson, which eventually took him to Washington. Not sure if he should leave Church employment, Arthur sought advice from President McKay, who was forthright: "You go, Arthur. It is right for you, and I have approved it." In early 1953, Arthur moved to Washington while his family stayed in Salt Lake City to sell their home. When he reached the nation's capital, he found living expenses higher than he had expected. He managed to rent a small room with a bath down the hall. He cooked his meals on a hot plate.

For Arthur, life at the Department of Agriculture in Washington, D.C., was a sharp contrast to life at Church headquarters in Salt Lake City. "The activity was intense, but the people there showed little interest in righteousness," he explains. "They were much more committed to getting ahead at all costs." Secretary Benson had strong leadership skills and responded well to the pace, the pressure, the structure, and the formality. He represented the Church well, and the government profited from his experience not only around the country but around the world. Always forthright and trusting, Secretary Benson expected similar integrity from others. "He was often disappointed, but he was undaunted," Arthur says. "He recognized this appoint ment as an opportunity for significant contribution to his country."

Arthur served with Secretary Benson in Washington for eighteen months. In June 1954, he was called by President Richards to preside over the Hawaii Mission. Returning to Salt Lake City, he met with the First Presidency before leaving for the mission and was set apart by President Clark. There was no training program to prepare the new president to administer one of the forty-two missions in the Church. President Richards outlined instructions and expectations in a few brief thoughts while walking up the front steps of the Church Administration Building with Arthur: "Remember to get your reports in on time. Don't disparage your predecessor. Keep to your budget. Now, the Lord bless you, and we'll see you when you get back."

Arthur, Maurine, and their four daughters, Marilyn, Judith Ann, Lynette, and Cheryl, arrived in Honolulu June 5, 1954. Elder LeGrand Richards, who was touring the mission with retiring mission president Ernest Nelson, met the Haycocks at the boat dock.

The mission home, which had been a center for servicemen during World War II, was in total disrepair. For several years the Haycocks made the best of it, but when Elder Marion G. Romney visited, Arthur put his fist through one of the big timbers under the front porch to demonstrate the damage to the structure from termites. After President Romney returned to headquarters, he received authorization for the purchase of a new mission home. An ideal facility was located in Nuuanu Valley, but the asking price was steep. Ralph Woolley, a prominent businessman and stake president, negotiated the purchase of the two and half acres, with the house and a small cottage for half the price. The mission had a new home.

The Haycocks kept in close touch with their friends on the mainland and received encouragement and advice from Church leaders. President Clark told Arthur in a letter, "I understand you are doing a good job. But always be sure that you get as many converts as you do baptisms." When Maurine's mother died, the Haycocks couldn't come home for the funeral, so Elder Spencer W. Kimball spoke at her funeral on their behalf.

Hawaii was a regular stop for Church officials on their way to New Zealand, Tahiti, Australia, and Asia. As a result, the Haycocks had lots of visitors. When President and Sister McKay were scheduled to tour the six missions in the Pacific in 1955, Arthur encouraged them to stop in Hawaii at the end of their trip. Though Arthur had had extensive experience in President George Albert Smith's office and was comfortable with the visits from General Authorities, he was anxious that all go well on President McKay's visit.

Arthur chartered a plane to fly the visitors from island to island. Though used to regular rainstorms, the pilot hit a squall and had difficulty breaking through the torrents pouring down on Hilo airport. As the pilot flew up the coast trying to find a break in the weather, Arthur grew more and more anxious. Then he glanced across the aisle and saw President McKay sleeping soundly. Arthur says, "He wasn't a bit worried, and the scene reminded me of the passage in the Bible that inspired the song, 'Master, the Tempest is Raging.' The apostles were so alarmed, but the Lord simply said, 'Peace, be still.' President McKay reflected that peace, and that put me at ease."

During the tour, President McKay dedicated the grounds for the Church College of Hawaii. At the official ceremonies, Arthur was scheduled to introduce Sister McKay to the Saints. He had fretted over just the right words, finally saying, "This is Sister Emma Rae Riggs McKay, who is just as lovely now as she was fifty-four years ago when President McKay married her." Suddenly Arthur felt President McKay's hand on his shoulder. Taking the microphone from Arthur, President McKay said, "I just want to correct Brother Haycock and say that my dear wife, Mama Rae, is fifty-four years lovlier than she was when I married her." When President McKay asked the advisory committee when they planned to open the school, he was told it would be in eighteen months, in the fall of 1956. The prophet responded, "No, I want it to open this year, the fall of 1955." The committee set to work on purchasing five war-surplus barracks from Pearl Harbor to be used as classrooms, offices and a library, and on September 26, 1955, the college opened.

President McKay was well received by the people. On Molokai, one of the smaller islands, school children had been dismissed from classes to greet the religious leader. The Saints at the leper colony, Kalaupapa, painted rocks with their greeting, "Aloha McKay," which was read from the sky since the plane could not land at the tiny airport. On Maui the local authorities were the first to greet the visitors, and on the island of Hawaii all the local politicians joined the Mormons for a luau. Everywhere the group went, there was an honor guard of Boy Scouts.

The completed college facilities were dedicated December 17, 1958. At that time President McKay said, "From this school will go men and women whose influence will be felt for good towards the establishment of peace internationally. Nearly a billion people are waiting to hear our message over in China. I don't know how many millions in Japan, 350 million in India. We have scarcely touched these great nations, and they are calling today, as the people's voice in Macedonia called to the Apostle Paul, 'Come over and help us!' "

On February 10, 1955, President McKay held an informal meeting for forty-four members at Pulehu, Maui, the site of the first baptisms on Hawaii and the location of the first branch of the Church in the Hawaiian islands, organized August 6, 1851. President McKay related to the assembled Saints a spiritual experience he and Brother Hugh J. Cannon had shared in 1921 at that spot while on a world tour of Church missions.

As background he explained that Hugh J. Cannon's father, George Q. Cannon, was one of the first missionaries to serve in Hawaii and had converted many of the islanders, including the influential Judge Jonatana H. Napela. Eventually he and other natives helped Elder Cannon translate the Book of Mormon into Hawaiian. Elder Cannon and the islanders had built a Church meetinghouse at the location where the visitors now stood.

President McKay, standing on the location of a pepper tree that had recently blown down in a storm, recounted his visit thirty-four years earlier, explaining: "We became very much impressed with the surroundings, . . . so I said, 'I think we should have a word of prayer.' It was a hot day, and the sun was shining, so we retired to the shade of a peppertree. . . .

I offered the prayer. We all had our eyes closed, and it was a very inspirational gathering. As we started to walk away at the conclusion of the prayer, Brother Keola Kailimai took Brother E. Wesley Smith [the mission president and son of Joseph F. Smith] to the side and very earnestly began talking to him in Hawaiian. . . . Brother . . . Smith said, 'Brother McKay, . . . Brother Kailimai said that while you were praying, and we all had our eyes closed, he saw two men who he thought were Hugh J. Cannon and E. Wesley Smith step out of line in front of us and shake hands with someone, and he wondered why Brother Cannon and Brother Smith were shaking hands while we were praying. He opened his eyes, and there stood those two men still in line, with their eyes closed just as they had been. He quickly closed his eyes because he knew he had seen a vision.'

"Now Brother Hugh J. Cannon greatly resembled Brother George Q. Cannon, his father. E. Wesley Smith has the Smith attribute just as President [Joseph F. Smith had it.] Naturally, Brother Keola Kailimai would think that these two men were there. I said, 'I think it was George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, two former missionaries to Hawaii, whom that spiritual-minded man saw.'

"We walked a few steps farther, and I said, 'Brother Kailimai, I do not understand the significance of your vision, but I do know that the veil between us and those former missionaries was very thin.' Brother Hugh J. Cannon who was by my side, with tears rolling down his cheeks, said, 'Brother McKay, there was no veil.' "

Concluding, President McKay said, "The Lord is pleased with what the missionaries have done, and I am grateful for the response of the Hawaiian people and others of these lovely islands. . . . May we who will now have increased responsibility from this moment on be true to the trust that the Lord has in us!" (Cherished Experiences, compiled by Clare Middlemiss [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955], pp. 50-52.)

Arthur had seen President McKay perform miracles in Hawaii when they visited in 1937. Serving on the big island of Hawaii, Arthur and his companion were checking daily on the progress of one of the missionaries who was in a small country hospital with typhoid fever. The elder was delirious most of the time, and the two young missionaries were discouraged. President McKay was touring the Hawaiian mission, visiting Hilo at the other end of the island, when he heard of the elder's plight. He traveled three hundred miles to reach the rural hospital and invited Arthur and his companion to join him in laying on hands and giving the patient a blessing. "There was a sweet, comforting spirit in the room as President McKay pleaded with the Lord for the health of our companion," Arthur says. "He promised him a full recovery." It wasn't long before the elder was back at work in the mission. "This remarkable healing was a great inspiration and testimony builder to all the missionaries," says Arthur. "President McKay did not hesitate to make the long journey to seek out one sick missionary and bless him with full health."

In July 1958 the Haycocks were released after having presided over the mission for four years. Arthur had employment offers from a variety of hotel chains, public relations firms, and health organizations in Hawaii and Los Angeles, but he felt impressed to return to Salt Lake City. Since his first job at the Church, he had always done what the authorities had asked him to do. He hoped to go back to work for the Church, telling his friends, "Think of the company I'll keep."

Elder Mark E. Petersen, the last official visitor to the mission before Arthur's release, spoke plainly: "Don't take anything until you hear from me." As president of Deseret News Publishing Company, Elder Petersen asked Arthur to become the secretary-treasurer of that corporation. Arthur started work August 3, 1958.

Four years later Elder Spencer W. Kimball asked Arthur to meet with the executive committee of the Missionary Committee, which, besides Elder Kimball, included Elders Gordon B. Hinckley and Boyd K. Packer. They asked Arthur to become the executive secretary of the Missionary Committee. He accepted and moved back to the fourth-floor offices of the Missionary Department in the Church Administration Building.

Arthur enjoyed the job. He knew missionary work from the field, and from Church headquarters as well. His understanding of the entire Church operation had increased.

It was not surprising, therefore, that at ten minutes to eight one Thursday morning, he received a summons from Elder Harold B. Lee, who was calling at the direction of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Arthur was to bring a shorthand book and come at once to the temple. He was appointed the new secretary to the Council of the Twelve.

President McKay's health had been failing. On Sunday, January 18, 1970, Arthur was sitting in a stake high council meeting when word came that President McKay had died.

When he heard the news, Arthur went directly to President McKay's apartment in the Hotel Utah. Joseph Fielding Smith, president of the Quorum of the Twelve, and Harold B. Lee, who would become the next president of that quorum, had just arrived and were talking with the family. Arthur joined them in contacting the members of the Twelve who were away on assignments and arranging for their prompt return.

A grand era in the Church had ended. For nineteen years this stately, gracious Church president had guided the growth of the Church around the world, prompting people to love one another and stay close to their families. Though Arthur was not as close to President McKay as he had been to President George Albert Smith, he affirms, "I had a testimony of his calling and his responsibility and valued my role in sustaining him as the president of the Church. Like members of the Church everywhere, I prayed for President McKay. I loved him.

"During his tenure I saw the Church from many vantages—the mission field, the government, the press, and the highest councils." It was these experiences that prepared Arthur to help other Church presidents in years to come.

President McKay trained many of the present General Authorities. He called President Gordon B. Hinckley as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve in 1958 and as an apostle in 1961. When the Church decided to build a temple in Switzerland, new challenges arose. The Swiss temple was to serve Saints all over Europe. How would the temple handle all the different languages? How would such a small country staff a temple for such a large area? President McKay gave the assignment to Elder Hinckley to put the endowment ceremony on film.

It was a first for the Church. Elder Hinckley selected the actors and directed the filming, with the dubbing in of translations in many languages. Later, as temples were dedicated in other parts of the world, the endowment was translated into additional languages.

"All that training under President McKay and subsequent presidents prepared President Hinckley for his challenges during President Spencer W. Kimball's administration. President Kimball was sick in his later years, and Brother Hinckley had to carry so much of the day-to-day burden," Arthur says. President Hinckley as a counselor to President Kimball dedicated sixteen temples in countries around the world, including Tonga, Chile, Sweden, South Africa, and Australia. As a counselor to President Benson, he has dedicated another eight in such areas as Peru, Canada, and Nevada.

"President McKay was a great man, a good man, who accomplished much in the nineteen years he served as prophet, seer, and revelator," according to Arthur. Arthur learned early in working at the Church offices that there would always be individual styles of leadership but that the principles that sustained the work would be inviolate. "President McKay exercised a scholarly, academic style," he says, "but he was also a courageous leader with strong opinions that could be easily measured." It was President McKay who challenged the Church membership with the slogan "Every member a missionary."

The Lord gave President McKay a sense of vision and an understanding of the worldwide Church. He was the most widely traveled of any Church president to that time. Everywhere he went he encouraged the members to focus on gospel principles in the home. His testimony of personal application of the gospel was one of his favorite themes: "Only through individual effort and divine guidance may true success and happiness be obtained. There is no blessing based upon another's achievement. Everyone must work out his own salvation." (Cherished Experiences, pp. 9-10.)
