Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter Five

Joseph Fielding Smith

President Joseph Fielding Smith is described by Arthur Haycock as the "Rock of Gibraltar." Called as an apostle in 1910 at age thirty-three, he was sustained as president of the Church on January 23, 1970, at age age ninety-three. No other Church president began his tenure at such an ad-vanced age.

"Joseph Fielding Smith came to earth with a mission," Arthur contends. Arthur was serving as the secretary to the Council of the Twelve Apostles when President Smith was named tenth president of the Church, the sixth prophet in this century. "You knew if you walked in his footsteps, you would not deviate from the gospel." He asked Arthur to be his secretary, and they began to develop a close and unusual bond. Arthur says: "His manner appeared strict and exacting, yet he was tender and warm. He was driven to preach the gospel, to tell the world, 'There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of us all, and one true church, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth.' He was indeed prepared to lead the Church."

President Smith's command of the scriptures was without equal; his understanding of the development of the Church was a product of his forty-five years of service as Church Historian. His decades of experience in Church administration—sixty years as an apostle—exceeded that of any other General Authority. "He came to the position an elderly man," says Arthur, "but a wise one who had influenced the Church's growth from its Rocky Mountain roots to its position as a religious force in the world today."

When President Smith died on July 2, 1972, at age ninety-five, the Church lost its living link to the pioneer past. Known for his historical roots in the Church and for his books on doctrinal subjects, President Smith was the son of the sixth president of the Church, Joseph F. Smith, and the grandson of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith, who was martyred in Carthage Jail. He was the grandnephew of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Because of these roots, President Smith held great reverence for the Church, its priesthood, and its responsibilities in the latter days.

When President Smith moved from the Historian's office to the president's office on the main floor of the Church Administration Building, he intended to use another desk rather than the one that was there—until Arthur showed him that the desk had been used by his father. President Joseph F. Smith had signed his name on a desk drawer with the date April 5, 1913, which prompted President Smith to change his mind. The desk was also used later by Presidents Harold B. Lee and Spencer W. Kimball.

President Smith also had a close affinity for the temple. At the Ogden Temple dedication, January 18, 1972, he looked back at the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple in April 1893. He had been one of those attending those significant services and had served in the Salt Lake Temple presidency from 1915 to 1935. As he spoke at the Ogden services, he challenged the members: "May I remind you that when we dedicate a house to the Lord, what we really do is dedicate ourselves to the Lord's service." (Church News, January 22, 1972, p. 3.)

Three weeks later, on February 9, 1972, he presided over the dedication of the Provo Temple, an occasion Arthur remembers as a glorious event for President Smith, whose dedicatory prayer paid special tribute to his grandfather: "Today is the 172nd [birthday] . . . of my grandfather, the Patriarch Hyrum Smith, and I am pleased that we are celebrating that occasion by presenting to the Lord another holy temple, wherein those keys and powers, held jointly by him and the Prophet Joseph Smith, may be used for the salvation and exaltation of many of our Father's children." (Ibid., February 12, 1972, p. 3.)

President Smith had a tremendous love for his own father. He often used to say to Arthur, "My father never had time to be a boy." Joseph F. Smith had driven an ox team across the plains with his mother when he was just a boy, and at age fifteen, orphaned, he was sent on a mission to Hawaii, where he served four and a half years. Since Arthur had been a missionary and mission president in Hawaii, the two spent many hours discussing the islands where President Smith's father had spent so much time. They also visited Hawaii together in 1972.

President Smith enjoyed recounting stories of his childhood. Arthur remembers one in particular about a pony. President Smith grew up in Salt Lake City not far from the Church offices. Behind the Smith home was a barn, where young Joseph Fielding kept his pet pony, Junie. Out in the yard was a watering trough for the cow and the pony. The yard was surrounded by a high fence with a gate secured by a piece of wood that slid into a slot. If Junie got thirsty in the middle of the night, she'd slip the bar up with her nose and wander out to the trough in the yard to get a drink. She learned to turn the tap on with her teeth, but she never turned it off. By morning, the trough would be spilling over into the yard, wasting precious water and forming a massive mud puddle.

Joseph's father, then president of the Church, became impatient with the situation, and one day he said, "Joseph, why don't you take care of that horse? We can't afford to have this yard a swamp all the time."

Joseph replied that he did take care of the horse. Not satisfied with the answer, his father said, "You come with me and I'll show you how to take care of the problem." Using a leather strap from the barn, he carefully wrapped it around the gate and secured it with a buckle. Then he said, "See, that was easy. That takes care of it, and we won't have this problem again." Looking at his young son he added, "I can't understand why you didn't think of it."

By the time the two got about halfway across the yard, the pony was right on their heels, nudging them along with her nose. Not only could she turn on the tap but she could unbuckle a strap as well.

Arthur was introduced to President Smith's humor when he was assigned to the Finance Department in his first years in Church employment. After lunch at the Lion House one day, Arthur saw someone go up the back stairs into the Church Administration Building next door. Arthur thought that if he hurried, he could get into the building without having to search his pockets for the key. He darted up the steps and caught the door just before it closed. As he rushed into the elevator, the only one to service the building, he found he had been following Elder Smith. Young and inexperienced, Arthur tried to make conversation with the apostle, blurting out, "I just followed you in the back door and caught the elevator door before it closed. I'm kind of hoping that's how it will be on the other side. If I can catch the pearly gates before they close behind someone like you, I may make it."

Elder Smith looked Arthur up and down. Then, as the elevator doors slid open, he winked and said, "If I were you, my brother, I wouldn't count on it."

Though quiet and soft-spoken, President Smith was deliberate and definite in his ways, says Arthur, who learned of those traits while he was secretary to the Council of the Twelve. One day Arthur was sorting out a mass of papers across the table in a room where the Twelve often met for meetings. President Smith didn't approve of his usurping the room for his secretarial needs and reminded him of the sacred purpose of the room. Arthur moved his materials elsewhere.

Arthur remembers when the president of the Church could go almost anywhere in the world with little fanfare. Gradually it became necessary to tighten security around the Brethren. Before that time, the General Authorities would leave general conference through the back door of the Tabernacle, where a passage would be roped off to provide a path for them to the street and their cars. This allowed them to leave Temple Square more quickly, but not everyone observed the restrictions. Once a little girl slipped under the ropes and came up to President Smith's side. He leaned down, picked her up, and gave her a gentle hug. It was a scene Arthur will never forget. "That little girl nestled next to his cheek as if he were her grandfather," he recalls. "The way he smiled and hugged her close reflected all his love and devotion for the Saints." Later the little girl's parents scolded her for getting lost in the crowd. She said, "I wasn't lost. I was in the arms of the prophet."

President Smith never veered from his course; people always knew where he stood. "He wasn't flashy," Arthur explains. "He never made anyone laugh in conference. I can't ever remember him telling a joke at the pulpit. His was always a solemn gospel dissertation that was a result of his intense family tradition of faith and service. He had something to say to the Saints, and it was always serious." His opening sermon at general conference on October 1, 1971, was typical of his counsel: "We believe that worship is far more than prayer and preaching and gospel performance. The supreme act of worship is to keep the commandments, to follow in the footsteps of the Son of God, to do ever those things that please him. It is one thing to give lip service to the Lord; it is quite another to respect and honor his will by following the example he has set for us." (Conference Report, October 1971, p. 6.)

While to some President Smith appeared rigid and autocratic because of his sober sermons, close associates described him as "a true friend, gentle, kind, shy, and tender." Arthur characterizes him as reserved, but this quality came from shyness and humility. "In spite of his great wisdom and mastery of the scriptures, he was a simple man with simple faith. He had only one purpose in life, and that was to serve the Lord and his Church," Arthur says.

President Smith's wife, Jessie Evans Smith, was in many ways his opposite. She was outgoing, gregarious, and affable. Arthur claims that they made an unusual couple. Joseph Fielding Smith had been in her home as a ward teacher, and the two renewed their acquaintance when she called him from the County Clerk's office to arrange an appointment at the Church Historian's office to have him sign a document. Gentleman that he was, President Smith said he would come to her office. He had been married twice before to Louie Shurtliff and Ethel Georgina Reynolds, both of whom had died. When Joseph and Jessie were married in the Salt Lake Temple, President Grant said at the conclusion of the ceremony, "Now, Joseph, kiss your wife." President Smith referred to that directive in an interview on their thirty-third wedding anniversary, April 12, 1971, commenting, "He said it like he meant it, and I have been doing it ever since."

President and Sister Smith were unusually devoted to each other. Arthur still pictures them walking together and chatting. The president usually carried her purse, a satchel full of everything she might need. When she urged the president to rest, Arthur recalls, she'd say, "Now, lie down and take a nap after church. All the other presidents did." He would quip, "Well, where are they now?"

When the two visited wards or stakes, they would usually end up singing. Jessie had a beautiful voice. A former member of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, she would accompany their singing on the piano. President Smith would turn to the audience and say, "She calls this a duet; I call it a Do-It. I have to Do-It whether I want to or not." Even in President Smith's later years, they loved to sing for the Saints. At the conclusion of their musical number, President Smith would often turn to the audience and say, "I appreciate that you folks didn't walk out on me."

Driving back to Salt Lake City after an impromptu recital at a Brigham Young University devotional, Arthur turned to the president and said, "President Smith, those people loved you, and they enjoyed your singing. Did you see they were weeping during your duet?" President Smith quickly replied, "I can understand that. My singing is enough to make anybody cry."

President Smith had great reverence for nature. No matter where he went in the world, he took time to view the scenery—the ocean, the mountains, the plains, the birds, the clouds, the flowers. As Arthur recalls, "He would find a sermon in simple things that we often overlook. He marveled at the magnificence of the world around us." President Smith enjoyed fresh fruit, especially watermelon and strawberries. He and Sister Smith enjoyed snacking on fruit. When they traveled, they sometimes stopped at a roadside stand to buy strawberries, which they would eat right out of the cup. President Smith also had two favorite kinds of pie—hot and cold. Like his historical research or his study of the scriptures, he was methodical about the way he ate pie: first he would cut off and eat the crust, then he'd polish off the rest.

President Smith's words touched the hearts of people everywhere. When the BYU student body awarded him the Exemplary Manhood Award, he urged the young people to follow the counsel of the Apostle James: "Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example." (James 5:10.) President Smith added, "The greatest example set for men, was that of [Jesus Christ]. His life was perfect. He did all things well and was able to say to all men, 'follow thou me' and we should all pattern our lives after His." (Church News, April 22, 1972, p. 3.)

In April 1971, President Smith addressed 13,000 young people in Long Beach, California, saying, "I plead with you young people . . . to keep yourselves clean and pure so that you will be entitled to go to the house of the Lord and together with the companions of your choice, enjoy all [the] greatest blessings the Lord offers to you." (Ibid., April 24, 1971, p. 6.)

President Smith's life was totally devoted to the Lord, and he always felt comfortable talking about the Savior and the gospel plan. To Arthur, the breakfast table seemed an unlikely place for a gospel dissertation, but not to President Smith. One day at breakfast he told Arthur, "I can't wait to get over to the other side and thank Mother Eve for what she did. We wouldn't be here if it weren't for her. Then I think of the Savior born in a manger. I think of him sweating drops of blood and hanging on the cross." President Smith was not one who often shed tears in public, but on this occasion the tears were streaming down his face as he said, "You know, he did that for me. He did that for us all. How can we ever repay him for his redeeming sacrifice?"

"President Smith's testimony was not melodramatic or complex," Arthur explains. "It was simple, sincere, and from the heart. It was clearly given to guide us all."

In July 1970, when Sister Smith was hospitalized for several weeks, President Smith stayed in her hospital room at night, sleeping on a couch near her bed until she could go home.

The following summer he was making plans with Arthur for the Church's first area conference, to be held in Manchester, England, when Sister Smith became ill. Arthur, who had been spending much of his time with them at their home in the Eagle Gate apartments, took her and President Smith to the hospital. She was diagnosed with congestive heart failure and was hospitalized immediately. She stayed almost a month and, as before, President Smith stayed at her side. When she was able to leave, they moved into the eighth-floor suite at the Hotel Utah where President and Sister McKay had lived.

On August 3 Sister Smith was checked by the doctor to see if she would be able to make the trip abroad to the area conference. At eight that evening, her nurse called Arthur, who was working late at the Church offices, and said to come quickly. As soon as he arrived, Arthur could see that Sister Smith was dying. Knowing that several of the General Authorities were attending a dinner at the Lion House, he hurried up the street and found Elder Richard L. Evans and President Harold B. Lee. By the time the three arrived at the hotel, Sister Smith had died. As they gathered around President Smith to express their love, he said simply, "I have been through this three times now."

Sister Smith's funeral was held in the Tabernacle. In benediction to her long life, the Tabernacle Choir, with whom she had sung for more than forty years, sang "King of Glory," from which comes the song she had sung so often, "He that Hath Clean Hands and a Pure Heart."

A week later President Smith and Arthur left for the conference meetings in Manchester, England. "It was a difficult period," says Arthur. "President Smith was heartsick and lonely; he struggled with Jessie's loss."

President Smith was used to having his wife at his side when he spoke. He had his sermons typed on yellow sheets, which he folded in half and put in his left coat pocket. Just before he gave a sermon she would jokingly remind him, "Your palk is in your tocket." The two would then chuckle, and he would get up and take out his talk and read it. In England she wasn't there to give him that support. Still, his message to the Saints came through clearly. Speaking five times during the conference, President Smith said, "We are members of a world church, a church that has the plan of life and salvation, a church set up by the Lord himself in these last days to carry his message of salvation to all his children in all the earth. . . . Not only shall we preach the gospel in every nation before the second coming of the Son of Man, but we shall make converts and establish congregations of Saints among them." (Manchester Area Conference Report, August 1971, p. 5.)

When not in meetings, the conference visitors took in some of the sights at Cardiff, Wales. While others in his party were visiting a splendid castle, President Smith, worn out from traveling, was not even interested in getting out of the car. Donald Smith, his nephew and doctor who was in the party, coaxed, "Uncle Joseph, don't you want to go home and say you have set foot on Wales?" President Smith opened the car door and set one foot firmly on the pavement. "There!" he announced. "I have set foot on Wales." Then he climbed back into the car and shut the door.

While President Smith was in England, his daughter Amelia and her husband, Bruce R. McConkie, a member of the Council of the Twelve, moved all of the president's personal things to their home, where he lived until his death.

Arthur usually picked up President Smith in the morning and took him home after work. President Smith had always adhered to the counsel in the Doctrine and Covenants, "Retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated." (D&C 88:124.) All his life he was up by six in the morning and in his office by eight. As president he continued this regimen. In the last week before his death, he worked in his office, signed papers, met with his counselors, and posed with the switchboard operators for a photograph. He even visited the Historical Department to see former fellow workers.

President Smith gave his last official address at the mission president's seminar on June 29, 1972. "His words were a fitting conclusion to a life devoted to the Lord," Arthur says. In his remarks he wished the leaders "success . . . as you walk humbly before Him. . . . You have been called to serve in the most important work in the world. It was the Prophet Joseph Smith himself who said: 'After all that has been said, the greatest and most important duty is to preach the gospel.' " (Church News, July 8, 1972, p. 5.)

Elder Ezra Taft Benson spoke at that same seminar, and his message was timely: "The saving of the souls of men is the greatest work that is going on in the whole universe. It is going on both sides of the veil; and I think sometimes that it doesn't matter which side of the veil we are working on."

On July 2, 1972, Elder Bruce R. McConkie called Arthur and said, with urgency in his voice, "Pick up the president's daughter Josephine [who lived in Bountiful], and come quick." Arthur asked, "Is something wrong?" Elder McConkie replied quickly, "Yes. Hurry!"

When Arthur and Josephine arrived at the McConkie home, President Smith was lying on the couch in the living room. He had just passed away. He had been sitting in his chair looking out the window when, without struggle or pain, he had slipped peacefully away. He was ninety-five; he would have turned ninety-six later that month.

Following the funeral services in the Tabernacle, the Twelve Apostles met in the temple July 7, 1972, to reorganize the First Presidency. Arthur was invited to attend and recalls the experience: "Each one of the Council of the Twelve expressed himself. They were sitting in their usual places, with no one sitting in the First Presidency chairs. The youngest member of the Twelve spoke first and bore his testimony and said he felt that the Presidency should be reorganized at once, and then each of the members of the Twelve in turn continued on in the same manner, expressing themselves, until it was President Kimball's turn. He, too, expressed his feelings that the First Presidency should be reorganized at once, and as the senior member under President Lee, he claimed the privilege of nominating Harold B. Lee as president of the Church. The voting was unanimous, and President Kimball was voice in ordaining and setting President Lee apart.

"President Lee then took his place in the center chair of the three for the First Presidency in the upper room of the temple. He named President N. Eldon Tanner as his first counselor and President Marion G. Romney as his second. These brethren were then set apart for these positions."
