Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter Six

Harold B. Lee

On October 6, 1972, during general conference, Harold B. Lee was sustained as the eleventh president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In his address he said, "Today is the greatest moment of my life. There has been here an overwhelming spiritual endowment, attesting no doubt, that in all likelihood we are in the presence of personages, seen and unseen, who are in attendance. Who knows but that even our Lord and Master would be near us on such an occasion as this, for we, and the world must never forget that this is his church, and under his almighty direction we are to serve."

Though President Lee was a man of great abilities and accomplishments, he humbly acknowledged that he was simply on the Lord's errand. He told seventy-five press representatives at a news conference that he felt very much like Nephi when he said, "I, Nephi, . . . went forth . . . , not knowing beforehand the things which I should do." (See 1 Nephi 4:5-6.) When asked about the greatest challenge facing the Church leaders, President Lee replied, "Keeping pace with the growth of the membership." At every opportunity he counseled the Saints, "The safety of the Church lies in the members keeping the commandments. There is nothing more important that I could say. Keep the commandments and blessings will come."

This was a man who was inspiring and fearless. Arthur Haycock, who served as President Lee's secretary, observes, "He was in control at all times, saying what needed to be said and doing what needed to be done. But you always knew that he would then report to the Lord.

"He was deeply spiritual. He was so close to the other side that he often said that there was no veil. For him, I know that was true. He did not wear his sensitivity on his sleeve. He was always in tune with the Spirit, but he was always in touch with the people as well. He had a remarkable gift as a leader."

President Lee exemplified such meekness when he spoke to the youth at a fireside in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on August 19, 1972. It was one of his first major speeches as Church president. He said, "Pray for me, young people. I plead with you to pray for me, and I promise you that I will try to so live, that the Lord can answer your prayers through me."

Having served in many ecclesiastical positions, President Lee was well prepared for his assignment. He was a seminary teacher at South High School in the school's first year of operation, and Arthur was one of his students. "With his dark wavy hair he was dramatic in his appearance," Arthur recalls, "but what I remember most was the way he took his work and the gospel so seriously. We knew it was important to him."

Arthur also remembers the day he was saying the opening prayer in seminary when he felt himself swaying back and forth. He opened his eyes to see what was happening, and the students were all holding on to their desks, their faces drained of color. It was an earthquake, and Brother Lee rushed them all outside to safety. Arthur never finished that prayer.

Neither President Lee nor Arthur could have imagined the way their lives would weave together. President Lee, as a member of the Council of the Twelve, ordained Arthur to be a bishop in 1947, and the two later worked together at Church headquarters. Arthur served as secretary to the Council of the Twelve when President Lee was an apostle and eventually as his secretary when President Lee directed the whole Church.

"President Lee was wise. You knew his suggestions were thoughtful, sensible, and inspired," says Arthur. "He could speak on behalf of the Church or he could address the needs of just one person." When Arthur was working as secretary and treasurer at the Deseret News after he presided over the Hawaii Mission, he was approached by Elders Spencer W. Kimball, Gordon B. Hinckley, and Boyd K. Packer to take a position in the Missionary Department under their direction. He pondered whether to accept the post and finally went to Elder Lee for advice. Elder Lee responded, "The offer may not be coming to you by inspiration, but if Spencer W. Kimball is asking you to do it, it's the closest thing to it. He is the biggest short man that I know anywhere. Anything Spencer W. Kimball wants, I'd listen."

President Lee was a leader who appealed to young and old alike. He often cautioned the youth, "I have the responsibility to speak by the Spirit of the Lord, and you have the responsibility to listen by the Spirit of the Lord." (Church News, June 16, 1973, p. 3.)

At Ricks College President Lee gave one of the finest speeches Arthur ever heard. He counseled the students who were witnessing dissension on college campuses across the nation to have faith in America, declaring, "Men may fail in this country, earthquakes may come, seas may heave themselves beyond their bounds, there may be great drought and hardship as we may call it, but this nation, founded on principles laid down by men whom God raised up, will never fail. This is the cradle of humanity where life on this earth began in the Garden of Eden. This is the place where the new Jerusalem is; this is the place which the Lord said is favored above all the nations in the world. This is the place where the Savior will come to his temple. I have faith in America. You and I must have faith in America if we understand the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ."

The students showed their admiration for this great leader with the following tribute presented during his visit: "As sons and daughters of the living God, we stand united in tribute to the living prophet. . . . Called from the simplicity of farms and fields to stand in the upper rooms of the temple where the veil is thinnest, comes such a man, whose life is a testimony that speaks to the praises of God. This is a man who is more than a man, a man bearing Israel's prophetic inheritance, one of God's choicest sons."

Not long after President Lee was sustained as the president of the Church, he received a note from a Primary president with a touching story: "I held up your picture and said to the children that this was our new president of the Church, Harold B. Lee. A little hand shot up quickly. 'Oh, I know him,' said the little boy. 'We sing about him all the time in church: Reverent-lee, quiet-lee . . . ' "

Arthur describes President Lee as always dressed in neatly pressed suits and carefully knotted ties. "He looked impeccable and stood with such imposing stature. You seldom spoke lightly or facetiously around him. He set a formal tone in his meetings, yet no one was more gracious or more considerate. He was formal in his relationships," says Arthur.

Once in a stake conference talk Arthur apologized for his height. He had been five foot six since high school, and he explained that he had tried lifts in his shoes, but he never got any taller. President Lee spoke right after Arthur and scolded him in front of the congregation, saying, "I never want to hear you talk like that again. I measure people from the shoulders up."

President Lee was a forceful and able administrator. One of the hallmarks of his style was that he cared deeply about people and took time for them. His service as president was marked by announcements of new missions and major building projects. President Lee pushed himself to the limit. When he was in Mexico in 1972, he spoke to four different groups in one night. "He was driven to do all he could as fast as he could," says Arthur. But he, like those before him and after him, always took time to help with individual needs. He once said of a spiritual experience, "It seemed as though the heavens opened and I could encompass every member of the church and my love went out to every member of the church and in fact to the whole world." He called people on the phone who sent him letters and talked with them about their problems and concerns. He cared deeply about needs and expectations and issues facing the people universally and individually.

The Haycocks often traveled with the Lees. Their most unusual trip was when they joined Elder Lee and his new bride Freda Joan Jensen Lee after their honeymoon in Hawaii in 1963. At the time, Arthur was secretary to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The trip was cut short when news came that Henry D. Moyle, counselor to President McKay, had died. At the urgent request of President McKay, the four returned to Utah for the funeral services.

On August 25, 1972, the Haycocks joined President and Sister Lee and other General Authorities at the area general conference of the Church in Mexico City. Here the newly sustained prophet spoke to the Saints in the expansive National Auditorium in Chapultepec Park, his first visit as head of the Church outside the United States, but his words were for members of the Church everywhere. He said, "The real strength of the Church is to be measured by the individual testimonies to be found in the total membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." He then quoted from the Doctrine and Covenants 88:73: " 'Behold, I will hasten my work in its time.' The evidence of the hastening of which the Lord spoke can be found in no greater measure than in this land of Mexico and in the countries of Central America as witnessed by the overwhelming superabundance of the blood of Israel to be found here."

At an official dinner for Mexican officials and Church leaders, one of the perceptive local dignitaries engaged President Lee in a discussion. He had been watching the prophet as he spoke individually to members, calling them by name, stopping to encourage here or to quietly counsel there. The diplomat knew he was speaking with a church leader who knew his flock. He asked, "What are you going to do, President Lee, when the Church gets big? So big, you don't know all the names?"

The Church was big, and getting bigger at a rapid pace. When President Lee was called as an apostle on April 10, 1941, the Church had 892,080 members. When he became president on July 7, 1972, there were 3,218,908. "In my judgment, few, if any leaders in the Church had a better understanding of priesthood and church government, save the Prophet Joseph Smith, than President Lee," says Arthur, who had witnessed changes in every aspect of the Church since the late 1930s. President Lee was the primary author of the area conferences, the system of regional representatives, and the correlation program. "He brought the worldwide Church together in one whole, ready to move ahead with force and energy. That was his major contribution."

Before serving as an apostle, President Lee had established and administered the Church welfare program in the 1930s under the direction of the First Presidency. At the time, the United States was reeling from the effects of the Great Depression. Overwhelmed with the magnitude of the assignment to care for the physical needs of Church members, he went up City Creek Canyon, near downtown Salt Lake City, to be alone with his thoughts. He mused about the possible systems that might be put in place to meet the needs of the members. He was thinking in grand terms when he received unmistakable inspiration. Arthur remembers from their discussions, "The answer was simple. All that was necessary was already established: simply follow the priesthood lines of authority." President Lee repeated that example many times when plans were presented to handle the growth of the Church.

Serving as the leader of the new welfare system was not always easy. At times Elder Lee seemed at odds with other areas where the responsibilities seemed to overlap. Arthur was present at a conversation between Elder Lee, newly called as an apostle, and President J. Reuben Clark, a member of the First Presidency for almost three decades. Elder Lee, recognizing the power that came with his new assignment, said, "They'll listen to me now." President Clark nodded in his familiar style and commented, "Yes, they will listen to you. Clearly, you have the authority now, but you be careful how you use it." Many times President Lee repeated that counsel to others as they were called forward to serve and were overwhelmed with their new responsibilities.

"President Lee was the most complex of any prophet I knew," Arthur claims. "He was very thoughtful, deeply spiritual, and very practical. His years of working summers, going door-to-door as an encyclopedia salesman, and presiding over the Pioneer Stake, a stake rich in testimony but not in material wealth, taught him of the realities of life. There was no question in his mind who the Savior was or who the Prophet Joseph was."

President Lee's testimony of the divinity of the work was defined when he told the Saints in general conference in October 1972: "I know, with a testimony more powerful than sight, that as the Lord declared, 'The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth [from the Prophet Joseph Smith through his successors down to the present], and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth.' " (Conference Report, October 1972, p. 20.)

President Lee did not do the Lord's work alone. He relied on his counselors and the other General Authorities. Marion G. Romney was a dear friend and associate who was called as second counselor in the First Presidency to President Lee in July 1972. He had been ordained an apostle in 1951. Theirs was a special friendship that began in a store one Saturday afternoon when both were working on meetinghouses and needing supplies. Carpenters of a sort, they were shopping the same aisles and began to share experiences. They arranged to see each other again. Their association developed into a friendship based on a similar philosophy about life and their testimonies of the gospel.

President Romney was a man of great integrity, says Arthur. President Romney had a favorite story from his youth that explained his undeviating commitment. When a youth, Marion Romney lived in the Mormon colonies of Mexico. He used to herd the cows home at night for milking. The McClellans and the Romneys had a common lane be-tween their homes. One evening the cows weren't moving fast enough, so Marion picked up some rocks and hurled them at their backs, hoping to hurry them along. He didn't actually aim at the cows but threw the rocks high, knocking some apples down from the McClellans' tree. He scooped them up and arrived home with the apples rolled up in his shirt.

His mother asked where he got the apples, and he said that they fell off Aunt Mary McClellan's tree. Pursuing the incident, she understood that he had knocked them off the tree deliberately. She insisted he take the apples back immediately, which he did. Sister McClellan told him to keep the apples, but he learned a valuable lesson. President Romney always said, "From that day on, I have never taken so much as a pencil, a stamp, or a paper clip from the office if it didn't belong to me."

"Every time he wanted to teach about honesty, he talked about those apples," Arthur recalls.

President Lee appeared healthy and vigorous. He kept a busy schedule, balancing travel with his work in the office. He attended the Hill Cumorah Pageant in Palmyra, New York, in the summer of 1973 and with the cast and missionaries visited the Sacred Grove. Arthur recalls this solemn and spiritual occasion. President Lee told those gathered, "The witness of the Book of Mormon is not found in the ruins of Central and South America. They may be outward evidence of a people long since disappeared. The real witness is that which is found in the Book of Mormon." Then he added, "I know this is the place where the Father and the Son came . . . and the Lord is still standing close to His leaders." (Church News, August 4, 1973, p. 3.)

President Lee's messages were varied, but the principles were always the same. At a genealogy seminar at Brigham Young University, he said, "Every one of you can become great ancestors. This is the important thing. The only honor to your name is the honor you bring to it." Weeks later, in dedicating a stake center near downtown Salt Lake City, he spoke of the great sacrifice and accomplishments of the early pioneer leaders, many of whom lived in that area. Then he said, "We can equal them in dedication and keeping the commandments of the Lord."

In 1973, the Haycocks accompanied President and Sister Lee to an area general conference in Munich, Germany. The meetings were scheduled on the grounds of the site of the 1972 Olympics.

Munich is known for its beauty and charm, but Arthur saw only a little of the city from a taxi window on the way to the hotel and out to the Olympic Gardens. He didn't even tour the grounds, still beautifully groomed from the previous year's athletic contests. "These trips were not for pleasure. We worked, we all worked," says Arthur. "Keeping up with the president was a challenge." Arthur credits the pressure to President Lee's vision of the growth of the gospel and recalls how the prophet used to tell the people, "We have only seen the beginning. It is great and significant that doors are being opened in countries where the gospel has not yet been preached to the many faithful of our Father's children."

Arthur and his wife planned to stop off at Spain or Portugal on the way home while President and Sister Lee went to the Holy Land. But when President Lee heard of the plans, he suggested, rather forcefully, that they not take the side trip.

The next morning, before leaving for Jerusalem, President Lee said he had reconsidered and that if Arthur and Maurine still wanted to visit Spain and Portugal, it would be all right with him. Arthur answered, "No, President Lee. Just to know that you had even the slightest question at the wisdom of such a visit is enough for us. We're going home."

President Lee went to Jerusalem with Elder and Sister Hinckley. In Greece they followed the path of Paul. The president spoke to a small gathering of Saints on Mars Hill in Athens and compared the members today with those during Paul's ministry: "As we come to positions of trust and responsibility centuries later, bearing the same message, teaching the same gospel, worshipping the same God, faced with the same opposition, we must not hesitate nor slacken our zeal to project the word of the Lord." (Ibid., December 16, 1972, p. 5.)

President Lee, accompanied by Arthur, went to New York December 19, 1973, to attend a meeting of the Union Pacific board of directors, of which he was a member. When they returned home, President Lee was visibly tired. Traditionally he delivered candy and flowers to friends and neighbors on Christmas Eve. This year, however, Arthur volunteered to make the visits, and President Lee accepted his offer. The prophet spent Christmas day with his wife, Joan, and his daughter, Helen Goates, and her family. He also visited the graves of his first wife, Fern, and his daughter Maurine.

The following day, Arthur collected the mail from the office and delivered it to President Lee, who, at the suggestion of his doctor, had decided to go to the hospital for his annual physical. At three o'clock that afternoon Arthur took him through a back entrance of LDS Hospital and up to his assigned room on the top floor. Sister Lee stayed with them until many of the tests were completed and then went home. Arthur visited with the president while he ate his dinner. "He seemed to be in good spirits and feeling fine," Arthur says.

But the atmosphere soon changed. Arthur was reading the evening newspaper when President Lee turned toward the wall and dozed off to sleep. About eight o'clock, President Lee sat up, spoke briefly to Arthur, and looked as though he was trying to get out of the bed. Arthur began talking to him, but the president didn't respond. "His face was ashen and covered with perspiration," says Arthur, who helped the prophet lie back down and then stepped outside to the nurse's station, about fifteen feet down the hall. The nurse followed Arthur into the room with a wheelchair. Now that President Lee was awake, she said, she'd take him down for an X-ray. Arthur still felt uneasy about the president's condition, so he went to the door and called to a doctor out in the hall. The doctor took a quick look at President Lee and shouted, "Cardiac arrest." The doctor began CPR while the nurse sounded the alarm. Medical people came from every direction with elaborate equipment and, according to Arthur, "worked heroically and professionally on President Lee."

Arthur called President Romney, who was at home, and explained the unexpected events. He located President Tanner in Phoenix, Arizona, where he was enjoying the holidays with members of his family. Arthur also called Sister Lee and Helen Goates and told them to come to the hospital immediately.

With all the activity up and down the hall and in and out of the room, it became obvious to Arthur that unless the Lord intervened, the president would not live. He hurriedly called Spencer W. Kimball, president of the Council of the Twelve. "When President Kimball answered, he cordially asked how I was, and I responded that I was not very well, explaining quickly that President Lee was very sick," Arthur recalls. "I said, 'I think you should come at once.' " Not until after Arthur had hung up did he realize that he hadn't told President Kimball where to come.

Arthur was waiting down the hall in another room with Sister Lee, Helen, and Brent Goates, President Lee's son-in-law, when President Romney arrived. President Kimball came a few minutes later. Arthur learned a great lesson in priesthood and Church government on that solemn occasion. He explains the events that followed: "President Kimball, president of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, immediately turned to President Romney, a member of the First Presidency, and asked, 'President Romney, what would you like me to do?' President Romney replied, 'I guess all we can do is pray and wait.' At 9:01 p.m. the doctor came down the hall, shook his head, and said, 'The Lord has spoken. We've done all we can. President Lee is gone.'

"At that precise moment, President Romney, knowing that with President Lee's death the First Presidency in which he had served was now dissolved, turned to President Kimball, who would now become president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and said, 'President Kimball , what would you like me to do?' " President Kimball asked President Romney and Arthur to go with him to the Church offices and call the Brethren of the Twelve in various parts of the world to advise them of President Lee's death. A meeting was set to arrange the funeral and to reorganize the First Presidency.

"Just so quietly, so smoothly, the leadership of the Church changed hands," explains Arthur, who had seen this process four times now. "There was no campaigning, no electioneering, no jockeying for position, no speeches—just a simple process the Lord himself has directed, that upon the death of the president of the Church, the president of the Twelve should become the next prophet and president. That is the order of the Church, and the Lord will always have his chosen servant in line when the time comes. That man will have been prepared, trained, tested, and tried. He will be mellowed and endowed from on high, and he will become the president of the Church in the Lord's own way and in the Lord's own time.

"Many considered that President Lee's tenure as president was cut short," says Arthur, "because he had seemed in such good health. He was young and vibrant. But this is the Lord's Church, and he knows what he's doing and when."

Speaking at President Lee's funeral, his dear friend and Church associate President Romney reiterated how President Lee had understood so well his responsibility as prophet: "The source of his greatness was his knowledge that he lived in the shadow of the Almighty." (Ibid., January 5, 1974, p. 12.)
