Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter Seven

Spencer W. Kimball

For weeks Arthur had quietly accompanied President Spencer W. Kimball to the Salt Lake Temple. The prophet was wrestling with a problem that had absorbed much of his attention. "I remember his wife, Camilla, calling me one day to ask if everything was all right," says Arthur. "She asked if something was going on, if there was some serious problem that had her husband so distressed and concerned."

Arthur told Sister Kimball that he knew what was troubling her husband, but that he was not at liberty to explain. "President Kimball was indeed pleading with the Lord for guidance and inspiration on a matter of major importance," he says. He promised Sister Kimball that all was well, and she thanked him for the reassurance. Only a few days later, on June 9, 1978, President Kimball, his counselors, and the Council of the Twelve announced to the world the revelation that all worthy male members of the Church could receive the priesthood. President Kimball dictated the declaration to Arthur, who took it down in shorthand and transcribed it. It read, in part: "All worthy male members of the Church may be ordained to the priesthood without regard for race or color. . . . We declare with soberness that the Lord has now made known his will for the blessing of all his children throughout the earth who will hearken to the voice of his authorized servants, and prepare themselves to receive every blessing of the gospel." President Harold B. Lee once called Elder Kimball "the biggest short man" he had ever known. President Kimball was a quiet, unpretentious, humble man and a prodigious worker, says Arthur. "He plowed through business all day at the office and then went home for a short nap and a light supper followed by more work and then more work. It wasn't unusual for him to slip down to the office at night if he had something on his mind."

He regularly admonished the Saints to keep a journal, sing in their ward choirs, hold family home evening, plant gardens, pray that doors might be opened in countries not yet admitting missionaries, serve missions, read the scriptures, serve their neighbors, live righteously as families, and repent, repent, repent.

Missionary work and the building of new temples received special attention from President Kimball. When he became president on December 30, 1973, at age seventy-eight, the Church had fifteen temples. In the twelve years he was president, he announced plans for thirty-two more temples, three times as many temples in twelve years as in all the previous years the Church had been organized.

When he spoke to the media at a press conference on September 14, 1974, at the time of the dedication of the Washington Temple, he affirmed that one sign of the growth of the Church was the expansion of temple work. "We teach the truth," he said. "If people knew what we know, there would be great numbers eager to join the Church. It's true, it's right, it's divine."

At a regional representatives seminar less than a year after he had received the mantle of Church leadership, President Kimball spoke in broad terms of the need to expand missionary work, saying, "How can we be satisfied with 100,000 converts out of 4 billion in the world who need the gospel? I wonder if we are doing all we can. . . .We have been proselyting now 144 years. Are we prepared to lengthen our stride?" (Church News, November 10, 1985, p. 10.)

The phrase "lengthen our stride" became President Kimball's call to action. "So much depends upon our willingness to make up our minds, collectively and individually, that present levels of performance are not acceptable either to ourselves or to the Lord. In saying that, I am not calling for flashy, temporal differences in our performance levels but a quiet resolve to do a better job—to lengthen our stride."

President Kimball crisscrossed the globe many times as he carried his message to the Saints. A chronicle of the places he visited reads like a geography text: England, Scotland, Poland, the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Austria, Switzerland, France, the Netherlands, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, the Philippines, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, Korea, Hawaii, American Samoa, Western Samoa, New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga, Australia, Tahiti, Canada, Mexico, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Panama, Peru, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela, and South Africa. He visited some countries many times. In addition, he traveled throughout the United States.

"Everywhere we went, he spread his spirit of warmth and goodness and genuineness," Arthur remembers. Frequently he would remind the people that the Church as a body of mortals can be no more holy than its people are righteous, and he would challenge them to develop Christ-like lives of self-mastery. President Kimball loved people, young and old, rich and poor, in high position or no position. All were his friends. He met with presidents of countries, ambassadors, premiers, and prime ministers. He stayed in hotels frequented by world leaders, yet he was always humble in projecting that wonderful, sweet, and articulate spirit of one completely dedicated to the Lord and his children."

President Kimball focused his messages on essential gospel principles. He reminded people to live the commandments. At the first area conference in South America in March 1975, he said: "Father considered long and well the creation of this earth and the peopling of it. . . . He made the earth for our benefit and for our growth and development. . . . You probably do not remember all the things you did in the life before you came here, but you lived; you understood the program; you accepted the divine plan; you agreed to it; you made the covenant, and you must not ignore that promise, even though you have that right of agency." (Ibid., March 8, 1975, p. 4.)

President Kimball understood that all individuals struggle with challenges. His own life had not been easy. His counsel, "Suffering can make saints of people as they learn patience, long-suffering, and self-mastery," had been learned by experience. Over the years he had suffered from various physical problems, including typhoid, smallpox, throat cancer, heart attacks, and open-heart surgery. Once as he was being wheeled to an operating room, the hospital orderly pushing the gurney bumped the corner of the door and began to swear, taking the Lord's name in vain. President Kimball looked up at him and said quietly, "Don't say that. You are speaking about my best friend."

On another occasion, President Kimball was so sick in the South Pacific that he couldn't lift his head from the pillow on the bed. Arthur and Russell M. Nelson, President Kimball's physician who was later called as a member of the Council of the Twelve, dressed the prophet and practically carried him to a waiting police car, which raced them to the airport to catch a flight to another island. He had a temperature of 104, yet he kept going. He would go to a meeting, stand up, and counsel the Saints with great sincerity. Then he would be whisked back to the hotel and put straight to bed to rest before the next meeting.

"He loved the Lord, and he loved the Church; serving them was his life," says Arthur. President Kimball reiterated that love and devotion to a BYU audience on September 6, 1977, when he said: "The Church of Jesus Christ, nicknamed Mormon, is the only true and living church which is fully recognized by God. . . . Most of the world disbelieves it, ministers attempt to disprove it, intellectuals think to rationalize it out of existence, but when all the people of the world are dead, and the ministers and priests are ashes, and the high trained are mouldering in their graves, the truth will go forward, the Church will continue triumphant and the gospel will still be true." (Ibid., September 10, 1977, p. 3.)

Arthur recalls that President Kimball's talks were more than words of inspiration; they were also poetry. "He didn't have a lot of education or a list of degrees behind his name, but he could touch the hearts of people everywhere with his stories and his warm and loving manner."

Arthur's favorite talk was one President Kimball first gave to a congregation in Richfield, Utah, and repeated to other gatherings, including general conference. In it, he talked about "hidden wedges" that could be removed by the process of repentance. "Let those take care who postpone the clearing of bad habits and of constructively doing what they ought. I had learned to use wedges when I was a lad in Arizona, it being my duty to supply wood for many fires in the big house." He then told of a boy who, using a wedge to make his chopping easier, had placed the wedge up in the fork of a tree, planning to take it to the shed right after dinner. He forgot about it.

Years later, as the tree matured, it grew up over the wedge, concealing it completely. During a particularly violent storm, a heavy gust of wind ripped off a big limb, which fell on the roof of the house. When he examined the damage to the tree and the house, the man found the wedge hidden in the fork where he had placed it years before. The tree had grown around it, but the wedge had so weakened the branch that it had fallen because of its unseen weakness. "Pride, envy, selfishness, dishonesty, intemperance, doubt, secret passions—almost numberless in variety and degree—are the wedges of sin. And almost numberless are the men and women who today are allowing sin to grow in the heart wood of their lives.

"The wedge is there. We put it there ourselves one day. It is harming the tree. For years after the wedge had grown over, the tree flourished and gave no sign of its inner weakness. Thus it is with sin. The wedge is there, and in the end of its work is a fallen tree, split, shattered and worthless."

When President Kimball spoke at conferences, he would often outline where he had been, what temple dedications he had attended, the things he had done. He loved people and he loved nature. When he and Arthur used to drive through communities on the way to conferences and meetings, he would say with dismay, "Look at that old barn. Look at that rickety fence. There's a garden that needs tending." At almost every conference, he would counsel, "Paint up, clean up, fix up your homes and your gardens, plant flowers." When he gave a talk at conference entitled "Don't Kill the Little Birds," in which he spoke out against the unnecessary killing of the Lord's creatures, a whole flood of hunting licenses and apologies poured into the Church offices from members who had taken his counsel.

Most happy when he was with the people, President Kimball cared little for visibility or position but a great deal about the needs, wants, and trials of the Saints. His message for finding happiness was uncomplicated: keep the commandments of the Lord. In a conference address in 1974, he said, "We believe that we have in the Church the answers to all the questions, for the Lord is the head of the Church and He has given us the program. Our message is what it has always been, and our hope is that our people will live the commandments of the Lord. They have been revealed in the holy scriptures and by living prophets throughout many years."

He was gentle in his manner yet firm and impatient to get things done. He would quietly come out to Arthur's desk and ask, "I wonder if one of the secretaries would have time to type this. I'm in no rush, just whenever they can get to it." Then a few minutes later he would return and ask if his material was ready. He was driven to push the work forward. On his desk was a sign prominently reminding him and his visitors of his motto: "DO IT."

He believed in doing the Lord's work, no matter what. Speaking to missionaries in Mexico, he emphasized the importance of doing more than just being ready to serve: "With missionary work . . . we . . . say, 'Father, Thy will be done.' I'm just Your faithful servant. I'm ready to serve and sacrifice. Open the gates. I'll do it.' The Lord didn't tell Lehi to ask for the plates or to try to get the plates. He said, 'Send your sons and get the plates.' " (Ibid., December 21, 1974, p. 5.)

When President Kimball succeeded President Lee on

President Spencer W. Kimball and D. Arthur Haycock

at a Church ranch near Orlando, Florida December 30, 1973, there were 3.3 million members of the Church in 630 stakes and 108 missions. When he died in November 1985, Church membership was 5.85 million; the number of stakes had doubled to 1,570, and the number of wards had surpassed 10,000. The number of missionaries serving increased from 18,109 in 1974 to more than 30,000 in 1985. Those figures were a reflection of work—his work. He set the standard, and the people followed. Arthur states firmly, "When I served with President Kimball, I never worked so hard in my life."

The growth of the Church thrilled President Kimball. He said in the opening session of April conference in 1980, "We want to keep faith with that small but noble band of souls who assembled in the Peter Whitmer home 150 years ago for the purpose of formally organizing the Church. We can keep the faith, in part, by helping the Church to grow in numbers and also in spirituality." (Conference Report, April 1980, p. 6.)

In August 1974, Arthur accompanied the Kimballs to Stockholm, Sweden, for an area general conference for the Scandinavian countries of Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and Finland. Upon arriving, Arthur spent almost all day retyping one of President Kimball's talks on a Swedish typewriter. To the listening Saints, President Kimball suggested that they hang a picture of an LDS temple in their homes to remind them of the work and to increase their commitment to the gospel.

Speaking of the need for local Saints to become involved in missionary work, he said, "Thousands of converts should come in from this source. They are your neighbors. They are your friends. They know your righteousness. You are an example in Christian living to them." (Church News, August 24, 1974, p. 4.)

The trip included a tour of Finland with the mission president, Robert Wade, a former member of Arthur's staff in the Missionary Department. In typical Kimball fashion, the tour was packed with events, from dedicating a building to meetings with the missionaries, the Saints, and even the American ambassador to Finland, who commended the missionary force with this comment: "There are only two groups of people who learn the Finnish language, Finnish babies and Mormon missionaries."

This tour brought to focus the rapid growth of the Church in countries all over the world. In 1955 when Elder Spencer W. Kimball visited Europe for six months, stopping at every mission on the continent and in England, his message was clear: "The days of gathering are over, and now we've got to establish Zion in all areas of the world. We need you here. Stay in your homeland and build up The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

Twenty years later he was back, visiting the members who had taken his admonition seriously and stayed home to build the kingdom. After the tour of Finland, he went to London, where he spoke to some four hundred missionaries and later to more than five thousand members assembled in a stake center.

In February and March, 1975, the Haycocks joined the Kimballs for a tour of South America, beginning with an area conference in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Extra security precautions were taken to prevent any threats or violence to the president and other General Authorities. At a meeting with stake and mission leaders before the conference sessions, President Kimball made the initial announcement of the Church's plans to build the first temple in South America at Sao Paulo, Brazil. He believed strongly in taking the temples to the people and often quoted Brigham Young's statement, "Every time a new temple is built, all the bells in hell begin to ring because Satan knows what it means."

The people in South America were ready for a temple. Arthur recalls the contributions and the sacrifices of so many to bring the temple blessings to their land. One faithful leader gave a gold medal he had received as an army officer after being stranded in the Andes mountains during a violent snowstorm that nearly wiped out his entire troop. The wind was so fierce they couldn't make a fire or put up a tent. To keep their blood flowing, this man and others like him kept moving among the men to help where he could. After twelve days they were rescued, but restoring the use of his frozen hands and feet took years. The country awarded him and the thirty other survivors gold medals for their heroism and leadership. When it came time to make his donation to the Santiago Chile Temple, Brother Cifuentes gave his prized award to be auctioned off to raise funds, knowing that because of the temple great blessings would come to his people. "These people understood that a contribution to the temple was really no sacrifice," Arthur says.

With each new temple came a new set of challenges. Arthur recalls, "When we tried to build a temple in Denver, we had to move the location two or three times because of some public resistance; some people worried that the increase in traffic would create problems. In Chicago, community leaders rejected our original plans because the temple spires would interfere with the flight path of birds migrating for the winter. But in East Germany, the government ran power and sewer lines out to our site and built roads for easy access. When we had the open house at the Freiberg Germany Temple, local leaders from all over East Germany attended. They appreciated that we were admonishing our people to be good citizens. Though our local leaders weren't trained in public policy and diplomacy, they were loyal to their country."

The South American trip also included visits to Santiago, Chile; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Bogota, Colombia; Montevideo, Uruguay; and Asuncion, Paraguay. That swing through South America took the president twenty-five thousand miles. He visited eight countries, toured three missions, and met with the president of Brazil, the prime minister of Paraguay, and the minister of the navy in Buenos Aires.

Everywhere President Kimball went, arrangements were made so he could avoid being crushed by the crowd. Everything was arranged down to the last minute, and President Kimball's departures were carefully planned to get him through the throngs and out of crowded halls. Congregations would stand in reverence, arms folded, as he walked past. But then his love would get the best of him, and he'd reach out and start shaking hands, and everything would break loose. The throngs would swarm around him, and all plans for an orderly exit would vanish.

"That was just his way," says Arthur. "He wasn't kissing babies to get votes or shaking hands to be popular; he was touching the people because he wanted them to know of his love, and he wanted to bless them." Arthur would have to remind himself that the scenarios were something like the one that occurred when the apostles of old turned the children away, and the Lord said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of God." (Mark 10:14.)

An incident in Bogota, Colombia, is one Arthur will never forget. The members met in a gymnasium with bleachers from floor to ceiling. A big stage, like a boxing arena, was constructed in the center of the floor as a stand for the General Authorities and local leaders. "These were people who loved President Kimball and were thrilled to be with him," says Arthur. It was planned that ushers would slip President Kimball out the side door just as the closing prayer was announced. However, as the time for departure grew near, President Kimball turned to Arthur and said, "I want to shake hands with the Saints."

Arthur was alarmed. With the final "amen," President Kimball got up, walked out to the edge of the platform, and reached out to shake hands. The members poured off the bleachers like a flood, and those in front were being crushed against the platform by the press of people from behind. Arthur motioned to the security officer in charge, and the two of them steered President and Sister Kimball safely to the door.

A similar situation occurred in Sao Paulo. Coming out of a big theater where a meeting had been held, President Kimball and Arthur struggled through the crowd to get to their bus, which was waiting out on the street. Arthur was holding on to President Kimball with his left arm and pushing forward with his right when out of the corner of his eye he saw a child knocked to the ground. Arthur instinctively reached down, caught her by the wrist, and pulled her with them fifty feet to the bus. "She'd have been trampled to death by the rush of folks whose eyes were on the departing prophet and not at their feet," he explains.

Arthur would always suggest to the president that he leave the stage early and get to the waiting vehicle before the people descended on them—and President Kimball would always answer the same way: "Now, that wouldn't be fair, would it?"

Attended by D. Arthur Haycock, President Spencer W. Kimball

greets a crowd of well-wishers For many years Arthur observed as the General Authorities reached out to the Saints. "Their love is just a part of them," he says. "They live the gospel rather than just preach it. When you work for those who have time for people, you work for the Lord's chosen." He adds, "It's the people—the ordinary people everywhere, not just the leaders—who make the Church great."

In San Juan, Puerto Rico, the Saints met with the prophet in a large hotel ballroom. Everyone was asked to stand back while the prophet walked out. But their enthusiasm got the best of them, and they crowded forward. Suddenly a woman stood up on a bench, reached out, and whipped President Kimball's head around to plant a kiss on his cheek. Arthur heard his neck crack, and the prophet suffered a stiff neck for days after the incident.

In the Dominican Republic, where meetings were scheduled in a Santo Domingo hotel. President and Sister Kimball were in bed after the last session when Joseph B. Wirthlin, then an Assistant to the Twelve, knocked on the door of Arthur's room with a problem. A group had just arrived from the other side of the island. The crowded bus had broken down from the load, and they had missed the meetings.

Elder Wirthlin had suggested holding a special session for these people at daybreak, but that was impossible. The members had to be back at their jobs in the morning. Arthur went to President Kimball's room to ask permission to express the prophet's love to the people and to explain that the late hour made it impossible for him to meet with them personally.

President Kimball's response was predictable. He looked at Arthur and said, "Now, that wouldn't be fair, would it?" Within five minutes he was dressed and downstairs to meet with this group of dedicated Saints.

All around the world, President Kimball admonished the Saints to live righteously. Typical of his counsel was a message he gave in 1975: "When we are asked by the Lord to enlarge the borders of the Church, that means not only more stakes, more missions and greater missionary work, but greater effectiveness . . . by having more and more of our members, young and old, more fully converted and in control of their lives, and less tossed by the trends of the time." (Ibid., July 5, 1975, p. 3.)

A member of the Twelve Apostles usually accompanied him on long journeys. Elder L. Tom Perry joined him in his visit to the Philippines. When the group stepped off their air-conditioned plane, they were hurried into a waiting air-conditioned taxi and then taken to an air-conditioned hotel. At the hotel, Arthur got out of the car, and immediately his glasses fogged up from the humidity and heat. He took them off and could barely see to get across the lobby and to the elevator. The group included two security officers. When the elevator doors closed, Arthur turned to the tall man behind him and began to clean his glasses on the man's tie. Suddenly he realized that this tie did not look like one either security man had been wearing. He looked up and saw Elder L. Tom Perry looking down—at him. Elder Perry still shields his tie when they meet; undaunted, Arthur always comments, "I'll bet that would be good for cleaning my glasses."

In the Philippines, local authorities assigned two heavy-set men to look after the president. After the meetings, they each took President Kimball by the elbows and walked briskly out of the hall; President Kimball's feet never touched the ground. They had just got him to the car and into the back seat when a missionary approached Arthur and said, "I have to talk with President Kimball." Arthur responded, "You and ten thousand others." The young elder explained, "My companion is new; he's homesick and he wants to go home. He would be a good elder, but he needs some help. I know President Kimball could help him." Arthur, touched by this young missionary who was trying to save his companion, opened the door and explained the situation to President Kimball. "Let me talk to him," said President Kimball. There were hundreds of people jammed in the street and around the car. The missionary's homesick companion entered the car and sat down next to the prophet. President Kimball listened intently to his story. "He didn't scold or lecture," Arthur says. "He just talked to the young elder as if he were his grandfather. Then he patted the missionary on the knee, hugged him, and said a little prayer for him. As the young man climbed out of the car, he said to President Kimball, 'I'm going to stay.' President Kimball knew when to leave the ninety-nine to save the one."

While Arthur was present for many memorable occasions, some of the most wonderful times were an hour here, a half hour there when President Kimball ministered one on one. "There is great security in spirituality," President Kimball said in 1974, "and we cannot have spirituality without service." He called on widows, gave blessings, visited those who were sick. "He did the ordinary things that we so often discount in importance, and yet he understood that in the eternal plan, these were essential," says Arthur. "He did, indeed, live by the exhortation, 'Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these, . . . ye have done it unto me.' " (Matthew 25:40.)

In Korea, members attending an area conference in August 1975 arrived in the middle of a heat wave. "I was hotter than I had ever been in my life," Arthur recalls, "but the local people sat very still in the conference. No one even waved a piece of paper or fan for relief." All during the meeting, ushers walked up and down the aisles holding up signs written in Korean. At the conclusion of the sessions, Arthur asked a local leader about the signs and was told that they read, "Please don't use your fans." The people felt that it would be disrespectful to fan themselves in the prophet's presence.

On trips Arthur always carried plenty of cash in the native currency. Still, he never seemed to have enough pesos, pounds, marks, or dollars to keep President Kimball supplied. When the president would meet a boy at a meeting or other function, he'd shake his hand and say, "You're going to be a great missionary when you grow up! This is to start your missionary fund."

"Of course," says Arthur, "they never spent the money. It was a keepsake from the Lord's chosen servant. Some even sent the bills to the office and asked for President Kimball's signature."

President Kimball was particularly vulnerable to requests from children. When he attended a conference in the Southern States one year, it was arranged for him to stay in the home of one of the Saints. Two little boys in the family slept in bunk beds, and they wanted the president of the Church to sleep in their room so they could say, "President Kimball slept here." He and Arthur slept on the small, lumpy beds with squeaky springs. Wanting not to disturb the president, Arthur lay awake on the top bunk most of the night. President Kimball, on the lower bunk, lay awake most of the night trying not to wake Arthur. In the meantime, the boys were sound asleep in a tent on the back lawn.

In February 1977, President Kimball and Arthur were in Mexico City, where they stayed at an elegant hotel overlooking Chapultepec Park and Mexico City. "We'd been to see the president of Mexico and the celebrated cathedral and the Zocalo Plaza," Arthur recalls. "We had seen the rich and famous, the ancient and magnificent sites. Now President Kimball wanted to attend a local family home evening." F. Burton Howard, a stake president from Utah who accompanied them as a Spanish interpreter and representative of the Church's legal affairs in Mexico, was asked to arrange it.

Shortly after dinner, President Kimball and his companions joined the family of Brother and Sister Agrico Lozano, who were of Indian descent. Their humble home was on a narrow street, with their sixteen-year-old car parked outside. The children, dressed in their Sunday best, had prepared a welcome for their guests in their best broken English. The mother gave a talk on the woman of Samaria, and President Kimball played "I Am a Child of God" and "I Need Thee Every Hour" on their piano. At the close of the evening, they all joined in singing "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." The family presented President Kimball with a book signed by the parents and each of the children. "Imagine the prophet coming to your home for family home evening!" says Arthur. "Yet to him, it was just a chance to be with the Saints."

While in Mexico, the president also made a surprise stop at a Church school. The children were out on the playground, and Arthur encouraged a group of them to run and find their teachers. He chuckles about the reception the children must have received when they announced to their teachers, "The prophet is out in the school yard!"

One brave little boy approached President Kimball and asked where he was from. The response was, "I am from Salt Lake City."

"Oh," said the child, "I thought you were from heaven."

One of Arthur's most memorable journeys with President Kimball was a 1979 trip to the Holy Land to dedicate the Orson Hyde Memorial Gardens on the Mount of Olives. Other Church officials also attended the dedication, including President N. Eldon Tanner, Elder Ezra Taft Benson, Elder Howard W. Hunter, and Elder LeGrand Richards. They visited Nazareth, Bethlehem, Shepherd's Hill, Mount Tabor, the Jordan River, and the Sea of Galilee. They walked on the Mount of Olives and into Bethany, saw the tomb where Lazarus was raised from the dead, and visited the place where David slew Goliath. Indeed, they walked where Jesus walked.

In Jerusalem, a Brigham Young University photographer took photos of President Kimball for a Church film project. The script called for pictures of him walking in the Garden of Gethsemane. A Catholic church had been built there, and the garden was surrounded by a wall. To go into the fenced-off area, it was necessary to obtain permission from the Catholic priest.

The Jewish guide and Arthur talked to the priest, who said that the charge would be 5,000 Israeli pounds per person per minute. For just the photographer and President and Sister Kimball, the fee would have totaled thousands of Israeli pounds, or approximately $450. The guide responded, "No, Father, President Kimball is a holy man. He came here to worship, not to pay tribute." Still, the pictures had to be taken outside the wall.

At the garden tomb, which Joseph of Arimathea had donated for the Savior's burial, the Kimballs and Haycocks stepped though the small opening into the crypt, which had been hollowed out of solid rock. The four of them sat in silence on a bench inside. After some moments, President Kimball began reading aloud from the Bible. He then offered a prayer. "At the conclusion of the prayer," Arthur recalls, "President Kimball turned to the three of us and said, 'I really think this is where they laid our Lord.' "

Everywhere President Kimball went in the Holy Land, Arthur was close to his side. As they walked near the garden tomb where Mary met the Savior that first Easter morning, Arthur held President Kimball's arm. Trailing along behind them was the BYU photographer, who wanted only President and Sister Kimball in the pictures. "I was reluctant to let go of President Kimball because the path was rough and uneven, so I cautioned him to watch his step and be careful," Arthur says. President Kimball turned, smiled, and replied, "It's all right, Arthur. Don't worry. I'm used to walking on holy ground."

A typical day with President Kimball at Church headquarters began early. Arthur always tried to get to work first, but President Kimball also liked to get there first. If Arthur was planning to arrive at 7:30, President Kimball would be there by 7:00. That meant Arthur had to start arriving by 6:30 to have the lights on, the office open, and everything ready when President Kimball came. All his appointments and meetings were outlined.

Arthur always cautioned Church employees to be sensitive and gracious on the phone. He often used as his example an incident that occurred when President Kimball and President Marion G. Romney were attending a meeting in Richfield, Utah. Arthur was taking notes when the stake executive secretary came up to him at the front of the room and said there was an important phone call for President Kimball.

Not wanting to disturb the meeting or the president, Arthur stepped down from the stand and went to take the call. "This is President Jimmy Carter," the caller said. "I would like to speak to your president."

Arthur quickly explained that President Kimball was at the pulpit speaking to a congregation of several hundred people and added, "I know he would like to speak with you, Mr. President. His second counselor is here. Would you speak to him?" Arthur hurried back to the chapel to get President Romney from the stand. President Carter was interested in learning more about the Church's missionary program. He explained that he was going to Mississippi to speak to a convention of Baptists, and he wanted to talk about creating a more effective missionary program—like that of the Mormons. His first question was how many missionaries were serving. President Romney said there were about thirty thousand. Then he wanted to know how much the Church paid them. He was stunned at the response: "Nothing. They all pay their own expenses." President Carter continued with his queries, asking how many countries they served in, where they came from, how they were trained, and how long they served.

Several days later, a newspaper reported on President Carter's speech, quoting him as saying, "We ought to be more like the Mormon Church. They have thousands of young people out teaching the gospel of Christ."

President Kimball thought in terms of "we." When he didn't mean the Church membership in general, he had in mind what would be good for both him and Arthur. They rarely stopped for lunch. The pattern was a result of President Kimball's zeal for the work and an intermittent decision to diet. "He never went on a diet alone," says Arthur. "We always went on a diet together, and he made sure I understood I needed it." The two were the same height, and when President Kimball started talking about Arthur's waistline, it meant they were in for a diet. Some days, hungry, Arthur would suggest lunch, at least a bowl of soup. As he tells it, "I would explain that Sister Kimball would be unhappy if I didn't get him lunch, and the president would quickly retort, 'That's all right. I'd rather she was mad at you than mad at me.' "

In 1975 Arthur accompanied President Kimball on a sentimental journey to his home in Arizona. They stopped in Pima, Thatcher, and Safford to see the homes where the Kimballs had lived, the winding staircase to the attic where Spencer Kimball had read the Bible as a boy, and the Gila Academy where he had been student-body president and a star athlete. They visited the home that Spencer and Camilla Kimball had built and lived in for just three years before Brother Kimball was called to Salt Lake City in 1943 as a member of the Twelve

Spending so much time together, the two men became close friends. They shared sorrows and celebrations; they laughed and they cried. And, like most proud grandfathers, they talked about their grandchildren. Arthur, in particular, liked to share his stories, and President Kimball had heard them all. Returning to the airport from a conference in the South, President Kimball seemed to be dozing in the front seat, so the stake president, who had been driving for more than thirty minutes without a saying a word, asked Arthur if he had any grandchildren. Before Arthur could answer, President Kimball lifted his head and said, "For heaven's sake, don't ask Arthur about his grandchildren. He'll never stop talking, and we'll miss the plane!"

President Kimball had a look of innocence and love that attracted people to him. But, says Arthur, "He also was human; he got frustrated and upset at times, like all the rest of us." He was independent and would sometimes slip out the back stairs when Arthur wasn't looking. Arthur saw his job as always taking care of the president. When they took a ship across the Mediterranean to Israel, President Kimball would deliberately get up and stroll around the ship alone, earlier than the two had agreed, just so he could greet the Saints who were hoping to see him. "I was trying to take care of him," says Arthur, "and he was interested in taking care of everyone else."

When they traveled, they always had adjoining rooms. If their wives were with them, President Kimball always asked Maurine, "You aren't going to lock this door, are you?" Arthur always kept a robe where he could reach it quickly.

When they were walking down the street, Arthur was quick to remind President Kimball of a letter or an accomplishment of someone heading their way. No matter where they were, Arthur always had a paper and pen handy to make a note of a name or an address and phone number. "There was never time for us to relax," he claims. But that didn't bother President Kimball.

President Kimball always advocated righteous living. He understood that the commandments knew no geographical boundaries. In Poland in 1977, when he dedicated the land for the preaching of the gospel, his supplication to the Lord included these words: "Bless these fathers and mothers in this nation, that they may bring up their children in righteousness, that they may train aright and bless the children that they may grow up to be honorable, peaceful, loving parents themselves, so that the generations may bring to Thee, their Lord, great satisfaction in the development of the souls of men." (Ibid., September 1977, p. 3.)

The General Authorities are serious about their work, but most of them also have a good sense of humor. "I still remember an amusing experience on the plane when I returned from Canada with President Kimball and several of the members of the Twelve," Arthur says. A flight attendant asked one of the Brethren if he would like some coffee. He said that he would like some lemonade. She responded that she didn't have any lemonade. She was moving off down the aisle when she must have remembered that she had some lemons. She came back and said, "I can squeeze you some." He replied, with a twinkle in his eye, "Don't touch me."

People flocked around President Kimball and sometimes tried to take advantage of him. When he was in the hospital, one of those attending him asked for the inside scoop on the Second Coming. His response was quick: "Why? Are you ready to go?"

"He got scores of requests to perform marriages and attend special functions," according to Arthur. "One man tried to get a commitment from me that the prophet would perform his marriage in the temple. Since President Kimball didn't know him, I turned him down. He apparently wouldn't take no for an answer, because a short time later he stood in front of the prophet's house and caught him coming home from work." The next day President Kimball scolded Arthur for being too protective. He had agreed to perform the wedding Arthur had declined for him

President Kimball's love for the Saints took him to Idaho after the collapse of the Teton Dam in 1976. A twenty-foot wall of water had wiped out many businesses, homes, and farms and forced residents of this fertile farm country to flee for their lives and then return to start over. At the time of the disaster, President Kimball had been flying home from a conference. The plane had developed engine trouble, and the president's party was stranded in Colorado. He didn't hear of the dam's collapse for more than twelve hours after it occurred. Arthur says, "He was visibly shaken that he had not been able to respond more quickly. The next day we flew to Idaho and toured the area by helicopter. Meeting with the Saints in temporary quarters, he encouraged reconstruction, telling them, 'Rebuild your lives while rebuilding your homes.' "

With all his humility, President Kimball also had a feisty streak. He would say that he got that trait from his grandfather Edwin Woolley, explaining, "If my grandfather ever drowned in a swift-running river, you wouldn't look for him downstream. He was so contrary, he would float upstream after he drowned." Arthur says, "When President Kimball got something on his mind, he would not let go of it. He was tenacious and determined yet demonstrative and kind."

President and Sister Kimball were always frugal. Sister Kimball had learned to make ends meet while growing up in the Mexican colonies, where food and clothing were scarce and making do was a way of life. She always tended a garden and bottled fruit and vegetables. When they moved into the Hotel Utah, she still went home to their residence to pick the apples from their tree in the backyard. She would cart them down to the hotel, up the elevator to the top floor, and down the hall to their apartment so that she could make applesauce. She bottled tomatoes, pears, beans—whatever she had in sufficient quantity. Arthur remembers stepping onto the elevator in the lobby of the Hotel Utah and smelling chili sauce. It was Sister Kimball's spicy home-cooked recipe simmering on the stove up on the tenth floor.

For President Kimball's eighty-fifth birthday party, she prepared a tribute that she shared with all attending: "On this your eighty-fifth birthday, my beloved husband, my heart is full of gratitude for the sixty-two years we've been privileged to share. They've been filled with joy and sadness. Sharing has made the joy more fulfilling and the sadness easier to bear. You have been patient with my foibles and richly fulfilled my needs. Your love and understanding have helped me over the rough spots. Our travels around the world have brought joyful and rewarding memories. In addition to my great love for you, I deeply respect and honor your undaunted courage in meeting successfully the many challenges which have filled your life. Your complete and unwavering dedication to your callings and service to others has been a lifetime of inspiration to me."

When President Kimball traveled, he took no time out for sightseeing. He claimed to have seen all of the world he wanted to see and was singularly focused on laboring for the Lord. On a European tour in 1977, he and Arthur had a week's break before going to Warsaw, Poland, to finalize arrangements for official recognition of the Church in that land. Arthur thought it a fine time to visit England, the land of his father's birth. President Kimball had different ideas. He wanted to visit the four new missions in Italy, as well as those in Austria and Germany. They went to Italy. Their first morning there, President Kimball asked when the meetings were scheduled with the missionaries. Wanting to conserve the president's strength, Arthur had planned a free day with an evening session. "I'm just trying to save you, President," Arthur said. Spencer Kimball responded, "I know you're trying to save me, but I don't want to be saved. I just want to be exalted."

Arthur set up meetings with the missionaries in every city they planned to visit, including Milan, Rome, Sicily, London, and Berlin. President Kimball's attitude was always the same: "You can't just float down the Thames; you have to be up and going. You've done a great job so far. Now what are you going to do tomorrow? Quicken your pace, lengthen your stride."

When President Kimball attended a meeting or a conference and got tired, he would ask to use the bishop's office for a few minutes; then he would shut the door and lie down on the floor for a quick nap. Soon after he became president of the Church, Arthur found him sleeping on his desk and promptly went out and bought a couch for the office.

"President Kimball was driven to do the Lord's work, and it showed," says Arthur. His shoes frequently needed resoling because, as he often said to Arthur, "My life is like my shoes, to be worn out in the service of the Lord." When he sat on the stand with his legs comfortably crossed, those in the audience could see the soles of his shoes worn right through.

In May 1980 more than 75,000 Latter-day Saints gathered at the Pasadena Rose Bowl in Southern California for an area conference. President Kimball was seated on a platform under the east goalposts, and during the meetings, he occasionally crossed his legs for comfort. A few days later a letter came to him at the Church offices with a check for forty dollars inside. A man who had viewed the proceedings through binoculars had observed that President Kimball had a hole in the sole of his shoe. In his letter he asked that the money be used to purchase a new pair of shoes for the prophet.

Arthur put the forty dollars into the general missionary fund and then went straight to a Salt Lake clothier and selected three new pairs of shoes, each a different style, in the president's size. President Kimball chose the pair he liked best and put them on. Arthur threw away the well-worn shoes.

The next day the two men left for a two-week trip to South America. Every day of the journey, President Kimball complained that his new shoes were too stiff, pinched his toes, rubbed his heels, and were uncomfortable. He rued the day Arthur convinced him to trade his perfectly good, though well-worn, shoes for a new pair.

Arthur tried to tailor his schedule to match President Kimball's. Planning to attend an event at the Lion House one evening, President Kimball stayed in his office working and waiting for Sister Kimball. About 5:30 he urged Arthur to go home, but his secretary insisted on staying as long as he did, saying, "President, you're making this hard for me. I am torn between doing my duty to stay close to you and still doing what you ask me to do." President Kimball, with a twinkle in his eye, responded, "They both ought to be the same, hadn't they?"

President Kimball took the process of perfection seriously. When in Kirtland, Ohio, he met a distant cousin who was not a member of the Church, he treated him the same way he treated everyone else, with thoughtfulness, interest, and great regard. The cousin, quite taken by President Kimball's sincerity and kindness, suggested to Arthur, "They should make my cousin Spencer a saint." A Catholic, the cousin was paying President Kimball a high compliment. When Arthur mentioned the cousin's praise to President Kimball, his response was immediate: "Nobody can make me a saint. I have to do that for myself." President Kimball's philosophy was always to put the Lord first, others second, and himself last. Even when he was ill and unable to work in the office, nothing was on hold. "He had set the agenda, and we simply followed his directions," says Arthur.

That President Kimball began to suffer physically from age and illness in the last years of his presidency was not unusual. "It's a reality of life," says Arthur, who has been at the bedside of five presidents of the Church when they died. "The president, quite naturally, is an older man when he is ordained and set apart, having already served many years as a member of the Council of the Twelve. Usually he has been in that position as a special witness of Christ for more than thirty years."

Arthur recognized the signs of wear on President Kimball as they were preparing to come home from a meeting at Logan, Utah, in the spring of 1979. President Kimball was leaning to one side, and Arthur, who was supporting him, worried that he might have had a stroke. He called President Kimball's physician from Logan and arranged to meet him at his clinic in Salt Lake City so he could check the president. When they had trouble getting President Kimball out of the car, they went immediately to the hospital.

That evening, after all the tests and CAT scans, a neurosurgeon recommended operating at once. President Kimball was suffering from a subdural hematoma.

"I determined I could not go through this alone and tried to get President N. Eldon Tanner on the phone," says Arthur. After repeatedly getting a busy signal on the Tanner number, he called Elder G. Homer Durham, a member of the Council of Seventy, who lived in the same building and on the same floor as the Tanners, and asked him to alert President Tanner. It seemed like only minutes had passed when President Tanner walked through the door. That night President Tanner and Arthur each slept on a hospital bed while they waited for word about the success of the surgery. At 3:00 a.m. the doctor woke them to explain that President Kimball had come safely through the operation and was out of danger.

Arthur often looks back on how Gordon B. Hinckley was called into the First Presidency just when the prophet and the Church needed him most. President Kimball hadn't been well, but one day he suddenly appeared stronger. He came out to Arthur's desk on July 23, 1981, and said he had decided to call another counselor. "See if you can find Elder Gordon Hinckley for me," he said to Arthur.

"Before I do that, President," said Arthur, "I want to be the first to hold up both hands to sustain him. We have worked closely together for more than forty years, and he is my dear friend."

President Kimball next asked Arthur to find Elder Neal A. Maxwell, one of the presidents of the Seventy, who was in the hospital following surgery. President Kimball and Arthur went immediately to the hospital, and President Kimball called Elder Maxwell to be an apostle, to fill the vacancy created by President Hinckley's becoming a member of the First Presidency.

"There was no doubt about it," says Arthur, "President Kimball needed some additional help in the presidency." President Tanner was gravely ill, and President Romney was not well. President Hinckley was well prepared to give faithful and able assistance. "President Hinckley was always careful not to push himself forward or assume prerogatives that belonged to the prophet," says Arthur. "He understood he had been called to help, and he did just that in any way he could."

President Hinckley had been a Church employee since 1935, three years longer than Arthur. "The Lord prepared President Hinckley for these days," says Arthur. "Over the years he'd had a depth of experience with the media, with temple work, as a member of the missionary committee, and with Church finances. He'd served on several boards of directors. With his wealth of experience, he was a great strength to President Kimball and an important addition to Church leadership."

Arthur describes President Kimball as a true servant of the Lord, always about his Father's business. "You can imagine his frustration when due to age and failing health he was unable to lengthen his stride or even maintain his pace in pushing forward the work of the Lord," says Arthur.

President Kimball's health began to fail shortly after President Hinckley's call, and he never again regained his strength. President Tanner passed away four months later, and President Romney's health continued to decline. The last time Arthur saw President Romney was shortly before his death. His eyes were closed, and he could barely move. Arthur sat down at his side and said, "President Romney, it's Arthur. If you can hear me, squeeze my hand." President Romney did.

In April 1982 President Kimball stood at the Tabernacle podium and delivered a brief testimony. It was a prophetic farewell when he said, "As I express that love for you and for the memory of the great experiences I've had with you, I bear my testimony: This work is divine, the Lord is at the helm, the Church is true and all is well." It was the last conference address he would present at general conference. His next conference sermon was read by Arthur, his secretary.

In 1980 Arthur spoke to an audience of students about his years with President Kimball, telling them: "We've been a lot of places together. We have laughed and sung the hymns together. We've prayed together. We've walked and ridden horses together. We've slept in the same room. I sat with him at breakfast this morning. He's old. He's tired. He's worn out. Unless the Lord heals him, he'll never go traveling again. But he is the prophet, and he will live as long as the Lord wants him to be president of the Church. I encourage you when you sing, 'We thank thee, O God, for a prophet to guide us in these latter days' that you sing with feeling and meaning and determination to follow his counsel. It won't always be what you want or what's convenient or what you enjoy, but I can testify to you, if you do follow him, always, you will never stray on forbidden paths. Your lives will be happy, and you will hear a glorious welcome when you pass to the other side, 'Well done, thou good and faithful servant. Enter into the joy of the Lord.' "

President Kimball's physical condition continued to weaken. Still he wanted to meet with people. He attended general conference, but it was exhausting for him. "I remember helping him when he attended all four sessions a month before he died," says Arthur. President Kimball died November 5, 1985. He was ninety years old.
