Heidi S. Swinton, In the Company of Prophets ( 1993)

Chapter Eight

Ezra Taft Benson

On May 1, 1992, the day before the Bountiful Temple site was to be dedicated, Arthur, as he had done so many times before at similar sites around the world, was walking around the area, "just making sure everything was in order."

This time, however, he wasn't on official business. He had retired from full-time Church employment by now and was serving in the Salt Lake Temple as a sealer.

Arthur no doubt understood better than most what this new temple would do for the community, the Church, and the work for the dead. He was sensitive not only to the grand affair scheduled for the next day but also to the long-range impact of this new temple in Zion. The location was well chosen, on a hillside overlooking the Great Salt Lake. It would be easily accessible from the Davis County suburbs, just north of Salt Lake City, much as the Jordan River Temple was accessible to Saints in the south part of the Salt Lake Valley.

Arthur wasn't alone. As he walked around the rough ground, President Ezra Taft Benson arrived to make a similar survey. For both it was a joyous meeting, and they shared their exhilaration for the event that would come the next day.

"I asked him how he was doing," Arthur says, "and in his typical style, he beamed and drew me to him. 'I love you,' he said. There we were at the site of another temple to be constructed for the Lord. It was a setting like so many others we had shared in our lives. But you never get used to a prophet of the Lord saying, 'I love you.' We both shed tears as we embraced."

President Benson and Arthur shared much in their five decades of association. Called as a General Authority in 1943, President Benson began his service to the Church with President Heber J. Grant. Arthur worked with him then and during President George Albert Smith's tenure. In 1952, when Elder Benson took on the additional responsibility of running the U.S. Department of Agriculture and serving in the Eisenhower Cabinet, Arthur was asked to assist in the new assignment. On leave of absence from the Council of the Twelve, Elder Benson left for a fact-finding tour around the United States while Arthur began organizing the myriad requests and information that began pouring into Secretary Benson's office. He also began poring over publications describing agricultural issues around the country.

In January 1953, Arthur and Daken Broadhead, a member of the Church who was originally from Nephi, Utah, accompanied the new Secretary of Agriculture to Washington, D.C. Both would serve as his assistants. Life in Washington was a sharp contrast to the religious environment of Salt Lake City. The tenor of activity at the Department of Agriculture was intense. On Secretary Benson's desk was a special white phone linked directly to the White House. "When Secretary Benson used it, you knew something official and important was coming," Arthur says.

Secretary Benson, in his honest and trusting style, expected complete integrity and veracity from others in Washington. But such was not always the case. Many times Arthur went home disappointed in the way Secretary Benson had been misunderstood and misrepresented. "Here was a man totally dedicated to doing what was right and necessary operating amid many who had agendas of their own," says Arthur.

A Washington reporter observed in 1954 that Secretary Benson "acts like a man whose conscience is always clear—his testimony will be the same next week or the week after or a year from now." Speaking not of his spiritual witness but of his truthfulness before Senate committees, the reporter said, "He doesn't have to remember what he said to an opposition senator at the last meeting. This is a built-in ulcer-saving device, not always found in Washington."

The Washington experience had another side, however. The Haycocks joined the Secretary for a gala affair at the White House with President Eisenhower and his advisors and were included in other major events. "Secretary Benson welcomed us and treated us kindly in every circumstance," says Arthur.

In the fall of 1953 Arthur accompanied Secretary Benson to a convention of agricultural leaders at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York City. Secretary Benson's address focused on issues and trends facing agriculture across the country. Near the close of his remarks, he paid tribute to a successful agribusiness leader from Chicago, lauding the man's contribution not only to the agriculture industry but to the country as well.

A few days later, Secretary Benson received a letter from the man expressing appreciation for the compliments and honor. It was what Arthur calls a "bread-and-butter" thank-you to a high government official; the letter said all the right things in just the right way. But what impressed him most was the postscript penned at the bottom of the letter in a firm executive hand. It read, "Secretary Benson, since I was with you in New York I have had the strangest feeling that I wanted to leave my nets and come follow you and be a fisher of men."

"President Benson so radiated his spiritual strength and closeness to the Lord that though his talk was about agriculture, a far greater message reached this man's heart," Arthur says. "A prominent Catholic, this man had seen beyond Secretary Benson's political role to his spirit. He knew, indeed, that he had been with a man of God."

While Elder Benson served eight years in Washington, Arthur was called, after a year and a half, to return to Church service as mission president in Hawaii.

Arthur later worked again with President Benson, serving as his secretary in the first months of his presidency of the Church. "He came into the office with sincerity and purpose," Arthur says. He focused quickly on the three-fold mission of the Church—to proclaim the gospel, to perfect the Saints, and to redeem the dead. "We shall continue every effort to carry out this mission," said President Benson.

"President Benson is thoughtful of others," Arthur comments. "When I was asked to return to Hawaii to work in the temple in 1986, he personally, without being asked, made arrangements for Maurine and me to take my ailing ninety-five-year-old mother with us on the assignment. I was visiting her daily and caring for her, and he knew she could not be left alone in Salt Lake City." Arthur's mother did not make the journey to Laie; she died shortly before their departure. Arthur relates, "I was touched that President Benson, President Monson, and other Church authorities took time from their busy lives to attend her funeral. President Benson asked to speak as well."

"President Benson is a man of wisdom, loyalty, character, and dedication," Arthur says. "His great loves are country , family, church, and the Book of Mormon. No one has ever put more emphasis on the divinity of the Book of Mormon and the importance of its message in our lives.

"I love him dearly, not only as the leader of the Church but also as my friend. We have shared much of our lives together; we have seen much change in the Church."

As he looks back over his life, D. Arthur Haycock claims to be just an ordinary man who has had extraordinary experiences. His life's mission has indeed been unique. He has learned how to get up early, work hard, and do all he can to contribute to the building of the kingdom. "For more than fifty years, I worked closely with, listened to, and observed the unselfish service and wise counsel and example of truly great men," says Arthur. "My experiences have been rewarding beyond earthly expectations. You can't work at the side of such chosen vessels of righteousness without recognizing that the Lord is in charge and that his servants are his witnesses. I have traveled the world with them, worshiped with them, prayed with them, and joined in sacred priesthood ordinances. With each I have found an understanding heart. My experiences far outweigh any material blessings or missed opportunities. I am so fortunate, so blessed, to have spent my working years in the company of prophets."
