I am very grateful to be a subscriber to A Liahona (Portuguese). The articles many, many times supply answers to my problems. I have learned that the magazine is one way to draw close to our Heavenly Father, because the Spirit of the Lord touches the hearts of those who read it.

Danubia Duarte,
Mogi Centro Ward, São Paulo Brazil Mogi das Cruzes Stake

As I read the Liahona (English), I am reminded of the army commander Moroni in ancient times. Moroni fortified his troops with the full armor of God in order to win their battles with their enemies (see Alma 43:19). Reading Church magazines and books will allow us, also, to put on the armor of God. I know that as I read each issue of the magazine I grow spiritually and am better prepared temporally to overcome whatever circumstances I encounter in life.

Elder James Malce Alo,
Philippines Davao Mission

After reading the First Presidency Message by President James E. Faust in the November 1995 issue of the Liahona (Spanish), I could not resist writing. President Faust’s article, “Serving the Lord and Resisting the Devil,” never stops being interesting. It has a deep and true moral content, and it should move us all to better our lives. An abrazo [a respectful embrace] for the First Presidency!

Víctor Plasencia Farro,
Miraflores Ward, Piura Peru Castilla Stake

One of the most eagerly awaited moments of each month is the arrival at my home of a beloved friend, the Liahona (Spanish). I am happy to open its pages because I know that within them I will find peace, truth, and much love. Each time I read the magazine I realize how much I love the Savior and how much concern he has for us. I wish everyone had the good fortune to feel the warmth that comes from the Liahona, for in its pages we find the pure love of Christ.

Estrella Ruiz Díaz de Gambetta,
Salinas Branch, Uruguay Montevideo East Mission

I consider A Liahona (Portuguese) to be an excellent magazine in every respect, as much for its photos and illustrations as for its written content. I greatly appreciate the beautiful experiences shared by members of the Church from around the world. I have been spiritually fortified many times by these stories.

Elson Carlos Ferreira,
Curitiba Fourth Ward, Curitiba Brazil Iguaçu Stake
