Lizzie wiggled and squirmed as she sat watching the deacons pass the sacrament bread. She thought, It’s sure hard to sit still and be reverent while the deacons pass the bread and the water. I wonder if all my friends will be in Primary today. I want to tell them about the presents Grandma and Grandpa sent from Portugal. I can’t wait to see Grandma and Grandpa when they come home from their mission!

In a few minutes, a deacon reached their row. When Lizzie took a piece of bread, Mom leaned over and whispered, “This is to help us remember Jesus.”

Lizzie tried to think about all the things she knew about Jesus. She thought of the story of Jesus visiting the Nephites after he was resurrected. He had blessed each child; then angels had come down from heaven. If only she could have been there!

Then Lizzie remembered a bedtime song Mom sometimes sang to her and her younger brother, Paul:

I think when I read that sweet story of old,

When Jesus was here among men,

How he called little children like lambs to his fold;

I should like to have been with him then.

I wish that his hands had been placed on my head,

That his arms had been thrown around me,

That I might have seen his kind look when he said,

“Let the little ones come unto me.”

(Children’s Songbook, 56)

Lizzie smiled quietly to herself and thought, I wish I could have been with Jesus then.

While she bowed her head for the prayer on the water, Lizzie listened carefully to the words. When she heard the priest say, “that they may always have his Spirit to be with them,” she wondered how she could have his Spirit with her.

The deacon passed the water to the family, and again Mom whispered to Lizzie, “This is to help us remember Jesus.”

Lizzie had a new thought. I didn’t live when Jesus was on earth, but he loves me just as much as he loved the children then. The sacrament prayer says that I can have his Spirit with me always if I remember him and am obedient. That’s great!

Lizzie snuggled up against Mom and smiled as the young men finished passing the sacrament. Thinking about Jesus had helped her be reverent during the sacrament, and she had such a good feeling inside that she knew she had done the right thing.
