Boyd K. Packer, Memorable Stories and Parables ( 1997)

10

Great Responsibility Rests on Teachers

I reluctantly make reference to [an experience that] taught me a significant, fundamental lesson.

During the winter of 1943-44, World War II was raging in full intensity. I had enlisted in the United States Army Air Force, and after a number of months of preflight training was assigned to a primary training field near Scottsdale, Arizona. We were training in bi-wing, open cockpit, single-engined Steerman trainers, an antique-type plane. We wore sheepskin jackets, helmets, and goggles, and, of course, the white silk scarf.

One day a plane crashed, and one of our classmates lost his life. Flight schedules were immediately intensified. This was war; it was no time to let student pilots become jittery.

The cadets in our class had all soloed, and that afternoon found us practicing landings at an auxiliary field. At the close of the day the last in turn to use the planes were to fly them back to the main field, while the remaining cadets were transported there by bus. It was my assignment to take one of the planes across the valley to the main field.

Out of curiosity I decided to fly over the crash site. It was plainly visible from the air. One could see the spot where the plane had hit, burst into flames, and skidded across the desert floor, burning the chaparral in a long, sooty smear. My curiosity satisfied, I then headed for the base.

We had been taught the various maneuvers: stalls, loops, spins, chandelles. In order to lose altitude to enter the flight pattern I decided to put the plane into a practice spin-the quickest way, of course, to lose altitude. I followed the proper procedure, and the plane entered a normal spin.

Somehow in making the recovery from the spin (perhaps nervous at the thoughts of the accident) I was clumsy, and I overcorrected. Instead of making a recovery the plane shuddered violently, stalled, and then flipped over into a secondary spin.

Never have I known such panic-before or since. I found myself clawing at the controls. Finally the plane pulled out in a long, sweeping skid just feet above the desert floor.

I don't know what happened. I think probably I let go of the controls. The plane, although antique, was used heavily as a trainer because it had the capacity almost to fly itself if left alone.

I quickly recovered my composure and made a normal landing, hoping that no one had seen the circus performance.

When we have had a frightening experience, shock sometimes doesn't set in until we have retired. For a long time that night I tossed and fretted, experiencing almost the same panic as I had in the plane. My buddy, a member of the Church from Salina, Utah, was sleeping in the lower bunk and was awakened in the wee hours of the morning by my restlessness. We went out on the barracks steps and talked. I told him what had happened and asked, "What did I do wrong?"

Then he told me that his instructor, early in their flight training, had warned them against just such a happening. He had pointed out to them the singular danger of a clumsy recovery from a spin and had taken each of his students up and demonstrated how to recover if it should happen. This training, this warning from his teacher, had insured my friend against mortal danger.

There arose in me an intense resentment for my instructor. Why hadn't he told us? Why hadn't he warned us? Another second or two in that spin and-well, I would not have been writing this story. His negligence as an instructor had come that close to costing me my life.

Great responsibility rests upon those of us who are teachers-both faculty members in the Church school system and teachers and general officers in the priesthood and auxiliary organizations of the Church. Jacob was a conscientious instructor:

Wherefore I, Jacob, gave unto them these words as I taught them in the temple, having first obtained mine errand from the Lord.

For I, Jacob, and my brother Joseph had been consecrated priests and teachers of this people, by the hand of Nephi.

And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day. (Jacob 1:17-19.)

Our whole social order could self-destruct over the obsession with freedom disconnected from responsibility, where choice is imagined to be somehow independent of consequences.
