Boyd K. Packer, Memorable Stories and Parables ( 1997)

24

What Do You Put into It?

Recently I listened to several sisters discuss Relief Society. One young woman said: "We find it so difficult to interest both the older and the younger women. If we have a lesson or project the younger women are interested in, the older women do not come. It's so hard to get something to please everyone."

Sisters, to me there is something pathetic about those of our sisters who sit at home waiting to be enticed to Relief Society. That is not right!

When faithful sisters pray and work and make a worthy presentation, they deserve your support. Just to have you attend is a great help.

Some sisters, it appears, seem to pore over the offering of Relief Society like a fussy diner searching a menu for something to excite the taste.

Sisters, it is your duty to attend Relief Society, just as it is the duty of the brethren to attend their priesthood meetings.

I've heard some sisters say, "I don't attend Relief Society because I just don't get anything out of it."

Let me teach you a lesson.

In 1888 the Relief Society and the young women's organizations of the Church became charter members of the National Council of Women and of the International Council. These two organizations were established primarily to promote women's suffrage and to improve the lot of women and children everywhere.

During those years our delegates had their good days and their bad, depending upon circumstances, the leadership, and the leaders' attitude toward the Mormons.

In April of 1945 Belle Smith Spafford became the general president of the Relief Society. Only a week or two after she had been sustained a letter came from the National Council of Women announcing their annual meeting to be held in New York City.

Sister Spafford had attended those meetings before, and in view of her previous experience she and her counselors carefully considered the invitation for several weeks. They decided to recommend to the President of the Church that the Relief Society terminate its membership in those councils. They prepared a statement of recommendation, listing all of the reasons for so doing.

Trembling and uncertain, Sister Spafford placed the paper on the desk of President George Albert Smith, saying, "The Relief Society Presidency wishes to recommend that the general board terminate its membership in the National Council and in the International Council of Women, for the reasons listed on this paper."

President Smith carefully read the paper. Had they not held membership for well over half a century? he inquired.

Sister Spafford explained how costly it was to go to New York, the time it took, and described the humiliation they occasionally experienced. She recommended that they withdraw because "we don't get a thing from these councils."

This wise old prophet tipped back in his chair and looked at her with a disturbed expression. "You want to withdraw because you don't get anything out of it?" he questioned.

"That is our feeling," she replied.

"Tell me," he said, "what is it that you are putting into it?"

"Sister Spafford," he continued, "you surprise me. Do you always think in terms of what you get? Don't you think also in terms of what you have to give?"

He returned that paper to her and extended his hand. With considerable firmness he said, "You continue your membership in these councils and make your influence felt."

And so they did! Sister Spafford took the gentle correction from that wise prophet, and the day came that she was president of that organization.

Now, I pass that same message to each sister in the Church. If you are absenting yourself from Relief Society because "you don't get anything out of it," tell me, dear sister, what is it that you are putting into it?
