Latter-day Saints from the five stakes in Cebu were delighted in August 2008 when Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, together with his wife, Susan Bednar, visited the Philippines. From August 15 to 17, 2008, Elder and Sister Bednar spoke to and visited with the Saints and missionaries during several meetings in Cebu. Elder Bednar also presided over the Cebu Philippines Central Stake conference.

At a multistake young single adult meeting, Elder Bednar emphasized the importance of meaningful prayer and personal revelation. “Pray in faith. This requires effort, commitment, and persistence. Faith in Christ leads to righteous action. We press forward after praying in faith by acting upon the things we have expressed to Heavenly Father.”

He also taught the Saints, “Revelation is real and available to every member of the Church who has been baptized, confirmed, and admonished to receive the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost, described in the scriptures as a still, small voice, usually communicates with us in ways that are quiet and subtle. Taking the Holy Spirit for our guide is essential for our spiritual growth and survival in an increasingly wicked world.”

Elder Bednar taught members about the temple during the Cebu Central Stake Saturday evening session of conference. “There soon will be a temple closer and more easily accessible for you,” he said. “Look with anticipation for the blessings that will come to your families as you make and keep sacred temple covenants. Prepare earnestly for and take advantage of every opportunity to attend the temple.”

Elder Bednar explained that the adversary relentlessly attempts to destroy families and to deter members from attending the temple. Elder Bednar counseled, “Pattern your homes after the temple—make each one a house of learning, a house of prayer, a house of order” (see D&C 109:8).

Homes should be places of learning—a place where inspired questions are answered with the assistance of the Spirit, where the gospel of Jesus Christ is learned and obeyed. “Our homes can be a spiritual refuge when patterned after the temple,” added Elder Bednar.

In a meeting expressly for the youth, Elder Bednar invited them to properly prepare for missionary service with the help of the Lord. “Study the scriptures daily and be obedient to all of God’s commandments. When you live the gospel, you can help encourage others to do the same,” he said.

“The gospel provides answers to why we are here and where we are going, which strengthens us and helps us obey the commandments,” he explained. “When you know and fully understand that you are a child of God, you will not violate the law of chastity and other commandments. … When we choose to do wrong, we have forgotten who we really are. As you come to understand that you are a chosen son or daughter of God, obedience will naturally follow.”

“Do not underestimate the spiritual capacity of the youth to understand and live the gospel. They have spiritual depth, yearnings, and desires,” Elder Bednar told the parents and leaders present as the devotional concluded.
