Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) Preface

In July 1986 a group of evangelical Christians and former Mormons held a news conference in SaltLakeCity and subsequently presented a petitionto TheChurch ofJesusChrist of Latter-day Saints demanding that it stop referring to itself as a "Christian" church. The petition had been signed by 20,543 individuals from 49 states and 31 foreign countries.1

The reaction to this petition in Utah was largely one of consternation. After all. the Saints asked themselves, is not the name of our church The Church ofJesus Christof Latter-day Saints? Do we not worship Christ? Is not the Book of Mormon another testament of Jesus Christ? The Utah Saints shook their heads and wondered how it was possible that anyone could seriously doubt that the Latter-day Saints were Christians. For several weeks afterward letters to the editors of the major Utah newspapers clearly indicated that the petition had stirred strong feelings on both sides of the question. Attacks and defenses, devotions and vituperations were all displayed in the controversy, but there is little evidence that either side really understood the basic issues involved.

The charge that Mormons are not Christians may nonplus the Saints on Utah's Wasatch Front-who seldom hear it or, when they do, simply dismiss it as too silly to be taken seriously - but in those areas where Latter-day Saints are a minority of the population, this is often the most commonly heard criticism of the LDS Church and its doctrines. For in the most part, even these Latter-day Saints find the charge incomprehensible; and without comprehension it is very difficult to offer a coherent response.

It is hoped that this book will be of service on two fronts -that it will make the accusation that Latter-day Saints aren't Christians comprehensible to the Latter-day Saints, and that it will also help them in forming an intelligent and informed response to that accusation. This book is not meant, however, to provide ammunition for those contentious souls who simply want to carry on a war of words with the anti-Mormons, for the spirit of contention is always un-Christian (seeD&C 10:63).

It is not my purpose in these pages to prove, or even to argue, that the LDS church is true or that its doctrines are correct, even though I believe both of those propositions. Rather, I willattempt to show whythearguments usedtoexclude Latter-day Saints from the "Christian" worldareflawed.Theoperating principle behindmostofmyarguments will not be rectitude but equity-whatissauce for the gooseissauce for the gander. That is,ifAugustine or Luther or John Paul II can express opinions or insist on beliefs that differ from the Christian mainstream and yet still be considered Christians, then Joseph Smith andBrigham Young cannot be disqualified from bearing that title when they expressthesame or similar opinions.Iftheological or ecclesiastical diversity can be tolerated among mainstream Christian churches without charges of their being "non-Christian," then
