diversity of a similar kind, or to a similar degree, ought to be tolerated in the Latter-day Saints. This is simply an issue of playing on a level field.

At one time Protestant and Catholic denominations did make charges against each other, each claiming that the other (or others) was not Christian. But in the almost five hundred years since the Reformation, Protestants and Catholics have become used to each other and, with the exception of certain fundamentalist groups, are willing to tolerate the differences between themselves. They see these differences as being "all in the family," and refer to each other as "Christians" in a generic sense, though they may still disagree with each other's doctrines.

The problemisthat the Latter-day Saints have only been around for 160 years, andthemore senior denominations have not yet become used to us, nor do they yet extend to us the courtesies and the toleration they now automatically extend to each other. I will maintain inthe following pages that the Latter-day Saintsareoften the victims of a theological double standard, being labelled "non-Christian"foropinions and practices thatarefreely tolerated in other mainstream denominations. Where this is the case, I must insist that the charges arenot only unfair butarelogically defective.Forifperson A holds an opinion with which other Christians disagree, and yet person A remains a Christianin thecommon estimation, then person B may not logically be declaredtobe non-Christianforholding the same opinion-whatissauce forthegooseissauce for the gander.Nohonest Christian, Mormon or non-Mormon, should be satisfied with results arrived at with the aid of an unlevel playing field or a theological double standard.

Many complex and even contradictory arguments are offered by those who would exclude the Latter-day Saints from the family of "Christian" churches. These arguments generally fall into one of six basic categories: (1) exclusion by definition; (2) exclusion by misrepresentation; (3) exclusion by name-calling (the ad hominem exclusion); (4) the historical or traditional exclusion; (5) the canonical or biblical exclusion; and (6) the doctrinal exclusion. In each of these broad categories there are certain subtle assumptions about the nature, history, and doctrine of the Christian religion that must be defined and examined before the exclusions based on them can be considered. I find that, upon close examination, these assumptions and/or the arguments based on them turn out to be either illogical or unfair.

The reader should note that where I have used examples and illustrations from antiquity, these are taken only from what are commonly considered orthodox Christian sources and not from Gnostic, Marcionite, Manichaean, or other heterodox writings. Also, in referring to modern authorities I have cited only mainline non-LDS scholars whose work is widely known and respected, usually the consensus experts in their fields. The reader will find that there has been no stacking the deck with eccentric "authorities" either ancient or modern.

In the following chapters I shall use the termsorthodoxandorthodoxyto refer to traditional, mainstream Christianity. This is merely for convenience and does not indicate that I accept "orthodox" Christianity as theologically correct, or that I accept any implication that Latter-day Saints are in the strict sense"unorthodox."
