Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) 1

The Exclusion by Definition

What is a Christian? The term is found three times in the New Testament (Acts 11:26;26:28;1 Pet. 4:16), but it is not defined in any of these passages. According toWebster'sThird New International Dictionarythe termChristianmay be defined in a number of ways, but the most common is "one who believes or professes or is assumed to believe in Jesus Christ and the truth as taught by him: an adherent of Christianity: one who has accepted the Christian religious and moral principles of life: one who has faith in and has pledged allegiance to God thought of as revealed in Christ: one whose life is conformed to the doctrines of Christ." The second most common meaning is "a member of a church or group professing Christian doctrine or belief."

Under either of these two most common definitions in the English language, Latter-day Saints qualify as Christians. Moreover, these are the definitions that most Latter-day Saints themselves would use in applying the termChristianto other denominations. Thus, even though Latter-day Saints feel very strongly that theirs is the true Church of Jesus Christ, they still accept Protestants and Catholics in all their varieties as Christians because these denominations believe in Jesus as the Christ and attempt to follow his teachings, however differently they may interpret them. While it is true that there are doctrinal differences, sometimes serious, between Christian denominations, it is generally accented that each follows Christ as it best understands him. As the dictionary indicates, this is the way that most people use the termChristian,as a generic noun that tolerates doctrinal differences and denominational variations among those who believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God and the Savior of the world. If one understands the termChristianin this way, then the charge that Mormons1are not Christians is a serious charge indeed.

Nonstandard Definitions

Most of the time, however, those who make this charge are not using the termChristianwith this definition in mind at all. He who defines a term controls a term. For example, if the Latter-day Saints defined the termChristianto mean "one who believes in the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith and in the inspired nature of the Book of Mormon," then they would betechnicallycorrect (based on their own private definition of the term) in concluding that only Latter-day Saints are Christians. It is unlikely, however, that the rest of the world would agree with such a parochial and distorted definition, and Latter-day Saints would likely (and rightly) be accused of trying to stack the deck through the manipulation of language. For Mormons to defineChristiansas "people who believe what Mormons believe" and then conclude that non-Mormons aren't Christians would be nothing more than to say that non-Mormons aren't Mormons -without any consideration for what they may or may not believe about Jesus.
