In fact, this manipulating of terms is exactly what some do in excluding the Latter-day Saints from consideration as Christians. They defineChristiannot in the generic sense of common usage, but in a narrow sectarian sense that excludes anyone whose doctrine differs from their own. Individuals who wouldn't tolerate a denominationally exclusive definition of the termChristianif it excluded them will often accept such a tactic if the tables are turned and the trick is played on someone else. Thus on the surface these individuals seem to be making the very serious charge that the Latter-day Saints do not believe in Jesus Christ or do not attempt to follow his teachings, but in reality they are only saying that the Latter-day Saints understand Jesus Christ differently and worship him differently than they do.

Any way you lookatit, this gameisrigged.Ifyou define a Christian as one who believes in the fundamentals of conservative Protestantism, for example, then only fundamentalist Protestantswillbe Christians.Ifyoudefine a Christian as one who accepts the leadership and authority of Pope John PaulII,then only Roman Catholics will be Christians.Ifyoudefine a Christianasone who acceptstheauthority of Archbishop Makarios or of Pope Shenouda, then only the Greek or Coptic Orthodox, respectively, can be Christians. Playing thiskindof word gameislike defining a duckas anaquatic bird with a broad, fiat bill, short legs, webbed feet, and brown feathers, and then arguing that female mallardsareducks but males are not because the latter's feathers are the wrong color.

Of course there certainly are those who defineChristiandenominationally in just this way in order to exclude Latter-day Saints and anyone else whose feathers are the wrong color, just as there are those who definehuman beingas necessarily meaning "male," or "Caucasian," or "Anglo-Saxon." There is usually little that can be done to get such individuals to change their definition to include the whole class and not just those with "the right colored feathers," but wecanpoint out to them the logical fallacy of using nonstandard definitions or an overly specific taxonomy for exclusionary purposes.

Itisironic that one version of the exclusion by definition tactic was used against ancient Christians by pagan opponents who, accordingtoWayne A. Meeks, "often denouncedthenew cultas'asuperstition' and its membersas'atheists.'"2Nomatter how much Christians protested the unfairness of this charge, insisting that they worshipped God, their persecutors countered that Christians did not worshipthe gods-that is, the right sort of gods,thepagangods-and were therefore "atheists." With this specialized definition of atheist, all the charge really meant was that Christians worshipped God differently than pagans, but the slander gave the impressionto themasses-as it was designed to-thattheChristians were godless and irreligious.Ofcourse this made hating and persecutingtheChristians much easierandmade it much more difficult for the Christianstoget a fair hearing. This same tacticisnow being used against the Latter-day Saints by other Christians who don't like the way we worship Christ and would therefore deny us the title of Christian.

Excluding More Than the Latter-day Saints

If the termChristianis understood to mean someone who believes that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God and the Savior of the world, and who believes that the Old and New Testaments contain his teachings. then the Mormons are Christians. It is simply a matter of
