historical record that the Latter-day Saints affirm all these propositions. Although the Latter-day Saints may differ in details of doctrinal interpretation (that is, have different colored feathers from other kinds of Christians), they certainly share the basic taxonomic similarities of the class.

On the other hand, if the termChristianis defined in a sectarian way to mean "those who believe as we do," then the sect in question might be able to say Mormons aren't Christians (using the term in their private, nonstandard sense), but all this statement really means is that Mormons aren't Baptists, or Pentecostals, or whatever-and we already knew that. The charge in this case is certainly not as serious as it would be if the excluders used the common definitions. But their use of customized definitions makes their charge against the Mormons not only trivial but useless. It certainly has no bearing on whether Latter-day Saints believe in Jesus Christ.

What the average "Christian" (used here in the inclusive sense) reader needs to bear in mind, regardless ofhisor her own denomination,isthat those who exclude by definition usually exclude considerably more peoplethanjust the Latter-day Saints.Ifone allowsthetermChristiantobe definedina nonstandard way to mean evangelical Protestantism,forexample, then Mormons are indeed excluded, but so are Roman Catholics, Greek Orthodox, and most otherkindsof Protestants - any duck whose feathersarenot exactlytheright color. Even amongthemost conservative Protestants this same exclusion has recently been used to declareas"heretics"andnon-Christians such evangelistsasPat Robertson, Robert Schuller, and Oral Roberts-anyone at all who disagrees with the narrow sectarian view. For those who employ this exclusion, the "family of Christian churches"isusually very small indeed. Their operating definition of a Christianis"a member of the true church [my church]," or "one who believes what I believe." Not eventheLatter-day Saints, who feel very strongly that theirs is the true Church, would define being a Christian in such a limited way.

On one occasion, when I was in the East lecturing on this topic to a group of ministers from various denominations, one person in particular kept insisting that Mormons were not Christians and that for this reason everything I had said was invalid. So I asked him-with Roman Catholic parish priests in the audience-if Roman Catholics were Christians in his understanding. He replied that they could be, but that they usually weren't, because they believed in salvation through the sacraments of the Catholic church and not through a "being saved" experience alone. I asked him again-with a Greek Orthodox priest present in the audience-if the Eastern Orthodox were Christians. He answered, "Only if they believe what Christians [that is,hiskind of Christians] believe." Then I asked him if liberal Protestants who do not accept the fundamentalist Christian theology were Christians. "Absolutelynot,"was the reply. "They are traitors to the cause of Christ."

While many of the ministers present at that meeting would have agreed originally with this man's statement that Mormons were not Christians, they quickly became incensed when the same charge,on the same grounds and for the same reasons,was levelled against them. In fact, all this particular individual was saying is that Mormons, Catholics, Orthodox, and liberal Protestants alike are not Christian fundamentalists. The hidden premise in his argument was that if one did not believe what he believed, then one was not a Christian.
