But surely if this hidden premise and the reasoning based upon it are to be rejected when applied to other Christian denominations, then they must be rejected when applied to theLatter-day Saintsas well.

Fundamentalists and other sectarians are free, I suppose,todefine the wordChristianany way theywanttofor their own purposes. They can define themselvesastheonly genuine Christians in the whole world and then shuteverybodyelse out,aslongastherest of Christendom understands that thatishow they areusingthe language, and that coming from them the assertion that "Mormons aren't Christians" simply means "Mormons disagree with us."

Christianity by Consensus

Now, it could be argued that the termnon-Christianshould be applied to anything not found, taught, or believed within the family of Christian churches, but this assertion meets with certain difficulties. First of all, it begs the question. Shall the Latter-day Saints be considered as part of the family of Christian churches that might be surveyed to determine what is "Christian"? Whether one says yea or nay, one must assume in advance the results of the survey. Begging the question is assuming in advance the results of the proposition supposedly being tested-the proposition being, in this case,"AreLatter-day Saints Christians?"

Second, the New Testament tells us that Paul most assuredly knew things, believed things that could not be shared with some Christians (see1 Cor. 3:1-2) or with any other Christians at all (2 Cor. 12:2-4). Did his knowing and believing things not taught in the Bible, things unknown to other Christians, render Paul a "non-Christian"? Surely not. This specialized definition ofChristiansimply doesn't work.

The New Testament itself does not present a very narrow view of who was a disciple and who was not. InActs 18:24-28we read about Apollos, who was "instructed in the way of the Lord" but incompletely. Eloquent as Apollos was, his doctrine was defective until Aquila and Priscilla "expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly." Yet there is no indication that he was not considered a Christian before he was set straight. Similarly, Paul found "certain disciples" near Ephesus who were so imperfectly taught that it was decided to baptize them over again (Acts 19:1-7). Nevertheless, imperfect as their understanding was originally, they, like Apollos, were called disciples, even though certainly there was room on their part for doctrinal improvement. The Christians at Corinth were so immature that Paul couldn't teach them the meat (the heavy doctrines) of the gospel at all; nevertheless Paul still addressed them as Saints (1 Cor. 3:2;1:2).

The letters of Paul make it absolutely clear that the law of Moses is fulfilled in the gospel of Christ and is no longer bindingasa requirementforsalvation.Thusmost would consider this a "Christian" doctrine. YetinActs 21:20weread that James said to Paul, "Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews therearewhich believe;andthey areallzealous of the law." These believers were not thrown out of the Church, even though they did not yet understand the fundamental doctrine of howthe lawwas fulfilledinChrist. Onthecontrary, James even suggested to Paul a public relations maneuver designed to soothe their
