Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) 2

The Exclusion by Misrepresentation

Simply put, the exclusion by misrepresentation is the attempt to condemn Latter-day Saints for things theydon'tbelieve. One of the fundamental liberties guaranteed under the Constitution of the United States is that people can believe and worship as they choose. No group or individual has the right to force their doctrine on anyone else. As a corollary to this, most would agree that it is also the right of any church or religion to define and interpret its own doctrines for its own use. The Methodists decide what Methodists believe, and the Baptists decide what Baptists believe; thus the doctrines of Methodism will be what Methodists determine they are and not what someone else says they are or must be.

Anti-Mormon Mind Readers

Yet time and again the Latter-day Saints are denied this basic privilege of defining and interpreting their own doctrines. Quite frequently a Latter-day Saint attempting to explain the tenets of his or her faith to non-Mormons will be interrupted by some self-styled expert who says, "No, that'snotwhat you believe;thisis what you believe!" There generally follows a recital of some hocus-pocus that is certainly not taught by the LDS church.

Ponder the absurdity of it-"Youdon'tknow whatyoubelieve, but I know whatyoubelieve; I know your thoughts better than you do!"

Many times in my professional career I have had occasion to say, "I'm sorry, but I don't believe that," only to be assured most forcefully by some antagonist that really, privately, secretly, I didtoobelieve it. "Take my word for it," I have responded,"Iam the world's authority on whatIbelieve -and I haveneverbelieved what you say I do!" Usually such a declaration on my part is to no avail, for these individuals have already decided in their own minds what my personal beliefs and the beliefs of the LDS church are, and they will not generally accept any testimony to the contrary. Thus I am denied the right to define my own beliefs.

Such individuals usually insist that Mormon doctrine is better understood and more authoritatively interpreted by non-Mormons than by Mormons. With a reasonably knowledgeable Latter-day Saint right in front of them saying, "That is not and never has been my belief or the doctrine of my church," they prefer to believe some anti-Mormon pamphlet or cleric. In fact it has frequently become an article oftheirfaith to insist that Latter-day Saints believe absurd and silly things that no Latter-day Saint in the world has ever heard taught as doctrine. Shall Mormon doctrine be what the Mormons say it is or what their opponents say it is?
