When non-Mormons attempt to impose doctrines on the Latter-day Saints or interpret them for us, the resulting fictions generally fall into one of three categories: outright fabrications, distortions of genuine LDS doctrines into unrecognizable forms, or the representation of anomalies within the LDS tradition as mainline or official LDS teaching.

Fabrication

A little background on the issue of outright fabrication is provided by an experience of the Procter and Gamble Company. Somewhere on the extreme fringes of the religious right the rumor was started in the early 1980s that Procter and Gamble, the soap company, was owned by satanists and that all of P&G's profits went to the Church of Satan. Apparently some "Christian" had noticed the venerable P&G trademark, which shows the man in the moon and thirteen stars honoring the thirteen colonies, and in the total absence of any evidence decided that this was a satanic symbol. Soon photocopied sheets detailing the sins of P&G were circulating in every part of the country, and as the story spread, it grew.

Ultimately it was claimed that P&G was wholly owned by the satanic church and that its officials had appeared on the Donahue show discussing their links to satanism.

Finding themselves attacked by religious fanatics, Procter and Gamble fought back. Expecting that any story so absurd and so easily disproved could be quickly stopped, the company established a toll-free public information number and hired private detectives to find out who was spreading the lies. In many states lawsuits were filed against those circulating literature containing the false stories. Sent to all ministers in affected areas were public relations packets with statements from Billy Graham, Jerry Falwell, Jimmy Draper of the Southern Baptist Convention, and Joseph Bernardin, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Cincinnati, all certifying that the story was a lie. Statements from the Dona-hue people denied that anyone from P&G had ever even been on that program, or that Donahue had ever even done a show on a related topic.

All to no avail-the religious extremists whom P&G was up against believed and printed whatever they wanted to, regardless of the quality or quantity of the contradictory evidence. Having the truth was nowhere near as important to them as having a target. After trying for years with all the legal, financial, and public relations resources of one of America's largest companies, an incredulous P&G finally had to throw in the towel and get rid of its trademark. They simply could not stop the willful and intentional fabrications of religious extremists.

The pointisthis:Ifan entityasinnocuousasa soap company can becomethetarget of religious irrationality and be totally unable to stop the subsequent campaign of lies, what chance do the Latter-day Saints have? Forit isbasically the same element that ambushed Procter and Gamble that produces and circulates the most outrageous fabrications about the Latter-day Saints and their beliefs. But the Latter-day Saints don't hire lawyers and private detectives; there are no mass mailings or public relations campaigns to counter the fabrications.TheLatter-day Saints just continuetoteach their beliefs, theirrealbeliefs, to those who will listen. Unfortunately, even people who are too knowledgeable to have fallen fortheProcter and Gamble stuff are sometimes takeninbythesame kind of outrageous literature if it is written against the Latter-day Saints.
