One day in 1983, when our family was living in Pennsylvania, our daughter Sarah, then ten years old, came home from school visibly upset. The subject of the Mormon pioneers had come up in class, and the teacher had asked if anyone knew anything about the Mormons. Before Sarah could respond, one of her classmates said, "My daddy says Mormons are people who live in Utah and worship idols." Sarah quickly answered back, "Well, I'm a Mormon, and we don't worship idols." But the teacher would not back her up, and many of her classmates never did believe her, largely because they had already been taught in their Sunday schools that Mormons do worship idols or Joseph Smith. Once again the first- person testimony of a live Latter-day Saint was rejected in favor of a popular anti-Mormon fabrication.

This state of affairs reminds one of the popular Christian notions of Jewish belief that circulated during the Middle Ages (and later). No matter what Jews said to the contrary, no matter what the evidence indicated, many Christians insisted that Jews secretly practiced the ritual mutilation and murder of Christian children. Over the centuries thousands of Jews have been killed as a result of this and other Christian fabrications. This Christian view of what Jews believedandpracticed had become part of popular Christian faith, even though it had nothing to do with the actual beliefs and practices of Judaism.1

Distortion

A close relative of the exclusion by fabrication is the exclusion by distortion. The only difference is that distortions are not entirely groundless, like fabrications, but are related to doctrines that the Latter-day Saints actually do believe. Yet the same objections hold for the exclusion by distortion as for the exclusion by fabrication. Latter-day Saints can't reasonably or logically be declared non-Christian for beliefs they do not hold, even if the distortion issimilarto actual LDS beliefs.

Let Them Speak for Themselves

When I was just out of graduate school, I was assigned to teach a class outside my usual area of expertise called Roman Catholic Thought. My colleagues stated at the time that nothing could be more ecumenical than a Mormon teaching Roman Catholic thought at a Methodist college, and indeed it turned out to be one of the most rewarding experiences of my career. After many years of hearing mostly non-Catholics explain Catholicism to me, I actually readCatholictheologians explaining their own beliefs. I learned that Catholicism was not the religion I had been led to believe it was. For the class I assigned and used only books that were marked "nihil obstat" and "imprimatur," that is, officially approved by the Catholic church. Day after day I learned along with my students and gave up distortions and misrepresentations that I had once ignorantly accepted as a part of Catholicism. The experience strengthened my already firm conviction that any religion must be allowed to speak for itself and interpret its own doctrines, and it must allow the same privilege to all others.2

It would seem only fair that any criticism of the Latter-day Saints must address doctrines that are actually held by them rather than doctrines merely attributed to them or interpreted for them by hostile critics. If Latter-day Saints believed that Jesus was not the Son of God
