but just an ordinary man, or if they worshipped someone else instead, they would be considered non-Christians-but first it would have to be established that Mormons really held such beliefs, and not merely that such beliefs were attributed to them by their enemies. Surely any reasonable investigator must grant that Latter-day Saints cannot rationally or logically be declared non-Christians on the basis of doctrines they donotbelieve.

What Is Official Doctrine?

So what constitutes genuine Mormon doctrine? What is the LDS equivalent of "nihil

obstat" and"imprimatur"?Whatdothe Latter-day Saints believe? Can something be said to be "Mormon" doctrine if any Latter-day Saint anywhere believes it? If my LDS grandmother believed that frogs cause warts, or that the earth is fiat, does that make those ideas LDS doctrine? If some LDS missionary somewhere believes that the earth is hollow and that the lost ten tribes are hiding inside, is his or her belief therefore LDS doctrine? Of course not.

Virtually every religion has procedures for distinguishing the individual beliefs of its members from theofficialdoctrines of the church, and so do the Latter-day Saints. In fact among the Mormons the procedure is remarkably similar to that of many Protestant denominations. An example of the procedure can be taken from the records of the Fiftieth Semiannual General Conference of the LDS church, 10 October 1880, when President George Q. Cannon addressed the conference:

I holdinmy hand the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and alsothebook, The Pearl of Great Price, which books contain revelations of God.InKirtland,theDoctrine and Covenantsinits original form, as first printed, was submittedto theofficers oftheChurch and the members oftheChurchtovote upon. As there have been additions made to it by the publishing of revelations which were not contained in the original edition, it has been deemed wise to submit these books with their contents to the conference,to see whether theconference will vote to accept the books and their contents as from God, and binding upon us as a people and as a Church. 3

Subsequent changes of content in the standard works of the Church have been presented similarly to the membership in general conference to receive a sustaining vote. It is that sustaining vote, by the individual members or by their representatives, that makes the changes officially binding upon the membership as the doctrine of the Church.

When Wilford Woodruff, as President of the Church, committed the Latter-day Saints to discontinue the practice of plural marriage, his official declaration was submitted to the Sixtieth Semiannual General Conference of the Church on 6 October 1890, which by unanimous vote accepted it "as authoritative and binding." It was that vote which made the documentofficial(it is now printed as Official Declaration- 1 in the Doctrine and Covenants). Similarly, when President Spencer W. Kimball declared in 1978, by revelation from the Lord, that the priesthood was henceforward to be given to all worthy male members, this pronouncement became Official Declaration-2 by the sustaining vote of a general conference on 30 September 1978.
