Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) 3

The Exclusion by Name-Calling

In textbooks dealing with logical thinking the ad hominem fallacy is described as indulging in name-calling rather than actually answering an opponent's arguments.Ad hominemis Latin for "against the man," and an ad hominem argument focuses on the emotions and prejudices felt toward a person or group rather than on the logic of their arguments. Ad hominem arguments can be quite effective at winning support for an otherwise weak position by obscuring the real issues involved. Name-calling has often been used in religious controversies. Catholics called Protestants "heretics"; Protestants called Catholics "Papists"; both called Jews "Christ killers"; and all three have been labelled "infidels" by Muslims. But intellectually speaking the ad hominem tactic amounts to nothing more than saying, "Boo for your religion, and hurrah for mine."

The LDS Church as a "Cult"

The nasty name most frequently flung at The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by its detractorsis"cult." Undoubtedly the termismeanttocall up images of Druids burning captives aliveinwicker baskets, of painted priests flinging virgins into volcanoes, or of satanic rituals performedin thedark of the moon. When critics call the LDS church a "cult,"theimplied logic seemstobe thatthereareobjective criteria for distinguishing "cults" from "religions," and that since Mormonismisa "cult" and Christianityisa "religion," Mormons can't be Christians. One flaw in this logicisthat thereare infact no such objective criteriafordistinguishing cults from religions, as a quick look atWebster'sThirdNewInternational Dictionarywill show. Therethepertinent definitions undertheentry "cult" are as follows:

1: religious practice: worship 2: a system of beliefs and ritual connected with the worship of a deity, a spirit, or a group of deities or spirits 3a: the rites, ceremonies, and practices of a religion: the formal aspect of religious experience bRoman Catholicism:reverence and ceremonial veneration paid to God or to the Virgin Mary or to the saints or to objects that symbolize or otherwise represent them 4: a religion regarded as unorthodox or spurious;also:a minority religious group holding beliefs regarded as unorthodox or spurious: sect.1

One can clearly see that in definitions 1, 2, and 3 there is no distinction between a cult and a religion-the terms are in fact quite synonymous. It is only definition 4 that comes close to the meaning desired by anti-Mormons. Use of the termcultin this latter sense, however, says nothing objective about a religion itself. Such language merely communicates a speaker's negative evaluation of the religion in question. With its negative connotations the termcultdoes not describe what a religion is, only how it isregarded,and simply means "a religion [usually one smaller or newer than mine] that I don't like." It is a word that
