communicates information about the speaker rather than about the thing described.Cultis therefore a totally subjective rather than objective term. To both the pagans and the Jews, earliest Christianity was a "cult," but this says nothing objective about Christianity except that it was disliked by those who so described it. There is no objective definition for the wordcultin standard English that does what the anti-Mormons want it to do.

Nevertheless there have been many attempts to definecultin an objective way without losing the term's negative connotations. So far all these attempts have failed. Let us take, for example, the last and most ambitious definition proposed by the late Walter Martin. I single out this one only because, from a non-Mormon view, Martin is certainly the consensus expert on this subject, and in his latest and longest definition ofculthe renders his most complete explanation of the term. In his proposed objective definition Martin lists ten characteristics common to cults which he believes distinguish them from legitimate religions.2At the conclusion of his list the author assures the reader that"wehave presented hereallof the essential marks which distinguish many of the new cults from the rest of society and from the biblical Christian church."3

The flaw, however, in the proposed definition-and the Achilles' heel for all such definitions ofcult-is that any objective definition ofcultthat can be applied to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints canalsobe applied to the Christian church of the New Testament and to most of today's mainline denominations when they were in their infancy. Let's examine Martin's ten points one at a time.

- "Cults, new as well as old, are usually started by strong and dynamic leaders who are incomplete control of their followers."

Certainly Jesus Christ must be reckoned a strong and dynamic leader. Is there any doubt that Jesus was in complete control of his followers, or that the disciples would have done anything for him, including the giving of their lives? Jesus asked his followers to give up everything (seeMatt. 19:27-29;16:24), and on occasion refused permission to his disciples even to carry out social obligations to their families (Luke 9:57-62). Was New Testament Christianity a "cult" because Jesus was a strong and dynamic leader in complete control of his followers?

- "All cults possess some Scripture that is either added to or which replaces the Bible asGod's Word."

A major claim oftheearly Christian church was thatthenew covenant of the gospelandthe New Testament that records it superseded the old covenant of the law of Moses and theOld Testament that recordsit(Gal. 3:24-29;Heb. 8:7-13;10:8).Tothe scriptures accepted during Jesus' lifetime as the word of God the Christians added at least four Gospels, a book of Acts, twenty-one Epistles, and an Apocalypse. The Jews were justasincensed at these spurious (from their point of view) additionstoGod's word in the period of the early Church as anti-Mormon critics are at the Book of Mormon today. Since the early Christians both added books to the previously accepted canon of scripture and insisted that theNewTestament fulfilled and superseded the Old, this is another indication, using Walter Martin's definition, that early Christianity was a "cult."
