Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) 4

The Historical or Traditional Exclusion

Modern Christian orthodoxy often sees itself as properly consisting of not only the events and doctrines revealed in the New Testament but also the historical, theological, and traditional developments of later centuries. It is sometimes argued that in order to be truly Christian modern churches must accept both biblical Christianityandthe traditional Christianity that grew out of it. This, in a nutshell, is the historical exclusion. If one does not accept the centuries of historical development and elaboration-the councils, creeds, and customs, the theologians and the philosophers-in addition to the biblical doctrines, then one is not a true Christian. According to this view the biblical revelation taken alone is inadequate for true Christianity.

This type of exclusionary thinking is illustrated by an incident that occurred to me while I was in graduate school. I had been invited by one of the large Protestant churches in town to teach a lesson on the beliefs and practices of the Latter-day Saints. Some of my professors were members of that church, and I was very pleased when they attended my lecture. At the end of the lesson I bore testimony to the restored gospel, to the divine call of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and most of all to the saving work of Jesus Christ.

When I was done one of my professors raised his hand and said, "Well, Steve, that was wonderful and informative, but I thinkyouhave leftuswiththeincorrect impression thatyouMormonsarea Christian denomination, when, of course, you arenot."Now, I knew this man fairly well, and consequently I knew what he meant by this statement. It was not a malicious pronouncement, but it had absolutely nothingtodo with what Latter-day Saints believed or didn't believe about Jesus Christ.Theman was a liberal Protestant historian, and his definition of the term Christian was a historical definition; it had nothing to do with personal belief.Tohim a Christian was someone whose theological family tree could be traced back throughtheProtestant Reformation, throughtheRoman Catholic church,andthroughtheecumenical councils to the first council of bishops at NicaeainA.D. 325. His definition had very little to do with what one believed; it was more concerned withhow one came by that belief.Inhis view,ifyour theology had the right pedigree you were a Christian;ifnot, though you might believe every word ofthe NewTestament,youwere still not a true Christian, because your intellectual and theological genealogy were all wrong.

As a liberal Protestant historian this professor had additional incentives for definingChristianin terms of heritage rather than belief', for, as I knew from private conversations with him, he did not personally believe most of the supernatural claims of the primitive Christian church. If" being Christian" was a matter of heritage rather than of personal
