"Because I accept the New Testament as containing God's word, even though I do not interpret it literally, and because I am an ordained minister in a denomination that traces its Christian heritage back to the New Testament period without a historical break."

"All right,now,asa Latter-day Saint I believe that Jesus Christis theliteral Son of God; that he was andisdivine; that he had the power toworkmiracles; that he took the sins of the world upon him in Gethsemane and on Calvary; that he died for us; that he was literally, bodily raisedupon the third day; and that he will raise us up to judgment and a glorious afterlife. Now, am I a Christian?"

"Absolutely not." "Why not?"

"Because you are a member of a church that is not theologically derived from and dependent upon the councils and creeds of the historical church, and because you reject traditional Christianity and its theology after the second century."

"Does your definition of 'being Christian' have anything to do with my personal belief in Jesus Christ?"

"No."

Now, when it was laid out like this, the congregation could see that the man was using a specialized definition of the termChristian,and consequently that he was not really saying what they had at first thought. After the lecture several people approached me to say that according to how they defined "being aChristian,"the Latter-day Saints certainly qualified, but that they weren't so sure anymore about the professor.

To the extent that the historical exclusion offers a specialized or nonstandard definition ofChristian,it is merely another form of the exclusion by definition and suffers from the same fallacy (see chapter 1 herein). The historical exclusion, however, involves additional considerations that ought to be examined here.

The Great Apostasy

First of all, it should be noted that the Latter-day Saints do reject the authority of traditional Christianity after the death of the New Testament Apostles. In the LDS view the keys and authority promised to Peter inMatt. 16:16wereapostolicin nature, and therefore when the Apostles were gone, so were their keys and authority. Thereafter, people could still be "Christian" in the generic sense, and are not, in the LDS view, automatically excluded from salvation (there will be opportunities to accept the gospel in the postmortal life); but the historical church no longer possessed the fulness of the gospel. This is the LDS doctrine of the Great Apostasy, a doctrine which is also taught in the New Testament. Following are two examples from the teachings of Paul:
