Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him,

That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.

Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a failing away [Greekapostasia] first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition;

Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.

Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things? (2 Thes. 2:1-5.)

For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.

Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. (Acts 20:29-31.)

These passages, and others that might be cited,1tell us not only that Paul was concerned about an inevitable coming apostasy, but also that he spent a great deal of energy warning the Church about it, 11 is the LDS belief that such an apostasy actually took place and that the keys and authority of the Apostles were lost. For this reason Latter-day Saints reject the binding authority of subsequent developments in historical Christianity.

Christians with Similar Views

Itissurprising that Protestants would criticizetheLatter-day Saints for believinginan apostasy and rejecting subsequent developments, since Protestants have essentially done the same thing-only instead of rejecting the authority of the traditional church after the first century, they reject it after the fifteenth. Protestant Reformers used many of the same Bible passages cited abovetoprove that the Roman church was corrupt andtojustify their own attempts at reform. Martin Luther and others wentso farastoidentifythepopeasthe Antichrist,2Ifsome Protestants argue that Mormons aren't Christians because they reject the Council of Nicaea (A.D. 325), couldn't Catholics argue that Protestants aren't Christians because they reject the Council of Trent (A.D. 1545-47)? The issue here does not involve a difference in kind but only of degree or of timing. Thus,interms ofthedoctrine ofanapostasy-that is, that at some point in timethehistorical church was no longerthetrue Church-most Protestants agree withtheLatter-day Saintsinprinciple; they just differ on the dates.
