Most Protestants accept as doctrinally valid and binding only the first seven of the great ecumenical councils, the last of which, the Second Council of Nicaea, was held in A.D. 787.3Greek Orthodoxy formally rejected the authority of the Western church in A.D. 1054, although their differences began long before this date. Six centuries earlier Armenian, Syrian, Coptic, and Abyssinian Christianity all rejected the "great church" at the Council of Chalcedon (A.D. 451), and have been separate churches ever since; hence we might ask, If the historical exclusion is applied to these "orthodox" churches-which accept only three of the twenty-one ecumenical councils-can they still be considered Christians?

And if the Armenians, Syrians, Abyssinians, and Copts can reject everything in traditional Christianity from the fifty century on and still be Christians, then where is the cutoff that marks how much can be rejected? If it can be as early as the fifth century, then why not as early as the second?

Thus some denominations place their break with the traditional church4at A.D. 451, while others might put it at 787, 1054, or 1517. Regardless of who was right and who was wrong in any of the schisms, in each case Somebody was rejecting the authority of a mother church an d refusing to be bound by its traditions and doctrines. Yet no one seriously accuses the Armenians, Copts, Syrians, Greek Orthodox, or protestants of being non- Christian for having done this.

Catholics often think of protestants as having rejected true Christianity, while Protestants think of themselves as having recovered the true Christianity from which the Roman church had wandered. For the purposes of my argument it doesn't matter who is right: what matters is that while rejecting each other's traditions and doctrines, protestants and Catholics still call each other Christiansinthe generic sense. Why, then, cannot the Latter-day Saints, who believe in Jesus Christ and who accept theNewTestament witness, also reject later traditions and doctrines without being labelled non-Christian?

A Single Christian Tradition?

Moreover, Protestants differ among themselves in the amount of the accumulated Christian heritage they accept. Many Protestants don't venerate the saints, or observe Lent, or know that Saint Swithin's Day is July 15. Is there some critical percentage of the nonbiblical traditions that must be believed, some specific amount of the accumulated customs that one must accept in order to be a true Christian, so that by accepting 50 percent, say, of the postbiblical material one is a Christian, but not with 49 percent? Or are there certain key nonbiblical traditions that must be accepted, such as observing Easter on the right day, while other trivial traditions may be safely ignored, such as eating fish on Friday? And exactly who decides which customs are dispensable and which ones are not, and by what authority do they do so, if the traditions are admittedly nonbiblical to begin with? Who preserves therealpostbiblical "Christian tradition," the Greek Orthodox monks at the Mar Saba monastery or the faith-healing. TV evangelist from Texas?

What exactly istheChristian tradition, and how can Mormons be expected to accept it. when mainline Christians disagree among themselves on virtually every aspect of it? In the words of David Steinmetz. Kearns Professor of the History of Christianity at Duke University: "Christians have argued, often passionately, over every conceivable point of
