Christian doctrine from the filio-que5to the immaculate conception. There is scarcely an issue of worship, theology, ethics, and politics over which some Christians have not disagreed among themselves."6

Like the modern Latter-day Saints,thePuritans rejected any practice or custom fromtheChristian tradition that could not be found in the New Testament. And accordingtoKenneth Scott Latourette, the Seekers, among them Roger Williams and George Fox 7"held that Antichrist had ruled so long that no true churches or valid office-holders existed and could not until God sent apostlestoestablishandordain new ones.8Now, thisisvery similarto theLatter-day Saint view. Does this make these venerable Protestantsnon-Christians? Remember,thequestion here isn't whether their belief was correct; rather,thequestion is,Ifthe Puritans, Separatists (among them our own Pilgrim Fathers), and Seekers can utterly reject the historical Christian tradition beyond the warrant of the New Testament and still be Christians, why can't the Latter-day Saints?

A Pure Christian Tradition?

Another problem with insisting that one must accept the historical Christian heritage in order to be a Christian is that many of the present traditions and customs in that heritage were originally pagan practices that have been "Christianized."9The Puritans in colonial America opposed the celebration of Christmas because they could find no biblical warrant for the practice, and attributed it to paganism and "popery."10Most of the customary symbols of Christmas-such as the Christmas tree, candles, holly, mistletoe, yule log, and so on-were adopted from the pagan religions of northern Europe, and the traditional date for celebrating Christmas was originally that of the pagan Roman festival ofNatalis SolisInvicti(the Birthday of the Invincible Sun-god).11

In addition, much pagan influence came into the Christian church in connection with the veneration of the saints. For example, did Saint Georgereallyslay a dragon? Most scholars identify his legend with the Baltic and Slavic gods Kalvis and Kresnik, and with the Greek myth of Perseus and Andromeda.12In many places local Christian festivals, especially those occurring on the solstices and equinoxes, are merely continuations of pre-Christian celebrations now dressed up in Christian trappings; and many a local pagan deity has continued to be worshipped in the guise of a Christian saint, and so has become part of the Christian heritage. Must one, in order to be a true Christian, accept those parts of the Christian heritage that originated in paganism in postbiblical times?

The Doctrinal Tradition

Now, one might respond thatit isnot thecustomsandtraditionsofthehistorical church that must be accepted after all, but onlythedoctrinesof the historical councils and creeds. Butif thecouncils and creeds teach doctrines not foundin the NewTestament, on what authoritymustthey be accepted? Andifthe councils and creeds merely repeat or summarize the doctrines ofthe NewTestament without addingtothem, then whyisit necessarytoaccept themin additionto the New Testament itself?. Only by making the councils the primary sources of Christian doctrine andthe NewTestament scriptures secondary can the historical exclusion work, even theoretically. And if other churches argue
