This is exactly what has happened to the Latter-day Saints. When the historical exclusion isused against them, their acceptance of the New Testamentisoutweighed by their rejection oftheGreek philosophical theology. While rejection oftheliteral truth of theNewTestament witness is seen as a trivial thing or at least as a negotiable issue in many modern Christian denominations, rejection of the philosophical tradition created by the Hellenized churchisanothermatter-that,forthe excluders, putsthe Latter-day Saints outsidetheChristian pale. Thus, underthehistorical exclusion the Latter-day Saints are accused of being "non-Christian" not because they rejectthebiblical Christ and his church, but because they commit the more serious "sin" of rejecting the philosophers.Inmuch of modern Christianitythemessage of Christ and the message of Plato have become practically indistinguishable.

One of my revered non-LDS teachers in graduate school, W. D. Davies, once described Mormonism as an attempt to return to Christianity as it was before its Hellenization.17 While many Protestants attempt toreformChristianity by giving up the papacy and returning to the church of the conciliar period (A.D. 325-787), the Latter-day Saints seek torestoreprimitive Christianity by giving up Hellenism and returning to the Church of the New Testament period.

In the Roman Catholic Tradition

It is also surprising to me that some Roman Catholic critics have used the historical exclusion against the Latter-day Saints, even though they no longer use it against Protestants, for in some ways Latter-day Saints are closer to the Catholic tradition than most Protestants are. For example, the Latter-day Saints, like Roman Catholics but unlike many Protestant denominations, accept the necessity of all seven traditional sacraments of the Christian church.18Martin Luther accepted only the Lord's Supper and baptism as Christian sacraments and rejected the sacramental character of the other five.

Moreover, Mormons accept the doctrine of apostolic succession, which is rejected by a majority of Protestants today. This doctrine states that the authority given by Christ to Peter inMatt. 16:19is necessary to the "true" Christian church and must be handed down in a human chain of persons who hold the keys and preside over the Church. In Catholic terms this person is the Pope; in LDS terms he is the President and prophet of the Church.

Catholics trace the authority of the pope through what they consider to be an unbroken line of authority that passes through Peter back to Christ himself. The Latter-day Saints trace the authority of their prophet through what they consider to be an unbroken line that passes through Peter back to Christ himself. Peter is a key figure, the "rock," in both traditions.19 In both traditions Peter is the link between the present Church and the authority of Christ. Whether Mormons are correct in believing that Peter personally bestowed the keys of apostleship upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (D&C 27:12) is not the issue. The point is that thetheoryupon which the LDS claim is based is equivalent to the Roman Catholic view: the keys of apostolic authority must be transmitted to the true Church through Peter by the laying on of hands. The authority to act as God's agent-that is, the priesthood-can only be received from someone who already has that authority. Latter-day Saints accept the doctrine of apostolic succession, though our chain has fewer links in it than that claimed by the Roman church. On the other hand, most Protestant denominations
