deny the need of an apostolic succession at all, and have gone to great lengths to reject the whole concept of divine authority being conferred by ordination.20

Most Protestants believe that the scriptures lead to conversion and that at conversion the Holy Ghost automatically confers all necessary priesthood on the believer. This is the doctrine of the "priesthood of all believers," which looks to the Bible rather than to the church or to the priesthood as the ultimate source of Christian authority, and which denies the historical transmission of priesthood through the Roman church. This is why Protestants are satisfied with aReformationof the Roman church along scriptural lines; they see authority as an automatic by-product of right belief.

On the other hand, for those who, like the Latter-day Saints and the Catholics, believe in apostolic succession, any break in the chain would require not merely aReformation,but aRestorationof apostolic authority. Though Catholics do not believe such a break has occurred and Latter-day Saints do, both share a common view of the necessity of apostolic succession and hold similar concepts of priesthood and ordination. Since Protestants have cut themselves off from the apostolic succession of the Roman church and claim no subsequent restoration of authority, they are forced to claim authority on other grounds- hence the doctrine of the "priesthood of all believers." As Catholics have known for centuries, the biblical concepts of apostolic keys, priesthood, ordination, and sacraments constitute the Achilles' heel of Protestant theology.

Thus, in the areas of priesthood, ordination, and apostolic succession, the Latter-day Saints are actually more "orthodox" than Protestants, sharing the older, more traditonal view with Roman Catholics. Of course, Catholics reject the validity of LDS claims to apostolic succession, just as Latter-day Saints reject the validity of the Catholic succession. But that, in itself, should not cause either to label the other non-Christian, for surely this disagreement is no more serious than the same dispute between Catholics and Protestants generally-and the latter two parties are still willing to refer to each other as Christians. For example, in 1896 Pope Leo XIII declared in a papal bull,Apostolicae Curae,that ordination in the Church of England was invalid, a charge which is extremely irritating to Anglicans.21Yet Catholics still think of Anglicans as Christians in the generic sense, even though they are, in the Catholic view, outside the apostolic succession. The point is this: If Catholics can still think of Anglicans as generically Christian, even though the pope has declared them to be outside the chain of apostolic authority; or, indeed, if Catholics can think of as Christians those Protestants who reject the idea of succession altogether; then Catholics cannot consistently exclude the Latter-day Saints from Christendom for merely being outside the apostolic succession claimed by the Roman church.

Were the Twelve Apostles Christians?

Finally, by far the most serious objection to the use of the historical exclusion is that it excludes not only the Latter-day Saints but also the New Testament Saints, including Jesus and his Apostles. If it is argued that one must accept the whole package of traditional Christianity in order to be a Christian- if one cannot merely accept the biblical teachings but must also accept the councils, creeds, and theologians of later centuries-then it is chronologically impossible for Jesus and his church to qualify. Since the New Testament
