itself, however, refers to the first-century Saints as Christians, by this alone we may know that the historical exclusion is invalid (Acts 11:26;26:28;1 Pet. 4:16).

Inthebook of Galatians, Paul argues thatthe lawof Moses cannot be necessarytoChristianity, since Abraham was justified by his faithinChrist four hundred years before thelawwas even given. Paul further argues thatifAbraham could be justified by faith withoutthelaw, so could those Gentiles who followed Abraham's example.(Gal.3:6-18.) Thisispreciselymyargument here. Acceptingthecouncils, creeds, and other traditional elaborations of theNewTestament religion cannot be a necessary condition to being a Christian, forthe NewTestament Christians lived four hundred years before the formulation of the Nicene Creed at the Council of Chalcedon. 22 And if the New Testament Saints could be Christians without the postbiblical traditions, thensocan the Latter-day Saints.

One may wish to argue that the Latter-day Saints really don't believe what the New Testament Saints believed, but in that event the objection has shifted ground from a historical exclusion to a doctrinal one, which will be dealt with in a subsequent chapter. There is simply no purelyhistoricalortraditionalexclusion that will eliminate the Latter- day Saints from the family of Christian churches that does not also eliminate the Saints of the New Testament.

Summary

In summary, the historical exclusion is invalid because it proposes a nonstandard definition for Christian, a definition thatisbased not on one's belief in Christ, but on one's cultural and theological pedigree. Also, it is invalid because it is used selectively against the Latter-day Saints, but not against others who have also rejected the traditional church. Many denominations have rejected all or part of an earlier orthodoxy but are still considered to be Christian. Furthermore,thehistorical exclusionisinvalid because it makes theNewTestament inadequate for communicating Christian faith unless itissupplemented by later non-biblical traditions. But most of all, the historical exclusionisinvalid because it proposes a testforbeing Christian (namely, acceptance ofthelater historical church with its councils, creeds, and customs) that the New Testament Saints themselves could not have passed, having lived centuries before these things came to be. class="pg">45

For example,1 Tim. 4:1-3and2 Tim. 3:1-7repeat the Pauline warning.Jude 1:17-18informs us that the other Apostles issued the same warning. And2 Thes. 2:7-11;1 Tim. 1:15; and3 Jn. 1:9-10offer a contemporary witness that the predicted rebellion (apostasy) was taking place already.

See, for example,Table Talk,no. 4487 (11 April 1539) in T. Tap-pert and H. Lehmann, eds.,Luther's Works(Philadelphia: Fortress, 1955), 54:346.

The Roman Catholic church recognizes twenty-one ecumenical councils, the last of which was the Second Vatican Council (1962-65).
