Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) 5

The Canonical or Biblical Exclusion

The Greek wordkanonmeans, first of all, a "ruler" or a "straightedge" and, secondarily, a "standard" or "norm." From this second meaning comes the English wordcanon,which means, when referring to the scriptures, "the list of books recognized as authoritative." The canon of scripture, then, is the standard collection of texts accepted by Christians as the word of God, or as authoritative. If a book is said to be canonical or one of the "standard works" (the LDS equivalent of "canonical"), that means it is on the list of approved and accepted scriptural books. For non-Mormons the canon is the list of books that make up the Bible.

It is well known that Latter-day Saints have an expanded canon of scripture compared to the rest of the Christian world. In addition to the Bible, they recognize the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price as the word of God. These four collections of inspired writings constitute the standard works, or canon of scripture, of the LDS church. In its simplest form the canonical exclusion, as applied to the Latter-day Saints, maintains that since Mormons have a different canon than the Christian canon, since they add books of scripture to the Christian Bible, Mormons cannot be Christians.

Adding to the Scriptures

One of the arguments that have been offered in support of this exclusion is that the Bible itself forbids any departure from the Christian canon either by addition or subtraction. The passage usually cited in support of this position isRev. 22:18-19: "For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: and if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book."

Since the above passage comes at the end of the last chapter of the last book of the Bible, the naive reader might naturally assume that the phrase "the book of this prophecy" refers to the entire Bible, and thus that the scriptures themselves declare the canon closed. This, however, is not the case. First of all, there is no way to know whether Revelation was the last book of the New Testament to be written. Most scholars date its composition at around

A.D. 94-95, but most scholars would also date James, I and 2 Peter, Jude, the three Epistles of John, and the Gospel of John at about the same time, or even later.1If Revelation was not the last book of the New Testament to be written, then obviouslyRev. 22:18-19cannot be understood as a decree closing the canon of scripture.
