But it doesn't really matter whether Revelation was written last or not,forthe"book" that John was writing when he issued his warning was certainly not the whole Bible, but just thebook of Revelation. When John wrote Revelation, the Bibleaswe know it-a standard collection of inspired texts boundalltogetherinone volume-simply did not yet exist. For centuries after John producedhiswritings, the individual books of the Bible wereincirculation singly orincombination with several others, but never as a complete Bible.Ofthe 362 biblical manuscripts knowntohave been produced before the tenth century A.D., only one has a complete New Testament, and none contains the whole Bible. 2 Of the entire corpus of 5 366 known Greek biblical manuscripts, only thirty-four contain the whole Bible, and all thirty-four were written after A.D. 1000.3TheBible,aswe know anduseit in the Christian world today,isone of the blessings of theageof printing; complete Bibles were virtually unknown before Gutenberg. Thus, when John wrote about "the prophecy of this book," he was not referringtothe collection of books bound together in one volume and known as the Bible, but to the book he was then writing, the book of Revelation. Since the Latter-day Saints neither add to nor take away fromthetext of the book of Revelation, the passage at 22:18-19 does not apply to their acceptance of extrabiblical scriptures.

This, by the way, is the same reason why Christians and Jews need not worry, in a canonical sense, about the commandment found inDeut. 4:1-2: "Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in and possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers giveth you.Yeshall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it,that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you." (Emphasis added.) If Moses' words were understood to have universal application, then Jews, who accept the later prophets and writings, and Christians, who add the New Testament to the Sinai revelation, would be in clear violation of the commandment of God. But obviously Moses was referring here to the specific revelation then being recorded, and did not intend his warning to close the canon of scripture for all time. Like John, Moses applied a local restriction against tampering with what he had just written, not a universal restriction against ever receiving further scripture from God.

Prophets Always Add to the Scriptures

In fact every one of the Old Testament prophets "added" to the words of his predecessors and to the word of God. Any student of the Bible knows that the author of 1 and 2 Chronicles rewrote material already contained in the books of Kings and Samuel, often quoting them verbatim, and that in his revised account he both added to and subtracted from those earlier books.

New Testament Christians, as we have already pointed out, "added" to the scriptures accepted by Jews. Even within the New Testament itself it appears that Matthew and Luke both "addedto"and "took away from" the words written by Mark, for according to current biblical scholarship both Matthew and Luke were written after Mark and used Mark as a base text from which to write their own Gospels (that is, it is believed that they added their own material to Mark's and subtracted from his what they didn't want to use).4For example, to what was written in Mark's Gospel, Matthew added the story of the Wise Men, the flight to Egypt, and the Sermon on the Mount; he deleted, among other things, the
