the question,forit does not mention the Bible or describewhatbooks should bein theBible; it merely states that "allscripture"is"profitable." IndeedtheLatter-day Saints would agree heartily thatallscriptureisprofitable, includingtheBook of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, andthePearl of Great Price. The passagein2 Timothy offers no criteriafordetermining what the canon of scripture oughttoinclude. And evenifit did, it does not say that the canon is closed or that the canon of scripture is sufficient, in-errant, or incapable of improvement; it merely states that all scriptureisprofitable.IfI want to drive my car, it is profitable to have the keys, but just having the car keys is not enough if there isno gas in the tank or airinthe tires. A thing can be profitable, or even necessary, without being sufficient. Paul's statement to Timothy clearly teaches that the man of God cannot be perfect without the scriptures, but it does not say that the scriptures alone make him perfect.5Any religious propositionsasimportantas"all religious truthisfoundinthe Bible,"or"the Bible aloneissufficient," or "there can never be additions to the Bible," to beself-consistent, oughttobe set forthin theBible in clear, unmistakable terms, yet theyareentirely missing.

Now, some conservative Protestants would argue that if Latter-day Saints don't accept this extreme form of biblical inerrancy, then by definition we are not Christians. But there are many Christians in the world-most, in fact-who do not believe that the Bible alone is sufficient for salvation, or that it is absolutely and literally perfect in every word, or that it answers every possible religious question with clarity. If all of these people-virtually every Christian in history except modern, conservative Protestants-are excluded from being Christians because they deny the extreme form of the doctrine of inerrancy, then the exclusion is nothing more than the religious imperialism of a sectarian minority and another example of a special definition forChristian(see chapter 1 herein). On the other hand, if Catholics, Orthodox, and mainline Protestants are not excluded for rejecting this type of inerrancy, but Latter-day Saints are, then we are clearly dealing with a theological double standard.

Which Is the "Christian" Bible?

The real Achilles' heel of the canonical exclusion, however, lies elsewhere. It lies in the idea that there is one single Christian canon or one single Christian Bible, for historically there has not been one Christian canon or one Christian Bible, but many. For example, just before A.D. 200 someone in the Christian church at Rome wrote a list of the books that were accepted as canonical by the Roman church at that time. A copy of this canon list was discovered in 1740 by Lodovico Muratori in the Ambrosian Library in Milan, and for this reason it is called the Muratorian Canon6According to it, the Roman church at the end of the second century did not consider Hebrews, James, 1 Peter, or 2 Peter to be scripture, and they accepted only two of the letters of John, although we cannot be sure which two. They did accept as canonical, however, two works now considered to be outside the New Testament, the Apocalypse of Peter and the Wisdom of Solomon. Clearly their canon of scripture was different from that of modern Christians, but does that mean that the second- and third-century Roman church was not Christian? Remember that these were the same people who were dying in the arenas for the sake of Christ. Can anyone seriously argue that they weren't Christians just because their canon was different?
