The famous church historian Eusebius of Caesarea, writing about A.D. 300, proposed another canon.7He listed only twenty- one books as "recognized," and listed Hebrews, James, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, Jude, and Revelation as questionable or spurious.8Was the "Father of Church History" not a Christian? After all, his canon, his Bible, was not the modern "Christian" Bible. As Bruce M. Metzger summarizes, "The Eastern Church, as reported by Eusebius about A.D. 325, was in considerable doubt concerning the authority of most of the Catholic Epistles as well as the Apocalypse."9

Saint Gregory of Nazianzus rejected the book of Revelation in his fourth-century canon list, which was ratified three centuries later in 692 by the Trullan Synod. Even though Revelation was not included on his list, Gregory insisted, "You have all. If there is any besides these, it is not among the genuine [books]."10Were both the saint and the synod non-Christian because they deleted Revelation from the "Christian" Bible?

One of the most important of the Greek New Testament manuscripts, known as D or Codex Claromontanus, contains a canon list for both the Old and New Testaments. The manuscript itself is a product of the sixth century, but most scholars believe the canon list originated in the Alexandrian church in the fourth century.11This canon omits Philippians, I and 2 Thessalonians, and Hebrews, but includes the Epistle of Barnabas, the Shepherd of Hermas, the Acts of Paul (not our Acts), and, like the Muratorian Canon, the Apocalypse of Peter.

The first indication of a canon like that of modern Christians does not come until well into the fourth century, when Saint Athanasius, the bishop of Alexandria, recommended a list of acceptable books to his churches in hisThirty-ninth Festal Letter(A.D. 367). But Athanasius' canon did not become official until over a thousand years afterward.

Before the fifth century the Syrian Christian canon included 3 Corinthians and Tatian's Diatessaron, but excluded the four Gospels, Philemon, the seven general Epistles, and the book of Revelation. Syrian Christians from the fifth century on accepted the Syrian Peshitta version of the Bible, which included the four Gospels in place of the Diatessaron and excluded 3 Corinthians, but recognized only twenty-two books in all as canonical: the four Gospels, the book of Acts, the fourteen letters of Paul, James, I Peter, and 1 John. To this day both the Syrian Orthodox church and the Chaldean Syrian church recognize only these twenty-two books, rejecting 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, Jude, and the book of Revelation.12It is also interesting to note that the Greek Orthodox church has never included the book of Revelation in its official lectionary.13

The Georgian and Armenian churches followed the Syrian churches in not accepting the book of Revelation until the tenth and twelfth centuries, respectively. The Abyssinian Orthodox church has in its canon the twenty-seven books of the modern New Testament, but adds the Synodos and Qalementos (both attributed to Clement of Rome), the Book of the Covenant (which includes a post-resurrection discourse of the Savior), and the Ethiopic Didascalia. To the Old Testament the Abyssinian canon adds the book of Enoch (cited as prophetic by the canonical book of Jude) and the Ascension of Isaiah.

The point of all this is not to suggest that any of the New Testament books are spurious, for Latter-day Saints accept all twenty-seven books of the New Testament. It is merely to show
