that there have been and still are Christians who differ from one another on the issue of canon and yet remain Christians. The idea that there is a single, fixed canon accepted by all Christians from the beginning of the Christian church is a myth. In fact the canon of scripture was not finally fixed authoritatively for Roman Catholics until 1546 at the Council of Trent. For most Protestant denominations the canon was officially fixed even later than this.14

Among Protestants, Martin Luther suggested that the New Testament books were of varying worth and divided them up into three separate ranks. In the prefaces of his early editions of the New Testament, Luther denied that the lowest rank (Hebrews, James, Jude, and Revelation) belonged among "the true and noblest books of the New Testament," and went so far as to call the Epistle of James"aletter of straw." He complained that Hebrews contradicted Paul by teaching that there was no repentance after baptism; that James contradicted Paul in teaching justification by works; that Jude merely copied from 2 Peter and from apocryphal books; and that Revelation dealt with material inappropriate for an Apostle, it didn't teach enough about Christ, and its author had too high an opinion of himself.15As a direct result of Luther's judgment, some subsequent Lutheran editions of the Bible separated Hebrews, James, Jude, and Revelation from the rest of the New Testament, and even went so far as to label them "apocryphal" and"noncanonical."As Bruce Metzger points out: "Thus we have a threefold division of the New Testament: 'Gospels and Acts', 'Epistles and Holy Apostles', and 'Apocryphal New Testament'-an arrangement that persisted for nearly a century in half a dozen or more printings.16

John Oecolampadius, the Reformation preacher at Basle, wrote in 1536 that"wedo not consider the [book of] Revelation, together with the Epistles of James and Jude, and 2 Peter, and the last two Epistles of John, to be on a par with the rest [of the New Testament]."17

Once again let me say that the point of all this data is not to attack the modern Christian canon, but merely to show that many Christians-both Catholic and Protestant, both ancient and modern-have disagreed over what belonged in the canon and what did not. To allow them to diverge from a single, monolithic canon and remain Christians while calling Latter- day Saints non-Christians for doing the same thing is logically inconsistent, and constitutes another example of the theological double standard.

The Catholic Bible vs. the Protestant Bible

Finally, it should be understood that there isstillno single Christian canon or Bible, for Protestants and Catholics disagree on whether the "deuterocanonical books" (what Protestants call the Apocrypha) are scripture. At the Council of Trent in 1546, Roman Catholics officially adopted a canon of scripture that included the Apocrypha as fully inspired and fully the word of God. Consequently these twelve books are found in modern Catholic editions of the Bible. The collection of books includes Tobit, Judith, the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus or Ben Sirach, Baruch, the Letter of Jeremiah, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees, additions to Esther, and additions to Daniel (comprised of the Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Young Men, Susanna and the Elders, and Bel and the Dragon).
