These books were part of the Greek translation of the Old Testament known as the Septuagint, which was in use in Egypt as early as the second century B.C. The Septuagint was also the version of the Old Testament used by the early Christian church, and so had passed into the Latin Vulgate of the Roman church, and is still the version used by the Greek Orthodox. The conciliar decreeDe Canonicis Scripturis,issued on 8 April 1546, declared that all who did not accept these deuterocanonical books (the Apocrypha) as Christian scripture were anathema (accursed).

On the other hand, most Protestants broke with the centuries-old tradition of accepting the Septuagint and all its contents, and preferred the version of the Old Testament which had been preserved in Hebrew by the Jews. These medieval copies of the Hebrew Old Testament did not have the Apocrypha in them as the Greek Septuagint translation did, and consequently the books of the Apocrypha are not generally accepted as scripture by Protestants. Thus the Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox Bible is around twelve books, or approximately 230 pages, longer than the usual Protestant Bible, and for this canonical shortcoming Protestants fall under the anathema of the Council of Trent. Yet Protestants and Catholics continue to call each other Christians, even though one or the other of them has added to or deleted from the "Christian" canon. If the Catholics and Orthodox can have twelve more books in their Bibles than Protestants do and still be considered Christians, then why can't Mormons add the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price? What's fair for one is fair for all.

In fact, in the interests of Christian unity Protestants and Catholics have "agreed to disagree" among themselves on the issue of canon. Each party feels that it is right and that the other is wrong; but they both feel that the issue of whose canon is correct is not serious enough to justify calling one another "non-Christian." This is why it is so unfair when this same issue is raised against the Latter-day Saints. If there is a single Christian canon and a single Christian Bible which Mormons must adopt in order to be Christians, then which one is it? Is the "Christian" Bible the one published by Catholics or the one published by Protestants? And if Protestants and Catholics cannot agree on this issue, yetbothremain Christian, then how can the issue consistently be used to exclude Mormons from the family of Christian churches? This is to apply an exclusion to the Latter-day Saints that the other churches do not apply among themselves.

Summary

It is true that the Latter-day Saints have an expanded canon of scripture. But the Christian canon of scripture was not closed either by biblical or apostolic declaration, nor were its contents fixed or agreed upon in the apostolic period. The perception that the canon was closed grew up in later periods, though no single canon of scripture, or even of the New Testament books, has ever been agreed to by all Christian denominations. When revelation ceased after the death of the Apostles, the church was forced to draw one of two conclusions: Either revelation had ceased because God had said everything he wanted to say, and the church didn't need any more revelation; or revelation had ceased be- cause there were no more Apostles and prophets to receive it, and the church was lacking one of its necessary components. Traditional Christians accept the former explanation; Latter-day Saints accept the latter.
