The Bible as we know it in the modern period is a product of the Christian church, rather than the other way around. Since it is clear that there were Christians before the New Testament was written, it cannot be maintained that the Bible is what makes one a Christian. Latter-day Saints reject this and all other enthusiastic claimsaboutthe Bible that cannot be foundinthe Bible.

To this day Christians disagree on which books are the word of God-that is, which books belong in a "Christian" Bible. During the Christian era there has been a variety of disagreements over which books should be part of the New Testament canon. Moreover, Catholics have added (or have Protestants deleted?) a large collection of books found in the ancient Greek manuscripts of the early Christian church and used by some Christians for centuries. The truth is that traditional Christendom has never been unanimous on the issues of canon and the Bible. If the modern churches can strongly disagree among themselves as to what the canon of Christian scripture is, and yet continue to accept each other as Christians, then it is logically inconsistent and manifestly unfair to deny the Latter-day Saints the same privilege.

For a scholarly discussion of the dates, see Feine, Behm, and Kümmel,Introduction tothe New Testament(Nashville: Abingdon, 1966).

It is estimated that four of these 362 were at one time complete Bibles, though none of the four (Sinaiticus, A, B, and C) has survived intact.

See Bruce M. Metzger,Manuscripts of the Greek Bible: An Introduction to GreekPaleography(New York: Oxford University Press, 1981), pp. 54-55.

See, for example, R. Spivey and M. Smith,Anatomy of the New Testament(New York: Macmillan, 1982), pp. 62-66, or Frederick Gast, "Synoptic Problem," inThe JeromeBiblical Commentary,ed. Raymond E. Brown, Joseph A. Fitzmyer, and Roland E. Murphy (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1968), 2:1-6, for Protestant and Catholic treatments, respectively.

The Greek wordteleios,translated in2 Tim. 3:17as "perfect," more often means "complete," "whole," "ripe," "ready," or "initiated" than it does "unimprovable."

See Hennecke, Schneemelcher, and Wilson, eds.,New Testament Apocrypha,2 vols. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1963-66), 1:42-45.

Eusebius,History of the Church,3.25.1-7.

The total comes to twenty-eight because Eusebius listed Revelation as both recognized and spurious,"asit seems right" to the reader.

Bruce M. Metzger,The Canon of the New Testament(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987), p. 209.
