become a little Christ." 18 In words reminiscent of those used by the Christian Fathers aswell as Lorenzo Snow, Lewis succinctly states: "The Son of God became a man to enable mentobecome sons of God." 19

In a fuller statement of his doctrine of deification, Lewis practically states the LDS view:

The commandBe ye perfectisnot idealistic gas. Noris ita commandtodo the impossible. Heisgoingtomake us into creatures that can obey that command.Hesaid (in the Bible) that we were "gods" and Heisgoing to make goodHiswords.IfweletHim-forwe can prevent Him,ifwe choose-He will make the feeblest and filthiest ofusinto a god or goddess, dazzling, radiant, immortal creature, pulsating all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine, a bright stainless mirror which reflects back to God perfectly (though, of course, on a smaller scale) His own boundless power and delight and goodness.Theprocess will be long and in parts very painful; but thatiswhat we are in for. Nothing less. He meant what He said. 20

If C. S. Lewis can think of human beings as "possible gods and goddesses," if he can maintain that "He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into a god or goddess," and if he is still to be considered a Christian-then how can the Latter-day Saints be excluded from the Christian family as rank pagans for believing exactly the same things?21

Critics of the Latter-day Saints may respond that the early Christian saints, the later Greek theologians, and C. S. Lewis all understand the doctrine of deification differently than the Latter-day Saints do, but this is untrue in the case of the early Christians and C. S. Lewis. Anyway, such a response amounts to a quibble, for it retreats abjectly from the claim that deification is a pagan doctrine wholly foreign to true Christianity. It argues instead that deification is a Christian doctrine misunderstood by the Latter-day Saints (and abandoned by most others, I might add). But if that is true, then the doctrinal exclusion is no longer valid when based on this doctrine, for-whether the Latter-day Saints interpret it "correctly" or not-deification is not a doctrine they made up out of thin air or borrowed from ancient paganism, nor is it totally foreign and repugnant to true Christianity, nor does it violate the broad limits of what has historically been considered Christian.

It should be noted here that the LDS doctrine of deification is often misrepresented. Despite what our critics claim, the Latter-day Saints do not believe that human beings will ever becometheequals of God, or be independent of God, or that they will ever ceasetobe subordinatetoGod.ForLatter-day Saints,tobecome gods meanstoovercometheworld throughtheatonement of Christ(1Jn. 5:4-5;Rev. 2:7,11).Thuswe become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ (Rom. 8:17;Gal. 4:7)andwill inheritallthings justasChrist inherits all things (1 Cor. 3:21-23; Revelation 21:?). There are no limitations on these scriptural declarations; we shall inheritallthings-includingthepowertocreate andtobeget. In that glorified state we shall look like our Savior (1 Jn. 3:2; 1 Cor. 15:49; 2 Cor.

3:18) we shall receive his glory and be one with him and with the Father (John 17:21-23;Philip. 3:21). Sitting with God upon the throne of God, we shall rule over all things (Luke 12:44;Rev. 3:21).
