day commonly referred to the angels as "gods" (Hebrewelimorelohim)in this nonultimate sense.22This is not because the Jews were polytheists, but because they used the termgodin a limited sense to refer to other beings associated with God whom he allowed the privilege of exercising divine powers.

But human beings are also called "gods" in scripture, probably forthe same reasons that the angels are-they, as well as the angels, can exercise the powers of God and act as his agents. Thus Mosesisdesignated a "godtoPharaoh"(Ex.7:1).Thisdoesn't mean that Moses had become an exalted or ultimate being, but only that he had been given divine powers and was authorizedtorepresent GodtoPharaoh, evento thepoint of speaking God's word in the first person. If the scriptures can refer to a mortal human being like Moses as a "god" inthis sense, then surely immortal human beings who inheritthefulness of God's powers and authority in the resurrection can be understood to be "gods" in the same sense.

InEx. 21:6and 22:8-9 human judges are referred to in the Hebrew text aselohim("gods"). InPs. 45:6the king is referred to as anelohim.Human leaders and judges are also referred to as "gods" in the following passage from the book of Psalms: "God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods .... I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes." (Ps. 82:1,6-7 Jewish and Christian biblical scholars alike have understood this passage as applying the term sods to human beings. According to James S. Ackerman, who is not a Mormon, "the overwhelming majority of commentators have interpreted this passage as referring to Israelite judges who were called 'gods' because they had the high responsibility of dispensing justice according to God's Law."23

Inthe NewTestament, atJohn 10:34-36,weread that Jesus himself quotedPs. 82:6and interpreted theterm godsas referring to human beings who had received the word of God: "Jesus answered them,Isitnot writteninyour law, I said,Yearegods?Ifhe called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?"Inother words, 'If the scriptures [Ps. 82] can refer to mortals who receive the word of Godas"gods," then why get upset with me for merely saying IamtheSon of God?'TheSavior's argument was effective precisely becausethescripture doesusethe term godsinthis limited waytorefer to human beings. According to J.A.Emerton, whoisalso not a Mormon, "most exegetesareagreed thattheargu-mentisintendedtoprove that men can,incertain circumstances, be called gods .... [Jesus] goes back to fundamental principles and argues, more generally, that the word 'god' can,incertain circumstances, be appliedtobeings other than God himself,towhom he has committed authority." 24

And that, in a nutshell, is the LDS view. Whether in this life or the next, through Christ human beings can be given the powers of God and the authority of God. Those who receive this great inheritance can properly be called gods. They are not gods in the Greek philosophic sense of "ultimate beings," nor do they compete with God, the source of their inheritance, as objects of worship. They remain eternally his begotten sons and daughters - therefore, never equal to him nor independent of him. Orthodox theologians may argue that Latter-day Saints shouldn't use the termgodsfor nonultimate beings, but this is because the
