The doctrinal exclusion is invalid often on general principles because it demands doctrinal conformity to a standard that does not really exist, to a "pure" Christianity which cannot be agreed upon by all Christians. Therefore it is a moving target which changes from denomination to denomination; all parties demand that Latter-day Saints be more "orthodox," but each defines "orthodoxy" differently. The doctrinal exclusion assumes that Christianity is one monolithic point of view when in fact the multiplicity of Christian denominations witnesses that it is not. Those who employ the doctrinal exclusion often recog- nize only two categories: those whose doctrine agrees with their own and those who are "not Christians." But without a third category-that is, Christians whose doctrine is different than one's own but who are still Christians-the very idea of a family of independent Christian denominations is impossible.

Still, the claim is made that certain LDS doctrines are so bizarre, so totally foreign to biblical or historical Christianity, that they simply cannot be tolerated. In terms of the LDS doctrines most often criticized on these grounds, however-the doctrine of deification and its corollary, the plurality of gods-this claim does not hold up to historical scrutiny. Early Christian saints and theologians, later Greek Orthodoxy, modern Protestant evangelists, and even C. S. Lewis have all professed their belief in a doctrine of deification. The scriptures themselves talk of many "gods" and use the termgodin a limited sense for beings other than the Father, the Son, or the Holy Ghost. If this language is to be tolerated in scripture and in ancient and modern orthodox Christians without cries of "polytheism!" then it must be similarly tolerated in the Latter-day Saints. If scripture can use the term gods for nonultimate beings, if the early Church could, if Christ himself could, then Latter-day Saints cannot conceivably be accused of being outside the Christian tradition for using the same term in the same way.

Again, I am not arguing that the doctrine is true, although I certainly believe it is. I am only arguing that other Christians of unimpeachable orthodoxy have believed in deification long before the Latter-day Saints came along, and that it has been accepted and tolerated in them as part of their genuine Christianity. Fair play demands the same treatment for the Latter- day Saints.

PresidentSnowoften referred to this couplet as having been revealed to him by inspiration during the Nauvoo period of the Church. See, for example,Deseret Weekly49 (3 November 1894): 610; DeseretWeekly57 (8 October 1898): 513;Deseret News 52(15

June 1901): 177; and Journal History of the Church, 20 July 1901, p. 4.Irenaeus,Against Heresies,bk. 5, pref.

Irenaeus,Against Heresies,4.38. Cp. 4.11 (2): "But man receives progression and increase towards God. For as God is always the same, so also man, when found in God, shall always progress towards God."

Clement of Alexandria,Exhortation to the Greeks, 1.

Clement of Alexandria,The Instructor,3.1. See also Clement, Stro-mateis,23.
