definition of his nature. These later concerns are elaborations upon the biblical doctrine of God, elaborations formulated to answer in philosophically respectable terms the questions and objections of Hellenistic thinking concerning the primitive Christian doctrine.4 Christian intellectuals of the fourth and fifth centuries felt that the biblical language was too unsophisticated and inadequate for this purpose, and so they attempted to supplement and improve it with their own best efforts.

Did the Councils Write Scripture?

The Latter-day Saints accept both the oneness and the threeness of God-both are biblical. They reject, however, the attempts of the postbiblical church to define, for the sake and in the language of the philosophers, how the oneness and the three-ness of God are related- attempts which amounted to putting words in God's mouth. If a proposition is not already found in the Bible, by what authority-in the absence of Apostles and prophets-can it be imposed on the church as the word of God? How can mere theologians expand upon or correct the doctrine of the Apostles? Can theologians add to the scriptures? Yet when the Latter-day Saints reject the doctrines of Nicaea and Chalce-don, which are clearly additions to the biblical teaching, they are accused of rejecting thescripturalview of God. This is simply a misrepresentation, unless one defines the words of the councils as supplemental scripture. Latter-day Saints do not believe that the words of the councils constitute additional scripture, and therefore they refuse to let the Nicene tail wag the biblical dog.

Itisabsurdly contradictory to say ontheone hand,assome critics of the Latter-day Saints do, that the Bible aloneissufficient for salvation (the doctrine ofsola scriptura),and then to add that one must also believethecreedsin additionto the Bibleinorder to even be a Christian. Some may respond thatthecreedsandteachings ofthecouncils are merely usefulashistorically accepted summaries ofthebiblical doctrines, but thisisnot a fair assessment. Anyone who has passed freshman English knows that a true summary cannot introduce concepts or information not found in the material being summarized. And there isno passage of scripture or combination of scripturesforwhich the doctrine ofanabstract, absolute, transcendent, consubstantial, co-eternal unity in trinity existing unknowably and incomprehensibly without body, parts, or passions and outside space and time can be called a fair"summary." There is a vast difference between a summary and an elaboration.

Modern scholars know that the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity not only differs from but also introduces new concepts to the biblical view. One such scholar notes,"Itis clearly impossible (if one accepts historical evidence as relevant at all) to escape the claim that the later formulations of dogma cannot be reached by a process of deductive logic from the original propositions and must contain an element of novelty."5Further on this same scholar concludes, "The emergence of the full trinitarian doctrine was not possible without significant modification of previously accepted ideas."6

Thus the Latter-day Saints simply prefer to do without such conciliar "summaries" and to stick to the scriptures themselves. The unsummarized Bible is fine just as it is; bring forward any creed composed entirely of scriptural passages and the Latter-day Saints will heartily affirm every word.
