The Trinity in the New Testament

It is a matter of record that the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity is a postbiblical development- it is simply not found in the New Testament. In one of the major Christian treatments of the doctrine of the Trinity, Jesuit scholar Edmund J. Fortman, having examined the various parts of the New Testament individually, notes that "there is no trinitarian doctrine in the Synoptics or Acts." He also observes that in the New Testament "nowhere do we find any trinitarian doctrine of three distinct subjects of divine life and activity in the same Godhead," and that "in John there is no trinitarian formula."7Concerning the letters of Paul, Fortman states:

These passages give no doctrine of the Trinity, but they show that Paul linked together Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. They give no trinitarian formula... but they offer material for the later development of trinitarian doctrine· [Paul] has no formal trinitarian doctrine and no clear-cut realization of a trinitarian problem, but he furnishes much material for the later development of a trinitarian doctrine.8

After examining all parts of the New Testament, Fortman concludes that the classical doctrine of the Trinity is not biblical:

There is no formal doctrine of the Trinity in the New Testament writers, if this means an explicit teaching that in one God there are three co-equal divine persons. But the three are there, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and a triadic ground plan is there, and triadic formulas are there .... The Biblical witness to God, as we have seen, did not contain any formal or formulated doctrine of the Trinity, any explicit teaching that in one God there are three co- equal divine persons.9

Latter-day Saints couldn't agree more· Biblical theology, like LDS theology, affirms the threefold nature of the Godhead; but, also like LDS theology, biblical theology lacks any indication of a Nicene understanding. The scholarly consensus is further affirmed inHarper's Bible Dictionary:"The formal doctrine of the Trinity as it was defined by the great church councils of the fourth and fifth centuries is not to be found in the New Testament.'"10

In his sketch of Paul's theologyJ.Fitzmyer notes that the Apostle's viewsasstatedinthe biblical text are unclear and undeveloped from a post-Nicene point of view: "This double series of texts manifests Paul's lack of clarityinhis conception of the relation oftheSpirit to the Son. Paul shares with the OT a more fluid notion of personality than the later theological refinements of nature, substance, and person.Hislack of clarity should be respected for what it is and be regarded only as the starting point of the later development.'"11In other words, from an orthodox perspective Paul didn't understand the nature of God as clearlyasthetheologians of the fourth century.IfPaul's views had first been proposed after the Council of Nicaea, they would have been viewedasinadequate or evenasdefective.TheLatter-day Saints prefertothink that Paul's conception of the nature of God is clearer and more authoritative than allthetheologians and philosophers after him combined. After all, it was Paul that spoke with the risen Lord and was caughtupto thethird heaven, not the theologians (Acts 9:3-6:2 1 Cor. 12:2-4).
