weren't any true Christians before the fourth century-including Jesus, his disciples, and the New Testament Church.

The Trinity Today

Even today the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity is not understood in exactly the same way by all orthodox Christians. Beginning in the eighth century and officially since the eleventh century, Roman Catholics and Protestants have added the Latin phrasefilioque(and from the Son) to the original text of the "Nicene" Creed23at the point in which that document says that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father. Thus, in the Western churches the orthodox doctrine says that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Fatherand from the Son(filioque),like a torch being lit simultaneously by two other torches. But in the Eastern churches it is maintained that the Holy Spirit, like the Son, proceeds from the Father alone, as when one torch lights first a second and then a third.

The Eastern churches hotly reject the addition of thefilioqueclause to the Nicene Creed as an unauthorized distortion of the doctrine of the Trinity. Frank Gavin observes,"Nosingle difference between East and West has aroused so much bitterness on the part of Orthodox writers as has the matter of theFilioque."24Theologians of the Eastern churches insist that thefilioqueintroduces a false concept of the nature of God-even a false god-into Christianity:"Bythe dogma of theFilioque[the Western Trinity] the God of the philosophers and savants is introduced

into the place of the Living God By the dogma of the procession of the Holy Spirit from theFather alone [the Eastern Trinity], the God of the philosophers is forever banished from the Holy of Holies." 25

Because of this issue of thefilioque,then, Eastern Christians and Western Christians have different concepts of the nature of the Trinity. This may seem like a small detail to nontheologians, but it is a dispute over the very nature of God, and it is serious enough to have separated the theologies of the East and West for nine hundred years.

Latter-day Saints believe in the biblical Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but we are accused of being non-Christians because our concept of their nature differs from that of other Christians. Thefilioquedispute is also a dispute over God's nature. If the argument used to exclude Latter-day Saints holds, and all true Christians must share the same concept of the Trinity, then either the Eastern or the Western church, and more likely the latter,26is not truly Christian. On the other hand, if dissimilar conceptions of the Trinity are allowed to Christians on both sides of thefilioquedispute, then the original argument is discredited - differing conceptions of the nature of the Trinity do not necessarily render individuals non- Christian.

Ultimately, being Christian is less a matter of perceiving God in the same Nicene or Chalcedonian terms as other Christians do, and more a matter of perceiving God in the same biblical terms as the first Christians did. Did the atonement of Christ save first- century Corinthians and Galatians, even though they did not conceive of God in Nicene terms? Of course it did. And if that is true, then the atonement of Christ can and will save
