faithful Latter-day Saints who accept the New Testament witness yet do not conceive of God in Nicene terms.

"God Is a Spirit"

The Latter-day Saint concept of God differs from that of Nicene orthodoxy in more than just the latter's trinitarian doctrine. The Latter-day Saints teach that God the Father is an anthropomorphic being-that is, that he has a tangible body: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell inus."(D&C 130:22.)

Some critics oftheLatter-day Saints have argued that beliefinananthropomorphic Deity represents a departure not merely from the Nicene conception of God but fromthebiblical teachingaswell, sinceJohn 4:24teaches very clearly that "Godisa Spirit: and they that worshiphimmust worshiphim inspirit and in truth." But the Latter-day Saints donotdispute this passage at all,unless it isinterpretedaslimitingGodtobeingmerelya spirit.Foreven trinitariansmustinterpretJohn 4:24ina way that allowsforthecorporeality of the resurrected Christ. Two ofthemost fundamental teachings of the New Testament are that Christ is genuinely God and that he is at the same time genuinely corporeal, both in his incarnation and in his bodily resurrection. Since the trinitarian God must include the person oftheSon-whoisa physically resurrected being-the statement "Godisa Spirit" cannot be understood, evenfrom a Nicene perspective,as limiting God in all contextstononcorporeality.

ActuallyJohn 4:24should be translated "God is Spirit" rather than "God is a Spirit," for there is no indefinite article(a, an)in the Greek language, and it is always a matter of subjective judgment as to when the translator should add one. The consensus among biblical scholars is that there shouldnotbe an indefinite article atJohn 4:24. C. H. Dodd insists that"totranslate [John 4:24] 'God is a Spirit' is the most gross perversion of the meaning"27According to Raymond E. Brown the passage atJohn 4:24

is not an essential definition of God, but a description of God's dealing with men; it means that God is Spirit toward men because He gives the Spirit (xiv 16) which begets them anew. There are two other such descriptions in the Johannine writings: "God is light" (1 John i 5), and "God is love" (1 John iv 8). These too refer to the God who acts; God gives the world His Son, thelightof the world (iii 19, viii 12, ix 5) as a sign of Hislove(iii 16)28

Just as God is not limited to being light and nothing else by1 Jn. 1:5, or to being love and nothing else by1 Jn. 4:8, so he is not limited to being spirit and nothing else byJohn 4:24- unless oneassumeswith the Greeks that spirit and matter are mutually exclusive, opposing categories. That God is spirit does not limit him to being a spirit anymore than his being worshippedinspirit (John 4:24) requires worshippers to first jettison their physical bodies.

Like first-century Jewish Christians, the Latter-day Saints do not understand the categories of "spirit" and "element"tobe mutually exclusive. AccordingtoJoseph Smith, "thereisno such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only
