be discerned by purer eyes" (D&C 131:7). Thus Latter-day Saints understand the termspiritualto mean "infused with spirit," whereas Hellenized Christianity would under- stand it to mean "incorporeal." For the Latter-day Saints, being spiritual or being spirit does not imply being incorporeal. For example,D&C 93:33indicates that even "man isspirit,"though man is definitely corporeal as well29Spirit and element are both compatible parts of the eternal whole. A strict mind/body or spirit/element dualism was foreign to Judaism and earliest Christianity until it was introduced by Hellenistic thinking. In the LDS view God/s spirit, but he is notmerelya spirit.

Latter-day Saints sometimes give the mistaken impression that because they believe the Father has a body "as tangible as man's," they believe him to be corporeal in the limited human sense. But this is not the case. God is spirit, but he is also element; both aspects of existence are included and encompassed within his glorious being. That he is either one does not limit the fact that he is also the other-and infinitely more.

God as a Spirit

Moreover, for the Latter-day SaintsGodmost certainlyisa spirit when manifest in the person of the HolyGhost-"the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, butisa personage of Spirit" (D&C 130:22). In the vast majority of cases, when human beings encounter or experience God, it is God manifest in the person of the Holy Ghost. This is the "gift" given to Christians in conversion and confirmation (Acts 2:38; 8:17; Luke 11:13).

The Holy Ghost is both the Comforter and the Spirit of inspiration. It is undisputed both by LDS and non-LDS Christians that Godisexperienced as a spirit (the Holy Ghost)inmost of the contexts in which human beings encounter him.

God as a Corporeal Being

Nevertheless, despite John 4:24 there are many other scriptures clearly teaching that, in theperson ofJesusChrist,Godalso has a tangible body. This doctrine oftheincarnationiscommontoMormons and non-Mormons alike. Afterhisresurrection, Jesus assured the Apostles that he was not merely a spirit: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones,asye seemehave" (Luke 24:39). The logic is not difficult: Jesus is God; Jesus has a body of flesh and bones; therefore, God, in the person of the resurrected Son, has a body of flesh and bones.Sinceboth LDS Christiansandorthodox Christians affirm the doctrines of thein-carnation and bodily resurrection of God the Son, then in the person of the Son, God must be understood to have a tangible body.

Since God, or the Godhead, consists of three persons for Latter-day Saints and trinitarians alike, it does not seem to me any more outrageous or un-Christian to think of the Father as corporeal, as the Son is corporeal, than to think of him as a personage of spirit, like the Holy Ghost. Both Mormons and non-Mormons accept that "God is Spirit," but since the New Testament does not specify whether that means the Father has"atangible body infused with spirit" or is "incorporeal" (both phraseologies are unbiblical), neither interpretation is more or less biblical or "Christian" than the other.
