the love of God ("God is love," "For God so loved the world," and so on). The philosophers got around this problem by simply redefining love whenever it was applied to God, so that for them divine love was not an emotion. Augustine defined the love of God as a function of His reason and will alone -God feels nothing. Thus, according to the ancient theologians, love as humans know it in an emotive sense has nothing to do with God, the statements of the scriptures notwithstanding. Neither can God have genuinecompassionorempathyfor human suffering, except as those terms are redefined to eliminate the element of feeling.39 In this way the language of scripture-the bare words themselves-are retained, but their meaning is completely subverted by philosophical concerns.

Of course the greatest passion of all was the suffering of Christ in Gethsemane and on the cross. Thus the central fact of the Christian gospel was also the biggest obstacle to embracing the absolutely nonbiblical Greek ideal of an impassible God-a God who cannot suffer. This obstacle was finally overcome in 451 A.D. at the Council of Chalcedon, when the theologians declared that unlike all other entities, which have a single essence or nature, Jesus Christ must have had two natures, one human and one divine.40It was the human nature that suffered on the cross-the divine nature, the pre-existent Son of God, didn't feel a thing. The human Jesus may have suffered and died for sinners, but the divine Son of God never did!

Did the divine, pre-existent Word, God the Son, actually become human in his nature and then suffer and die for humanity? The Latter-day Saint answer is an emphaticyes;but the orthodox Council of Chalcedon said no, the Bible is not to be taken literally on these points.41According to theTomeof Pope Leo the Great, which was approved at the council,

to pay the debt that we had incurred, an inviolable nature was united to a nature that can suffer .... Each nature preserves its own characteristics without diminution, so that the form of a servant does not detract from the form of God .... Each nature performs its proper functions in communion with the other; the Word performs what pertains to the Word, the flesh what pertains to the flesh.42

Thus Chalcedon provided a formula by which the theologians could maintain contradictory propositions-thatGodsuffered, because of the corporate identity ofthetwo natures in Christ, and that God did not suffer, because of the strict distinction between the two natures.Theformula allowed orthodoxyto affirmwith the New Testament that Christ suffered while agreeing with Plato that Godisimpassible. Most modern Christians are unaware of the doctrine at all and naively talk about a God who suffers, but those whoareconversant with the fine points of orthodoxy know that accordingtothefourth-and fifth- century church fathers, the divine nature within Christ could not and did not suffer for us or anyone else. Henry Chadwick expressesit inthis way: "The enthusiasm of devotion may say that 'God suffered and died'; but the theologian knows thatGodisimpassible and immortal, and therefore that this transfer of human frailtytoGod·. . does not strictly meanwhatit says." 43

The theological proposition of the two natures in Christ, an invention of the post-apostolic Church, was so incomprehensible and so controversial that it took two hundred years to
