of Jesus and the Apostles were incomplete and inadequate for salvation until supplemented and defined by the church fathers-the "new, improved" Christianity of the fourth and fifth centuries. Latter-day Saints see this rejection of the primitive biblical Christianity in favor of the expanded philosophical Christianity of later times as "making the word of God [the New Testament] of none effect through your [philosophical] tradition" (seeMark 7:13).

Summary

The Latter-day Saints accept unequivocally all the biblical teachings on the nature of God, but they reject the extrabiblical elaborations of the councils and creeds. A doctrinal exclusion applied to the Latter-day Saints for rejecting the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity is invalid because that doctrine was not taught in the Bible or in the early Christian church. It is not found in the teachings of the Apostolic Fathers or those of the Greek Apologists.

Even today Eastern and Western orthodoxies still disagree strongly over both the precise nature of God and the exact wordings of the major creed of Christianity (thefilioquedispute). If in order to be a true Christian one must conceive of the Christian God in precisely the terms of Nicene orthodoxy, then all Christians who lived before the fifth century, and all those on at least one side of thefilioquedispute since the eighth century, must be excluded as Christians as well as the Latter-day Saints. Moreover, it is contradictory for Protestants to insist on the doctrine ofsola scriptura-thatthe Bible alone is sufficient for salvation-in one context, and then to turn around and add nonscriptural requirements for salvation, like acceptance of councils and creeds, in other contexts.

Latter-day Saints agree that God the Fatherisspirit in the highest sense oftheword, but they deny that this limits himtoincorporeality. Godisa spiritinthe person oftheHoly Ghost, butinthe person oftheSon,Godhas a tangible body.Onthegrounds of modern revelation Latter-day Saints believe thatGodtheFather also has a tangible body, but they grant that this cannot be proved or disproved from the Bible. Still, given their philosophical assumptionsit isthe orthodox who must, without biblical warrant, dismiss the biblical anthropomorphisms applied to God as merely figurative, while the Latter-day Saints accept them at face value.Theanthropomorphic view ofGodiscompatible with biblical imagery, but conflicts with the Greek philosophical definition of God.Ifconceiving ofGodinanthropomorphic terms, as the Latter-day Saints do, excludes one from being a Christian, then most Christians, both ancient and modern, must also be excluded,formostareguilty in some degree of conceiving of God in anthropomorphic biblical terms ratherthan in theabstract terms of philosophical theology. Moreover, since the Bible itself describes Godinanthropomorphic language, evenifsuch descriptions are understood merely as helpful symbolism or allegory, it cannot be seriously argued that perceivingGodinanthropomorphic terms is an un-Christian practice.s merely figurative, while the Latter-day Saints accept them at face value.Theanthropomorphic view of Godiscompatible with biblical imagery, but conflicts with the Greek philosophical definition of God. If conceiving of Godinanthropomorphic terms, as the Latter-day Saints do, excludes one from being a Christian, then most Christians, both ancient and modern,mustalso be excluded, formostare guiltyinsome degree of conceiving of Godinanthropomorphic biblical terms rather thanin theabstract terms of philosophical theology. Moreover, since the Bible itself describes God in anthropomorphic language, even if such descriptions are understood
