Even Augustine was willing to grant that while the essence of the Father must always be invisible, still he "may have represented himself to mortal senses by a corporeal form" (Onthe Trinity,18.35).

Shaye J. D. Cohen,From the Maccabees to the Mishnah,vol. 7 of theLibrary of EarlyChristianity(Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1987), p. 44.

Cohen,Maccabees to Mishnah,pp. 86, 87.

See Owen Chadwick,Western Asceticism(Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1958), pp. 234-35, citing a reference in John Cassian,Conferences,10.3; also Sozomen,ChurchHistory, 8.11.

See Henry Chadwick,The Early Church(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1967), pp. 185-86.

See Augustine,Our Lord's Sermon on the Mount,2.5 (17): "'Who art in heaven'-that is, in the saints and in the just. For God is not contained in local space."

For an excellent summary of the doctrine of the impassibility of God, including its Greek origins and its tension with Hebrew biblical thought, see Cross and Livingstone,OxfordDictionary of the Christian Church,p. 694.

Van A. Harvey,A Handbook of Theological Terms(New York: Macmillan, 1964), p. 129; emphasis added. Or see (the Very Reverend) James Malloch,A Practical ChurchDictionary(New York: Morehouse-Barlow, 1964), p. 244: "This view seems to conflict with God's love for man, Christ's passion, and other doctrines of mercy and sympathy."

Augustine,Enchiridion,33. Cp. also Augustine,On Patience,1:"Forif we think of these [emotions] like they are in us, there are none in him .... Far be it from us to suppose that the impassible [i.e., incapable of feeling] nature of God is liable to any disturbance."

These words are derived from Latin and Greek, respectively, and mean literally "suffering (Latinpassio,Greekpathos)with another." Since, according to the doctrine of impassibility, God can't suffer, he can't have compassion or empathy, at least not in the human sense.

Like the idea of a "square circle," this proposition is incomprehensible to the human mind, but it allows contradictory conclusions to be asserted simultaneously-that is, Christ is God and suffers, but God doesnot suffer.

Yet for insisting that the Bibledoesmean what it says-that Jesus was God, that Jesus suffered, and therefore that God himself, in his own divine nature, suffered and died for man-Latter-day Saints are labelled heretic non-Christians.
