Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) 8

The Doctrinal Exclusion: Lesser Arguments

Occasionally the claim has been made that the practice of polygamy is so abhorrent to all true Christians that anyone who would espouse it or even tolerate it cannot be truly Christian. It follows, the argument runs, that since many Latter-day Saints practiced plural marriage during the latter half of the nineteenth century, this practice reveals their religion to be non-Christian. The argument runs into several difficulties, however, but before we look at them we must say a few things about the LDS doctrine of plural marriage.

LDS Plural Marriage

First of all, during the period when plural marriage was practiced by the Latter-day Saints it was the exception rather than the rule. There were more monogamous marriages among the Mormons than there were polygamous marriages, and without special dispensation a Latter- day Saint could not take a plural wife.

Second, the Latter-day Saints donotmaintain that the practice of plural marriage is a requirement for entrance into the kingdom of God, nor do they argue that plural marriage is taught in the New Testament.1While Latter-day Saints do believe that whenever God commands the Saints must obey, they do not insist that plural marriage is an essential element of the gospel of Jesus Christ or that plural marriage is intrinsically preferable to monogamy.2The atonement of Christ will save or exalt a monogamist as readily as a polygamist, and vice versa.

Third, because plural marriage is neither a universal nor an essential principle of the gospel, the Lord may command, tolerate, or forbid the practice among his people as their circumstances warrant. For example,in theBook of Mormon itself(Jacob2:27-28) the Lordforbadeplural marriageto theNephites, though apparently the practice had been allowedtoIsraelites generally under the law of Moses. Conversely,inthe nineteenth century the Lord commanded that plural marriage be practiced among the Latter-day Saints; thus LDS plural marriage was nottheresult of some scriptural discovery or a doctrinal preference for polygamy, but was dueto thedirect command of Godinrevelationtothe Prophet Joseph Smith. For Latter-day Saints plural marriage of itself has nothingtocommend it, butthecommand of the Lord makes the practice right or wrong. WhattheLord requiresisright: what he forbidsiswrong.3Thequestion before us here, however,isnot whether plural marriageisright or wrong, but whether merely believing that itcanbe right under special circumstances necessarily renders one non-Christian.
