The Abhorrence of Plural Marriage

Toabhor plural marriageisnotthesame thing as merely not to practice it. Even in cultures where polygamyisallowed,themajority of people generally choosenottopractice it, yet they are not horrified by those who do. In Western culture plural marriageisgenerally abhorred, buttheroots of this abhorrence can hardly be describedasbiblical,fortheOld Testament explicitly sanctions polygamy4and the New Testament does not forbid it.Thepractice could not have been abhorrenttoJesus andthefirst-century Jewish Christians, for their culture was not Western, and plural marriage was sanctioned in thelawof Moses,5 the holiness of which was endorsed by both Jesus and Paul.6Indeed, itispossible that some Jewish Christians of the first century continued to practice plural marriage just as they continued Sabbath observance, circumcision, and other practices relatedtotheir cultural and religious background.Thecultural milieu of Judaism and early Christianity simply cannot bethesource of the Western horror of plural marriage,forplural marriages were common in the environment of the earliest Christian church.

I do not deny that polygamy is now abhorred in Western culture generally and in modern Christianity particularly. What I deny is that the source of that abhorrence is biblical. It is derived not from the biblical heritage but the classical-the abhorrence of polygamy comes from Greece and Rome.7As orthodox a figure as Saint Augustine knew that the prohibition of plural marriage in the church of his day was only a matter of Roman custom: "Again, Jacob the son of Isaac is charged with having committed a great crime because he had four wives. But here there is no ground for a criminal accusation: for a plurality of wives was no crime when it was the custom; and it is a crime now, because it is no longer the custom .... The only reason of its being a crime now to do this, is because custom and the laws forbid it."8Though pagan culture could freely tolerate multiple sexual partners, it could tolerate only one wife. In that respect Greco-Roman culture was very similar to contemporary Western culture.

Clearly, then, the antagonism to plural marriage was not biblical in origin, for the bosom of Abraham, where most Christians long to repose, is a polygamous bosom, and the house of Israel, into which most Christians seek admission, is a polygamous house.

Polygamy and Divorce

Now, it has been argued that the Old Testament approval of plural marriage should be understood as being analogous to its toleration of divorce, that both practices were permitted to the Jewish people under the Mosaic law only because of their moral weakness, and that both practices were later prohibited to Christians. Yet while the New Testament makes such a statement about divorce (Matt. 19:3-9), nowhere does it make such a statement about plural marriage; there is no biblical warrant for equating the two cases.

But even if there were such a warrant, there are at least two reasons why equating divorce and plural marriage would not help the excluders' argument-in fact such an analogy would makemycase. First, the New Testament indicates that while divorce was prohibited generally, it was allowed in special circumstances (Matt. 19:9;11 Cor. 7:15, the so-called Pauline privilege). This is all the Latter-day Saints would claim for the practice of plural
