marriage-that it is prohibited generally but allowed under special circumstances. Second, if the practice of plural marriage is analogous to the practice of divorce, and today there are literally millions of divorced Christians, why can there be no polygamous Christians? In truth, despite the fact that it is specifically prohibited in the New Testament, for most Christian denominations divorce is no bar to membership, though it may be discouraged or disapproved of. I am personally acquainted with several divorced Protestant ministers. But if divorce and plural marriage are to be understood as analogous cases, then the sanctions against plural marriage, which isnotspecifically prohibited in scripture, cannot reasonably be greater than those against divorce, whichisprohibited. Further, divorced persons are still generally accepted as Christians by their contemporary churches, and rightly so. But if divorce and plural marriage really are analogous, then those who merely believe in the possibility of plural marriage (without practicing it, I might add) should be accepted as Christians as readily as those who actually practice divorce.

Christian Precedents

Once again, I am not arguing that plural marriage is correct. I am only arguing that believing itcouldbe right under special circumstances does not render one a non-Christian. Robert Holst, a Protestant missionary to New Guinea, notes that in that country "Baptist and Methodist missions baptize those who entered a polygamous marriage before coming into contact with the Gospel or, more specifically, before making a decision to accept Christ. They do not consider polygamy a sin but feel that it is not the ideal of God."9In other words, the missionaries believed that polygamy is not a bar in all circumstances to being a Christian. Shall we write off both the converts and their missionaries for believing that in some circumstances plural marriage can be tolerated in a Christian church?

Protestants in other areas have similarly argued for the possibility of Christian polygamists: "Let it be publicly declared that a polygamous African church may still be classified as a Christian church, even while monogamy remains the Christian norm, and that no such church will be excluded from Christian councils and full Christian fellowship solely because of its polygamy.10

Perhapsthebest illustration of the possibility of Christian plural marriageisprovided by the great Reformer himself, Martin Luther. Thereisno doubt that Luther was,generallyopposed to the practice of plural marriage: "Consequently itismy opinion that a Christian is not freetomarry several wivesunless God commands himto go beyond the liberty whichisconditioned by love."11But itisjustasconsistently clear that in Luther's theology opposition to plural marriage was never absolute. Even where he wrote in favor of monogamy Luther generally added that polygamy could be allowedtoa Christian under special circumstances; for example,ifa wife should contract leprosy, orifshe should be unwilling to engage in marital relations, or if there was "some other compelling reason" 12

-or, as stated above, if "God commands him." By contrast, in the LDS view only the latter contingency would justify an exception to monogamy. Without a specific commandment from God, plural marriage is as unacceptable for the Latter-day Saints as it is for other Christians, an offense for which excommunication is the certain result.
