But there were other circumstances in which Luther thought plural marriage allowable. In September 1531 Luther wrote a letter to Robert Barnes -the envoy of the English king Henry VIII-who had been seeking Luther's support for Henry's divorce from Catherine of Aragon. In it Luther argued that since divorce was forbidden by God and would be unjust to Catherine, Henry should simply marry a second wife.13

Eight years later one of Luther's supporters, Philip, the Landgrave of Hesse, desired to marry Margarete yon der Saale without divorcing his first wife (since divorce was prohibited in scripture). Neither Philip nor the prospective bride and her mother would go ahead with the plural marriage, however, without the written sanction of the Lutheran theologians. On 10 December 1539 Luther, Bucer, Melanchthon, and others signed a document stipulating that the proposed plural marriage was acceptable, "since the Gospel neither revokes nor forbids what was permitted in the Law of Moses with respect to marriage." After being strongly advised to keep the whole thing secret for understandable political and cultural reasons, Philip was further assured (in writing) that he had "the approval of us all" in his proposed plural marriage.14Consequently the marriage was performed on 4 March 1540 by Dennis Melander, the Lutheran court chaplain, with Bucer and Melanchthon present.15

I do not mean here to represent Luther as a champion of plural marriage. For him monogamy was clearly the rule-but polygamy was an allowable exception to Luther's rule, a viable option in special circumstances. It should be carefully noted that Luther much preferred polygamy to divorce, yet many modern Christians, while abhorring polygamy, practice divorce as though it were almost a Christian sacrament.

My point is this: If Luther could seriously endorse plural marriage, in writing, on at least two occasions almost a decade apart; if he could certify in writing that the plural marriage of Philip of Hesse was acceptable in the context of the Christian gospel; and if he could then sanction the actual marriage itself; then I feel it safe to say that Martin Luther sanctioned plural marriage under special circumstances. And if he is still to be counted a Christian, as he most assuredly is, then it is not true that endorsing plural marriage under any circumstances renders one a non-Christian. If Luther, Bucer, and Melanchthon could advise and sanction plural marriages and remain Christians, then so could Joseph Smith and Brigham Young.

The Esoteric Teaching (the Temple)

Another issue used by those who employ the doctrinal exclusion involves the esoteric teaching of LDS temple worship. Those who have received this teaching are under a covenant obligation not to discuss the details of the LDS temple and its ordinances. This makes attacking them on the subject similar to debating a monk under a vow of silence-it is usually an easy victory, but never a heroic one. It is not necessary to discuss or defend the LDS temple in detail here, however, for the charge of the non-LDS critics is not that the LDS version of the esoteric teaching in Christianity is incorrect (that would be an interdenominational squabble), but rather that there never was an esoteric teaching in Christianity at all, and that anyone who believes in an esoteric teaching is therefore not a Christian.
