An esoteric teaching is any teaching that is held back from general, public circulation, a teaching not available to everyone but reserved for the initiated. In the LDS context this also involves vicarious ordinances for the dead. The question before us is not whether the specific LDS esoteric teaching is the right one, but whether Christianity ever had any kind of an esoteric teaching at all. For if it did, then it is aChristianphenome-non-whether the modern denominations have it or not, and whether the LDS understanding of it is correct or not.

The Esoteric Teaching in the New Testament

Let's begin with the Apostle Paul, who wrote in his First Epistle to the Corinthians: "Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought: but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory" (1 Cor. 2:6-7). The Greek word translated "perfect" in verse 6 isteleios,and besides "perfect" it also means "mature" and "initiated."16So for Paul there is a hidden wisdom communicated not to the masses but only to those who are mature. By definition this is an esoteric teaching, an esoteric teaching communicated, Paul says, "in a mystery." The Greek word translated "mystery" ismusterion,and it means "a mystery," "a secret," "a secret rite," or "a secret teaching.17Thus here we have in the New Testament a hidden wisdom communicated by means of a secret rite(musterion)only to those who are mature or initiated. Even if there were no other evidence, this passage alone would prove the existence of an esoteric teaching in earliest Christianity. As One non-LDS scholar has remarked: "Paul reveals here almost certainly that he knew an esoteric Christian apocalyptic-wisdom teaching which he carefully guarded from immature Christians.18

Some commentators on these verses have tried to argue that the public Christian proclamation itself was the hidden wisdom, but that argument is untenable for two reasons. First, the Christian proclamation was not hidden or reserved only for the mature; it was preached "upon the housetops." Second, while the Corinthian Saints had already heard the Christian proclamation and been converted and baptized, Paul felt that they still were not yet mature enough for the "meat" of the gospel. Therefore the two levels of teachings, the public and the hidden, cannot be equivalent. "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able." (1 Cor. 3:1-2.) Since the Corinthians were already Christians, the meat which Paul continued to withhold from them cannot have been the public Christian proclamation.19Whatever it was, the fact that it was withheld from them because they were not yet ready for it makes it by definition an esoteric teaching.

In the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul refers to secret teachings he received by revelation when he was caught up to the third heaven-"how that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter" (2 Cor. 12:4). What Paul learned on this occasion was certainly esoteric, and I think we may assume that not all Christians have received it. Moreover, Paul felt obliged to keep these things secret, no doubt "because they are too sacred."20to be written or told.
