In I Corinthians, Paul also refers to an early Christian practice of vicarious baptism for the dead, which is one of the rites of the LDS temples. While arguing that without the resurrection of Christ and of all mankind, faith and repentance and even his own preaching are all in vain, he asks: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor. 15:29.) Scholars and theologians have proposed many different theories to try and explain this verse. Yet honest scholars, both Catholic and Protestant (even those hostile to the LDS doctrine), are forced to admit that the passage describes vicarious baptism for the dead, and that proposed alternatives are really just attempts toavoidthe clear meaning of the text because of its theological implications.

Regarding1 Cor. 15:29, a conservative Protestant work explains: "The normal reading of the text is that some Corinthians are being baptized, apparently vicariously, in behalf of some people who have already died. It would be fair to add that this reading is such a plain understanding of the Greek text that no one would ever have imagined the various alternatives were it not for the difficulties involved."21The finest Roman Catholic biblical commentary is of the same opinion: "Again, the Apostle alludes to a practice of the Corinthian community as evidence for a Christian faith in the resurrection of the dead. It seems that in Corinth some Christians would undergo baptism in the name of their deceased non-Christian relatives and friends, hoping that this vicarious baptism might assure them a share in the redemption of Christ."22

Both Catholic and Protestant scholars agree that the Corinthian Saints practiced baptism for the dead. Now,theargumentissometimes made that Paul must have merely toleratedanaberrant practice at Corinth, that he looked the other way because these vicarious baptisms reflected a kind of faithinChrist. There are serious problems with this view, even from a non-LDS perspective. But evenif theargument were valid, Latter-day Saints would be entitled to ask their critics,Ifthe Apostle Paul found vicarious rites for the dead tolerable amongtheCorinthian Saints, why mustthesame practice be judged intolerable amongtheLatter-day Saints?Ifthe Bible shows thattheApostle Paul wasinfellowship with those who, rightly or wrongly, practiced baptism for the dead, how can modern Christians reject the precedent?

The Esoteric Teaching in Early Christianity

In the centuries following Paul many other orthodox writers refer to the esoteric teaching. In fact one scholarly source states that Saint Clement of Alexandria, the head of the catechetical school at Alexandria and the most influential theologian of his generation, "based his exegesis on the existence of a Christian gnosis, i.e., the secret knowledge of the profoundest truths of the Christian faith to which the elite were initiated."23

Clement's writings were never anathematized by any council, and he is still revered as an orthodox saint by several modern denominations.24Yet Eusebius of Caesarea quotes him as saying: "James the Righteous, John, and Peter were entrusted by the Lord after his resurrection with the higher knowledge. They imparted it to the other apostles, and the other apostles to the Seventy."25This "higher knowledge" cannot be the public gospel message, for the teaching described here was not given directly by Christ to the disciples as
