was the public teaching, but was a separate revelation communicated privately only through Peter, James, and John. Clement often refers to the public Christian message as "the common faith," "the foundation," or "the milk.26The esoteric teaching he refers to as "the higher knowledge," "the secret things," or "the gnosis." For example, Clement explains:

The Lord did not hinder from doing good while keeping the Sabbath; but allowed us to communicate of those divine mysteries, and of that holy light, to those who are able to receive them. He did not certainly disclose to the many what did not belong to the many; but to the few to whom He knew that they belonged, who were capable of receiving and being moulded according to them. But secret things are entrusted to speech, not to writing, as is the case with God.27

For centuries orthodox interpreters of Clement's writings have insisted that there wasn't really any esoteric teaching in his theology, but that the so-called "secret teaching" was merely the public message itself, which was understood by different believers according to their different capacities. The mature understood the public gospel well, and the immature understood it less well. But since 1973, that dodge has been no longer possible, for in that year a previously unknown letter of Clement was published28that makes matters quite clear. Following is an excerpt from that letter as translated by Morton Smith (notes for this quotation are mine; square brackets are in the original):

Mark, then, during Peter's stay in Rome, he wrote [an account of] the Lord's doings,29not, however, declaring all [of them], nor yet hinting at the secret [ones], but selecting those he thought most useful for increasing the faith of those who were being instructed. But when Peter died as a martyr, Mark came over to Alexandria, bringing both his own notes and those of Peter, from which he transferred to his former book the things suitable to whatever makes for progress toward knowledge [gnosis].[Thus] he composed a more spiritual Gospel30for the use of those who were being perfected.31Nevertheless, he yet did not divulge the things not to be uttered, nor did he write down the hierophantic32teaching of the Lord, but to the stories already written he added yet others and, moreover, brought in certain sayings of which he knew the interpretation would, as a mystagogue,33lead the hearers into the innermost sanctuary of that truth hidden by seven [veils]34.... and, dying, he left his composition to the church in Alexandria, where it even yet is most carefully guarded, being read only to those who are being initiated into the great mysteries.35

In view of this letter, which a large majority of scholars now acceptasgenuine,36itisno longer possible to argue that Clement did not believe in an esoteric teaching in precisely theLDS sense. In this Secret Gospel of Mark, as it is now called, the esoteric teaching was not the public gospel, but wasanadditiontowhat was containedinthecanonicalGospel of Mark. Even so, Clement informs his reader, there were secrets even beyond those-secrets he calls "the hierophantic teaching oftheLord"-which were too sacredtobe written down even in the Secret Gospel.

In the same letter Clement goes on to explain that the Carpo-cratians and other Gnostics erred, not by their inventing an esoteric teaching out of thin air but by their distortingthegenuineesoteric teachings of Christianity.
