Now, Clement's letter does not prove that there was a Secret Gospel written by Mark, although it certainly establishes the possibility. The letterdoesprove, however, that Saint Clement, the foremost orthodox theologian of his generation and head of the catechetical school at Alexandria,believedthere was an entirely orthodox Secret Gospel, and since he claims to have read it, he himself must have been "initiated into the great mysteries." Moreover, he cannot have been the only orthodox Christian in Alexandria to have so believed or to have been so initiated. Alexandrian orthodoxy of the second century included, at least among the "mature" Christians of Alexandria, a belief in an esoteric Christian teaching. This is now simply a matter of record.

In the fourth century the emperor Constantine built churches on the three holiest sites in Christendom: the locations of the Nativity, the Resurrection, and the Ascension.

Concerning the third of these churches, which was called anciently the Eleona, Eusebius, the "Father of Church History" and an orthodox theologian, writes: "The mother of the emperor raised a stately structure on the Mount of Olives also, in memory of his ascent to heaven who is the Saviour of mankind, erecting a sacred church and temple on the very summit of the mount. And indeed authentic history informs us that in this very cave the Saviour imparted his secret revelations to his disciples."37

Shortly thereafter Saint Cyril of Jerusalem described a baptismal ceremony that can only be described as an esoteric rite of initiation.38Both the details of the ritual itself and Cyril's mystical interpretation of it were to be kept strictly secret:

When the instruction is over, if any catechumen tries to get out of you what your teachers told you, tell nothing, for he is outside the mystery that we have delivered to you, with its hope of the age to come. Guard the mystery for his sake from whom you look for reward. Never let anyone persuade you, saying "What harm is it that I should know as well?"...

Already you stand on the frontier of mystery. I adjure you to smuggle no word out.39

As Cyril describes the action of the mystery, first "you stretched forth your hand and, as though Satan were present, you renounced him."40Until the ordinances were complete, "the men were to stay with the men and the women with the women."41The initiates were then anointed with consecrated oil in stages from their forehead, ears, nose, and so on, down to their feet.42Cyril describes this as the anointing referred to in the New Testament at1 Jn. 2:20,27.43After being anointed the initiates were washed in baptism three times, were anointed again, and then were dressed in white robes that Cyril calls "the garment of salvation."44The initiates received the name of Christian-in fact Cyril calls them "Christs"45-and they passed from an "outer" to an "inner" chamber, which Cyril calls in unmistakable temple symbolism the "Holy of Holies."46

Cyril of Jerusalem was not alone in teaching this esoteric doctrine. Saint Ambrose of Milan (Saint Augustine's teacher), Saint John Chrysostom in Constantinople, and Theodore of Mop-suestia are just a few of the Fathers who taught essentially the same things in widely separated geographical areas of the Christian church.47

Saint Basil (the Great) also wrote of secret teachings that were separate and distinct from the written gospel and that had been passed down from the Apostles:
