Of the beliefs and practices whether generally accepted or publicly enjoined which are preserved in the Church some we possess derived from written teaching; others we have received delivered to us"ina mystery" by the tradition of the apostles; and both of these in relation to true religion have the same force .... For we are not, as is well known, content with what the apostle or the Gospel has recorded, but both in preface and conclusion we add other words as being of great importance to the validity of the ministry, and these we derive from unwritten teaching. ... Nay, by what written word is the anointing of oil itself taught?... Does not this come from that unpublished and secret teaching which our fathers guarded in a silence out of the reach of curious meddling and inquisitive investigation?

Well had they learnt the lesson that the awful dignity of the mysteries is best preserved by silence. What the uninitiated are not even allowed to look at was hardly likely to be publicly paraded about in written documents.48

Now, some modern Christians may dismiss all of this as hocus-pocus, but these things were performedingreat seriousness over a period of centuries by orthodox Christians who understood themassacred teachings ofthegospel,teach-ings considered to be over and above what was containedinthe writtenNewTestament. Basil and Cyril were Christiansaints;Basil wrote the discipline for monasticlifethatisstilltherule in Orthodoxy; and Cyril attendedtheCouncil of ConstantinopleinA.D. 381 and helped to formulateitsversion of the Nicene Creed. Moreover, Cyril's lectures onthesecret teachings were delivered to the initiates in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem the holiest shrine of orthodoxy.49These men and their esoteric teachings cannot be dismissedasunorthodox.

My point is this: If objective scholars can conclude that the New Testament supports an esoteric teaching in Paul; if the New Testament explicitly states that Corinthian Christians practiced vicarious baptism for the dead; if Saint Clement of Alexandria believed that an esoteric teaching of the Lord was part of Christianity, and Clement himself had been initiated into it; if Saint Basil can emphatically state that the most sacred Christian teachings were never written down but were found in secret rites and teachings handed down from the Apostles; if Saint Cyril of Jerusalem could perform secret rituals and in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre instruct his initiates on the esoteric meanings of those rituals; then there is no case for excluding the Latter-day Saints from Christendom simply because they believe in an esoteric teaching.

Though modern Christians are often embarrassed by the fact, it is a matter of historical record that esoteric teachings have been part of orthodox Christian practice in other times and places. Modern Christians might reject the views of Clement, Basil, Cyril, Ambrose, Chrysostom, and the other Fathers, and even accuse them of being influenced by the pagan mysteries-but normally they don't accuse them ofbeingpagans. And if an esoteric teaching is going to be tolerated in the orthodox church of the third, fourth, and fifth centuries, there is no reason it can't be tolerated in the modern Latter-day Saints.

The Premortal Existence of Souls

Another doctrine of the Latter-day Saints that sometimes comes under attack and is used to exclude them from Christian circles is the premortal existence of souls.
