One would think that the orthodox doctrine of the soul would have been established firmly in the earliest periods of the Christian era or in the New Testament itself, but this is hardly the case. One informative reference source explains: "No precise teaching about the soul received general acceptance in the Christian Church until the Middle Ages. The Scriptures are explicit only on the facts of the distinction between soul and body, the creation of the soul of the first man by the Divine breath, and its immortality."50Christians still disagree on the exact nature of the soul, and several different theories of how souls are created coexist among the modern Christian churches.

On the basis of modern revelation the Latter-day Saints believe that all souls (Latter-day Saints often call them "spirits") were organized in a premortal existence and that they lived for a time in the presence of Godbeforethey came to earth to inhabit their individual bodies. This view is sometimes misunderstood by non-LDS people as a belief in reincarnation or in the transmigration of souls, but the Latter-day Saints are hostile to both of those doctrines; for in LDS belief once a soul has received a mortal body, it cannot enter another mortal body. The only difference here between the beliefs of Latter-day Saints and those of other Christians concerns whether souls are created individually at the moment of conception or of birth, or whether they were created before that moment. Other Christians may disagree with the Latter-day Saints, but since Christians interpret differently the few Bible references on this issue, and since the traditional views-themselves surmises-weren't commonly accepted until the Middle Ages, the claim that one's whole standing as a Christian hangs on believing one or the other is exceedingly weak.

How We Are Saved

One sometimes hears that Latter-day Saints aren't Christians because all true Christians believe in salvation by grace, while the Mormons believe in salvation by works. If this were true, it would mean that Mormons believe each individual "works out his own salvation." Under such a belief, salvation becomes an individual accomplishment-something each one does to and for himself or herself-while the atonement of Christ becomes merely a handy tool to be used by the individual in his or her own do-it-yourself salvation kit. Those who view salvation in this way-and apparently there are some misinformed Latter-day Saints who do-in effect say, "And surely I will do it; wherefore givemethine honor."51Salvation ceases to be the greatest of all thegiftsof God (D&C 6:13) and becomes something an individual earns for himself by simply following the proper steps or numbers. Under this view Christ is dethroned as a personal Savior, as the one who actually accomplishes the work of individual salvation, and salvation is no longer a Christ-centered but rather a self- centered activity.

My first observation regarding this idea of salvation by worksisthat it has nothing to do with LDS doctrine. In factitcould have been treatedinchapter 2 of this book, for the charge that thisiswhat Latter-day Saints believe badly misrepresentstheLDS position. Now, even among non-LDS Christians the doctrine of divine grace can be hotly argued, so I will not attempt to define that doctrine to the satisfaction of all non-LDS critics.

Nevertheless, the following basic principles taken from the Book of Mormon do, I believe, provide a fair representation of the LDS view.52
