First, it is impossible toearnordeserveany of the blessings of God in any sense that leaves the individual unindebted to God's grace. In the Book of Mormon, King Benjamin expresses it in this way:

I say unto you that if ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another-I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants ....

... And ye are still indebted unto him, and are, and will be, forever and ever; therefore, of what have ye to boast? (Mosiah 2:21,24.)

Even in those contexts, such as the law of tithing, where there isa quid pro quo-a covenant agreement that if I will do A, God will grant B-the very fact that such a covenant has been offered to me and that I am able to receive such overwhelming blessings in return for such paltry efforts is in itself a prior act of grace-an expression of the pure love of God, a gift.

Salvation itself is the result of such a covenant of grace-"the new testament [covenant] in my blood" (Luke 22:20). The very existence of this covenant is a gift, a grace offered by a volunteer Savior. Yet like all covenants, there are terms binding upon both parties. Our best efforts to live the laws of God are required, but not because they earn the promised

rewards-our efforts are infinitely disproportionate to the actual costs. Rather, our best efforts are a token of our good faith and of our acceptance of the offered covenant. Thus we participate in our own salvation as we attempt to keep the commandments of God, but we can never earn it ourselves or bring it to pass on our own merits, no matter how well we may think we are doing.

Second, redemption can never comeasthe result of an individual's own efforts, but only through the atonement of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon prophet Lehi explains this tohis son Jacob:

Wherefore, I know that thou art redeemed, because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer

....

And men are instructed sufficiendy that they know good from evil. And the law is given unto men. And by the law no flesh is justified; or, by the law men are cut off....

Wherefore, redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth.

Behold, he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered.

Wherefore, how great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah. (2 Ne. 2:3, 5-8.)
