Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God.

And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. (Moro. 10:32-33.)

Some critics may object that the Latter-day Saints do not insist that we are saved by gracealone,or do not accept the idea ofirresistiblegrace (predestination), but these are points upon which other Christian denominations have disagreed as well. The specific LDS view may be right or wrong from the viewpoint of a particular denomination, but the fundamental LDS belief regarding grace and works is well within the spectrum of traditional Christianity, with strong affinities to theWesleyanposition. While not every Christian will agree with the specific LDS concept of grace, the Latter-day Saints have never believed in salvation by any other means-and especially not by individual works. It is true, I suppose, that some Latter-day Saints do not adequately understand this aspect of their own religion, but the same could be said about a minority in any denomination. The LDS scriptures are clear-we are saved by grace.

Summary

Even though the practice of plural marriage is viewed with abhorrence in Western culture, the roots of that abhorrence are not biblical. Even so, the Latter-day Saints themselves are opposed to the practice except when God commands it. Since the Western taboo against plural marriage is not biblical, and since other non-LDS Christian leaders have allowed plural marriage in special circumstances without ceasing to be Christian in the common estimation, the practice of plural marriage by a minority of Latter-day Saints (who acted in the belief that God commanded it) cannot properly be used to exclude all Latter-day Saints from Christendom.

Onthebasis of modern revelationtheLatter-day Saints believe that the ordinances oftheLDS temple, an esoteric tradition,arepart of the fulness oftheChristian gospel.Thisoffends some modern Christians who believe that all genuine Christian beliefs and practices must be foundinthe public message of the written scriptures.Thisview, however,isecclesiastically very shortsighted, for from Paulinthe first centurytoClement of Alexandria in the second,to thechurch fathersinthe third and fourth, itisundeniable that an esoteric tradition-not contained inthewritten documents of the church but supposedly handed down fromtheApostlesinsecret rites and teachings-was not only tolerated but fully embraced by mainstream orthodoxy for over half a millennium.Itisnot possibletoexclude Latter-day Saints from Christendom onthebasis ofanesoteric teaching without excluding atthesame time the very Christian Fathers whose writings have defined the nature of Christian orthodoxy.

Because the Bible is silent onhowsouls are created, modern Christians have agreed to disagree among themselves on the issue, some holding one view and some holding another. The Bible is also virtually silent aboutwhensouls are created; thus, by analogy, it would
