Stephen E. Robinson,Are Mormons Christians?( 1991) 9

Conclusions

Surely by now itwillhave dawned on the discerning reader that of all the various arguments against Latter-day Saints being considered Christians, not one-not asingleone- claims that Latter-day Saints don't acknowledgeJesusChristasLord. Considertheenormous implications of this fact. The only issue that really matters is the only issue that iscarefully avoided! Picture for a moment two men arguing in front of a policeman overthecontents of a box.Thefirst man insists that his wallet stolen by the second,isinside the box. The second man insists that the box he holdsisempty and presents the officer with dozens of argumentstoprove it, arguments based on everything from average wind speed at the vernal equinoxto thespecific gravity of applesauce. But whenever he is askedtoopenthebox, he changes the subject with additional arguments for its being empty-allthewhile keeping the lid securely shut.

When the charge is made that "Mormons aren't Christians," the very first impression created in the mind of the average individual is that Latter-day Saints don't believe in Jesus Christ. Most often those who make this chargeintendthat their uninformed hearers or readers will get this impression. Yet in the arguments offered to support the assertion the only issue that really matters is never even raised: Do the Latter-day Saints believe in Jesus Christ? Do they accept him as Lord? Do they believe that he is the way, the truth, and the life, and that no man cometh unto the Father but by him? These crucial questions are never asked. And why aren't they? Because these critics of the Latter-day Saints know that to open the box is to lose the argument, for no one who is even remotely familiar with the beliefs of the Latter-day Saints-not even their most hostile critics-can deny the Latter-day Saints' belief in Jesus Christ as the Son of God, as the Savior of the world, and as the only source of salvation available to human beings.1

As Joseph Smith said in the very first LDS article of faith, "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." This is amplified in the fourth article of faith by the assertion that of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, the very first is "faith in the Lord Jesus Christ."

In fact Latter-day Saints go to church every Sunday with but one major purpose:

It is expedient that the church meet together often to partake of bread and wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus;

And the elder or priest shall administer it; and after this manner shall he administer it-he shall kneel with the church and call upon the Father in solemn prayer, saying:
