O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (D&C 20:75-77.)

This is done in every LDS meetinghouse practically every Sunday of the year.2The main purpose, the central focus of LDS Sunday services is to renew our faith in and our commitment to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God. This is not a pretense or a sham; it is at the heart of what we do as Latter-day Saints.

Nor do the LDS scriptures teach anything about Christ that the rest of the Christian world would find offensive. I have frequently asked non-LDS critics exactlywhichBook of Mormon teachings about Jesus Christ they disagreed with. Invariably the response has been that it isn'twhatthe Book of Mormon says or teaches per se that is offensive-it is the Book of Mormonitselfthat is offensive.

The objective observer will notice that in most cases anti-Mormons hate the LDS scriptures generically, without knowing or caring what those scriptures actually teach about Christ, simply because Latter-day Saints dare to call them "scriptures." You see, it isn't really the LDS doctrine of Christ that is objectionable; rather it is the claim that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and that the Book of Mormon is God's word. If Joseph had never claimed to be a prophet and if he had advertised the Book of Mormon as merely his own scriptural commentary, like those of Calvin and Luther, instead of claiming it to be scripture, the Book of Mormon doctrine of Christ would have been considered quite unobjectionable by contemporary standards.

In fact,touse the terminology of biblical scholars, the Latter-day Saints have a very high Christology. That is, for the Latter-day Saints Jesus is not merely a good man, a teacher, or even a prophet; heisnot merely a human being; heisnottheson of Joseph and Mary who later became God's Son.Incommon with other Bible-oriented Christians,theLatter-day Saints believe that Jesusis thepre-existent Word oftheFather who became the literal, physical, genetic Son of God. Asthepre-existent Word he wastheagent of the Father in the creation of all things. Astheglorified Son heisthe agent of the Fatherinthe salvation of all humanity.Webelieve he was conceived of a virgin by the power of the Holy Ghost. We believe he led a sinless life, that he was morally and ethically perfect, that he healed the sick and raised the dead, that he walked on the water and multiplied the loaves and the fishes.Webelieve he set a perfect example for human beings to imitate and that humans haveanobligation to follow his example in all things. Most important of all, we believe that he suffered and died on the cross as a volunteer sacrifice for humanity in order to bring aboutanatonement through the shedding of his blood.Webelieve that he was physically resurrected and that he ascended into the heavens, from which he will come at the end of this world to establishhiskingdom upontheearth and eventually to judge boththeliving and the dead). 3
