Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHRONOLOGY—VOLUME V

B.C. Signifies—Before the birth of Christ. N.A. Signifies—Nephite Annals, or years after Lehi left Jerusalem. Y.J. Signifies—Year of the Judges.

Alma transfers the records to his son Helaman; leaves B.C. N.A. N.J. Zara-hemla, as if to go to Melek, and is never heard of more. Dissensions arise in the church; the dissenters endeavor to make Amalickiah king. Moroni rears the "Title of Liberty," the people rally thereto, and Amalickiah retreats into the wilderness; the greater portion of his followers are slain; he escapes to the Lamanites, rises in power, poisons General Lehonti, kills the king, marries the queen, and is proclaimed king. Moroni fortifies the Nephite cities. The Lamanites invade Ammoniah and Noah; are repulsed with great loss and return home to their own lands. 73 528 19

Moroni commences his line of defense along the southern line of the Nephite possessions. The Lamanites driven out of the east wilderness. The foundations laid of Moroni, Lehi, Nephihah, and other cities. 72 529 20

Never was a happier time among the people of Nephi. 71 530 21

Contention between the people of the cities of Morianton and Lehi. The former flee northward; their flight arrested by Teancum, who defeats and slays their leader. The difficulty is settled, and both people return to their own posses- sions. Nephihah, the second chief judge, dies; his son, Pahoran, succeeds him. 68 533 24

Great contentions between the "king men" and "free men." The people decide in favor of the continuance of the republic, upon which the monarchists revolt; they refuse to take up arms against the invading Lamanites, but are de- feated by Moroni, 4000 slain, and the rest cast into prison. Amalickiah captures the Nephite cities of Moroni, Nephihah, Lehi, Gid, Morianton, Omner, Mulek, etc., on the Atlantic coast. He is defeated by Teancum. Teancum enters the Lamanite camp at night and slays Amalickiah. 67 534 25

The Lamanites retreat into Mulek. Ammaron, brother of Amalickiah succeeds him as their king, and takes com- mand of their armies on the Pacific Coast. Moroni visits the Nephite forces in the southwest. Teancum fortifies the land Bountiful and the Isthmus of Panama. The Ammonites desire to assist in the war, but because of their oath are not permitted; but 2000 of their sons, under Helaman, join the Nephite armies in the south-west, where they find that the Lamanites have captured the cities of Manti, Zeezrom, Cumeni and Antiparah. 66 535 26

Moroni reinforces Teancum in Bountiful. The Nephite forces in the south-west finish fortifying the city of Judea. Tremendous battle in the wilderness north of Judea; the Lamanites defeated, but Antipus, the Nephite commander, is slain. 65 536 27

Pachus revolts and endeavors to establish a monarchy. Moroni re-captures Gid, and releases large numbers of Nephite prisoners. Six thousand men, from Zarahemla, join the Nephite armies in the south-west. The Lamanites surrender Cumeni. The Nephites drive the Lamanites eastward to the land of Manti. They are afterwards driven out of that region by Helaman. Helaman writes an epistle to Moroni, complaining of want of reinforcements. 63 538 29

Pachus drives the chief judge out of Zarahemla; he seeks safety in Gideon. Pachus opens a treasonable correspondence with the Lamanites. Moroni, having received Helaman's epistle, writes twice to Pahoran; on receiving the latter's reply, he gathers up troops and goes to his aid. The united forces of Moroni and Pahoran defeat Pachus, who is slain, and the rebellion is put down. The Lamanite troops, driven out of the south-west, capture the city of Nephihah. 62 539 30

Provisions and 6000 men sent to the relief of Helaman; the same to the commanders in the east. A battle fought on the road between Zarahemla and Nephihah. 4000 Lamanite prisoners make a covenant of peace, and are sent to join the Ammonites. Nephihah surprised and captured by Moroni. Lehi and several other cities on the Atlantic coast recaptured by the Nephites. Teancum slays Ammoron in the city of Moroni, and is himself slain by Ammoron's servants. The city is captured by the Nephites, and the Lamanites are driven to their own lands. 61 540 31

Moroni fortifies the southern border of the Nephites, and transfers the command of his forces to his son Moronihah. Helaman and his fellow-laborers re-establish the church; great humility of its members. 60 541 32

The Nephites begin to recover from the demoralization and disorganization incident to the protracted war. 59 542 33

Helaman dies. Shiblon takes charge of the sacred plates. 57 544 35

Moroni dies, aged 43. 56 545 36

Five thousand four hundred Nephites, with their families, leave Zarahemla to colonize the north country. Hagoth establishes ship-building yards on the Pacific side of the Isthmus. 55 546 37

Large migration northward. Two of Hagoth's ships never again seen after leaving port. 54 557 38

Shiblon dies; the sacred records, etc., transferred to Helaman, the younger. Some Nephites dissent and go over to the Lamanites; the latter invade Zarahemla, but are driven out by Moronihah. Pahoran dies. The Book of Alma closes. 53 548 39

The Book of Helaman opens. Tubaloth king of the Laman- ites. Three of Pahoran's sons contend for the judgment seat. The people choose Pahoran, the younger. His brother Paanchi rebels, for which he is condemned and executed. One of his adherents, Kishkumen, assassinates Pahoran. Pacumeni chosen chief judge. The Gadianton bands organized. 52 549 40

Helaman elected chief judge; Kishkumen attempts to assassinate him, but is himself slain. Gadianton and his band flee into the wilderness. 50 551 42

Much contention among the Nephites. Many emigrate north, as far as the great lakes. 46 555 46

Great contentions. Helaman fills the judgment seat with justice and equity. 45 556 47

The contentions measurably cease; the church is greatly prospered; tens of thousands baptized. The Gadianton robbers secretly increase in the more thickly settled portions of the land. 43 558 49

Pride increases; the more humble members of the church persecuted. 41 560 51

Helaman dies, his son Nephi chosen chief judge. 39 562 53

Contentions and bloodshed among the Nephites; the rebellious affiliate with the Lamanites. 38 563 54

More dissenters go over to the Lamanites, who are all the year preparing for war. 36 565 56

The Lamanites invade Zarahemla; the Nephites, owing to their dissensions and wickedness, are everywhere driven before them. 35 566 57

The Lamanites overrun all the Nephite possessions as far as Bountiful. The Nephites fortify the Isthmus. 34 567 58

The Lamanites obtain possession of all South America. 33 568 59

Moronihah reconquers the most northern portions of South America. 32 569 60

The Nephites regain about half their possessions, Zarahemla remaining in the hands of the Lamanites. Under the preaching of Nephi, and others, the Nephites commence to repent. 31 570 61

No more Nephite successes on account of their lack of faith. Nephi delivers up the judgment seat to Cezoram. Nephi and Lehi, having preached to the Nephites, go over to the Lamanites in Zarahemla; 8000 of that people are baptized. They then proceed to the land of Nephi, where they are imprisoned, but delivered by marvelous manifestations from heaven. The voice of the Lord is heard by those assembled at the prison, and they are surrounded by fire. The greater part of the Lamanites are converted and they surrender all the lands they had taken from the Nephites. 30 571 62

The Lamanites exceed the Nephites in righteousness; their missionaries preach in Zarahemla and the land northward; Nephi and Lehi also go north. Universal peace prevails throughout the continent, and Nephites and Lamanites travel, unrestrictedly in all parts. 29 572 63

An era of great prosperity. Much preaching and prophecy by the servants of God. 27 574 65

Chief Judge Cezoram slain by a Gadianton robber; his son and successor suffers the same fate. 26 575 66

The Nephites again growing exceedingly wicked, the greater part unite with the Gadianton robbers; they also build up to themselves idols of gold and silver. 25 576 67

The Lamanites grow in righteousness, while the Nephites increase in iniquity. The Gadianton bands are utterly de- stroyed from among the Lamanites, but are so greatly encouraged by the Nephites that they obtain sole manage- ment of the government. 24 577 68

Chief Judge Seezoram assassinated by his brother, Seantum. Nephi, rejected in the north, returns to Zarahemla; he notifies the people of the murder of Seezoram, is arrested as an accessory, but afterwards released. The Lord makes a covenant with him, and directs him to continue his mini- trations. 23 578 69

Nephi, preserved by the miraculous power of God, preaches from land to land. 22 579 70

Division, even to bloodshed, prevails among the Nephites. 21 580 71

Contentions and wars throughout all the land. 20 581 72

The internal wars, originating with the Gadianton robbers, still continue. To stay the bloodshed, Nephi prays for a famine, his prayer is answered. 19 582 73

The famine continues and spreads. 18 583 74

The whole land, both among the Nephites and Lamanites, smitten with the famine: thousands die of hunger and pestilence. The people, in their extremity repent; they exterminate the Gadianton bands. 17 584 75

The Lord sends rain, and the earth brings forth abundantly. Nephi is revered as a servant of God by all the people. 16 585 76

The people rapidly increase; the major part of both peoples belong to the church. 15 586 77

Slight contentions on doctrinal questions. 14 587 78

The controversies increase; Nephi and Lehi receive many revelations and put an end to the disputes. 13 588 79

Dissenters search out the ancient abominations, re-establish the Gadianton bands and commence war. 12 589 80

The robbers grow strong; defy the armies of the Nephites and Lamanites; commit depredations and carry off many pris- oners. Great loss of life on both sides. 11 590 81

The Nephites again begin to forget the Lord. The Lamanites remain faithful. 10 591 82

The people wax strong in iniquity. 9 592 83

The people do not mend their ways. 8 593 84

The people grow in wickedness and ripen for destruction. 7 594 85

Samuel, the Lamanite, prophesies on the walls of Zarahemla; some attempt to kill him, others believe. The latter seek Nephi and are baptized. Samuel escapes to his own land. Nephi performs many miracles. 6 595 86

The greater portion of the people remain in their pride and wickedness, the lesser portion walking more circumspectly before God. 5 596 87

The people grow more hardened. 3 598 89

The words of the prophets begin to be fulfilled; signs and wonders appear, betokening the coming of the Savior; angels are seen by many; yet the people still harden their hearts. The Book of Helaman closes. 2 599 90

"IN THY LIGHT SHALL WE SEE LIGHT"

That the books of the Bible are not placed in chronological order is a fact recognized by nearly all Biblical scholars. It may rightly be said that even some of the chapters of the books are misplaced. This often confuses the layman who best understands history by arranging its events in proper order. To assess correctly its pertinent value, a laborious study of prophecy, history, and genealogy, is entailed when considering each text. In ancient times the Jews made these subjects an important part of their learning. It was the mold in which their integral lives appear to have been cast. The Prophet Nephi says: "Yea, and my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah, for I came out of Jerusalem, and mine eyes hath beheld the things of the Jews, and I know that the Jews do understand the things of the prophets, and there is none other people that understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews." ( 1 Ne. 25:5 )

When Lehi left the Land of Jerusalem, where he had resided all his life and where his children had been reared, he took with him a copy of the Hebrew Scriptures which were engraved upon plates of brass. These, it may be assumed were complete. Besides the writings of Moses and the prophecies of Isaiah which they contained, Lehi's son, Jacob, and other Nephite servants of God, often quoted the words of the Prophets Zenock and Zenos also found thereon. The wonderful parable of the vineyard given by Zenos and recorded by Jacob in his own book is almost incomparable. The writings of these holy men are now omitted from all available Old Testament compilations. There are other missing records. The excuse is sometimes made that all the books presently comprising the Bible are old; that there are no original manuscripts accessible to us for collation. Those who make that apology infer that it would be fruitless to compare the versions now in use with those of a thousand years ago because, they say, "the same conditions prevailed then as now."

When the ages that have passed since they were written are considered, the many translations that have been made of them, the vicissitudes that have befallen them in their transmission to the present generation, the wonder is, not that there are errors and parts left out, but that there is a Bible at all. The diluting influences that accompany each translation and retranslation has surrounded the Old Testament with a mist which, like an imperfect glass, distorts and confuses the vision of those who desire to know the mind and will of God.

Around the most plain and precious truths, man had built a wall of meaningless words, and, like a theme he had borrowed from an old melody, he plays it and replays it, improvising throughout. To the untrained ear it sounds like the original. But it is not; it is different. The difference is the distance between right and wrong, true and false, the real and the imitation. The wisdom of man which for ages has fixed the credibility and meaning of holy writ, has led man into a labyrinth of inconsistent and opposing doctrine. One says one thing, another something else. Like the blind leading the blind, they wander into unlighted paths where there is little they can discern. They see "dimly, as through a glass darkly."

"They will not search knowledge, nor understand great knowledge when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain as words can be." ( 1 Ne. 32:7 )

We know of no other place in all man's moral or intellectual universe that is more suited than here to repeat the words of the Apostle Paul: "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man that is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man but the Spirit of God." ( 1 Cor. 2:11 )

In the Book of Mormon the great truths of Christ's Gospel are made known in plainness: "For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the understanding; for He speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their understanding." ( 2 Ne. 31:3 ) Jacob, who, upon the death of Nephi, became the spiritual leader of the Saints in the Land of Lehi-Nephi, says: "Behold, my brethren, he that prophesieth, let him prophesy to the understanding of men; for the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls." ( Jacob 4:13 )

No prophecy of God is obscure to those unto whom it is directed. To them, its meaning is clear. It need not be added to, or taken from. Frequently, men have placed their wisdom above the knowledge and understanding of the Lord's. The result is an enigma, which none can explain. If one would see the contrast, complete, between the teachings of men and the inspired utterances of God's servants, one need only compare the creeds and declarations of faith, promulgated by the churches of the world with the plain and simple truths revealed through the prophets of the Lord. These latter need no interpreters. The former declare themselves to be, not the Church of Christ, but the Mystery of Iniquity, the great and abominable church of Nephi's vision, Babylon the Great.

The Apostle Peter, writing to the Hebrew Christians in Asia Minor, said that the Apostles had not followed "cunningly devised fables" when they recounted the life of Jesus, His power and coming; for they had been eyewitnesses to His majesty; they saw His glory and heard the voice from Heaven, when they were with Him in the holy mountain. But, he argues, if one wants still more evidence of Jesus' divinity, "We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." ( 2 Pet. 1:19-21 )

Such is the value which the Apostle Peter places on the prophetic word. It is more sure, than what? Than the historical part of the Gospel to which the Apostles testified as eyewitnesses.

It shines as a light in a room during the dark hours. It is given us to heed, not to ignore. Indeed, the prophetic word is one of the most wonderful manifestations of the Priesthood, caused by the operation of the Spirit upon the minds of holy men. It is the star-light for the guidance of the people of God, until the day star, the Sun, comes up in glorious effulgence.

To understand and seize for one's own good, the lessons therein imparted, it is necessary to know that the Book of Mormon was written by the spirit of prophecy and revelation. By the same spirit, the Latter-day Saints know and proclaim its message, and hear the wonderful promise of Him Whose voice is to all men, even unto the ends of the earth, "For because of My Spirit he shall know that these things are true." ( Ether 4:11 ) With the help that comes from the Lord, may all men open their eyes to all truth and see and welcome it: "Whether shining from the annals of ancient revelations, or reaching us through the seers of our own time; for Thou hidest not Thy light from any generation of Thy children that feel after Thee and seek Thy guidance." (Jewish Prayer, Union Prayer Book)

In the study of the Book of Mormon it is well to remember that wise men in every age of the world have likened evil and error unto night and superstition and lack of knowledge to darkness. In contrast they have compared truth and understanding to light. "I will be a light unto them forever," is the glorious promise of the Lord to them, "that hear My words." ( 2 Ne. 10-14 ) "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His servants, that walketh in darkness and hath no light?" ( 2 Ne. 7:10 ) "For behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you that the Lord God worketh not in darkness." ( 1 Ne. 26:23 ) Jesus said to the Nephites when He labored among them in the Land Bountiful: "I am the light and the life of the world." ( 3 Ne. 9:18 ) "Yea," said the Prophet Abinadi, "A light that is endless, and can never be darkened; yea, and a life which is endless, that there can be no more death." ( Mosiah 16:9 )

As He watched His flock gathered about Him, the Savior fondly compared Himself to a Good Shepherd: "I am the Good Shepherd," and with almost the same words He bid the Nephites, as He had the Jews, "Come follow Me." As men press forward in Jesus' footsteps and follow Him along that path which is strait and narrow, they feel more and more constrained to exclaim with Isaiah, as is recorded upon the Brass Plates of Laban, "O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord." ( 2 Ne. 12:5 ) And here, one should not forget the words of the ancient Hebrew brethren, "In Thy light shall we see light." ( Ps. 36:9 )

P. C. R.

REFERENCE TO VOLUME IV

Volume IV of the COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON gives an account of the happy reception given by the people of Zarahemla to the persecuted Ammonites, and also, that because of war, they removed to the Land of Melek. In addition it recounts Alma's continuing missionary labors; his mission to the Zoramites and his ministry at home in Zarahemla. It tells of Korihor, the Anti-Christ; his rebuke by Alma, and the sign that was given him. It also imparts great knowledge concerning certain doctrines when in the spirit of prophecy, Alma gave his sons a father's blessing and his final instructions. Foiled in their attempt to destroy the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, or as they then were known, the Ammonites, the blood-thirsty Lamanites, led as usual by Nephite apostates, made a sudden incursion into the Land of Zarahemla, and in fulfillment of Alma's prophecies, destroyed the great City of Ammonihah, but met with most disastrous defeat later in the campaign. Still vowing vengeance upon the Nephites, the Lamanites returned to their own lands, and feeling that the Ammonites were in sympathy with the Nephites, satisfied their hatred by again slaughtering many of those unresisting people, who, as before, permitted themselves to be slain without first making even a token resistance of defense. But Ammon and his brothers were not willing to have the disciples continually harrassed and eventually exterminated. They judged that the Lord, having so thoroughly tried the faith of so devoted a people, would provide some way of escape for them.

Ammon counseled with the king, and together they thought it would be better to forsake their all as far as worldly possessions were concerned than to sacrifice their lives. But first they resolved to inquire of the Lord if such a course were proper. Ammon did so, and the answer came: Get this people out of this land, that they perish not, for Satan has great hold upon the hearts of the Amalekites who do stir up the Lamanites to anger against their brethren to slay them; therefore get thee out of this land; and blessed are the people of this generation for I will preserve them.

The word of the Lord thus received was joyfully obeyed. The Ammonites gathered up their flocks and their herds and departed into the wilderness that lay between the Lands of Nephi and Zarahemla. There they rested while Ammon and his brethren went forward and treated with the Nephites in behalf of the persecuted believers in Christ who were in their charge. The people of Nephi, by united voice, gladly welcomed their co-religionists and set apart the Land of Jershon as their inheritance. Thither the Ammonites with happy feet repaired, and there they dwelt until war again broke out, and it was deemed desirable that they should remove en masse to the Land of Melek. In after years many of them emigrated to "the land north."

The next notable event in the history of the Nephites was the appearance of Korihor, the Anti-Christ. (75 B.C.)

The doctrines advocated by Korihor were of a kind that would gain ready adhesion from those who did not fervently love purity, truth, and righteousness, as they flattered their vanity and gave them liberty to follow the lead of their passions without fear of the judgment or condemnation of a Divine Being. He denied the coming of a Messiah, he ridiculed prophecy and revelation, and asserted that it was impossible for men to know the future. He inveighed against the Atonement of the Redeemer as a foolish superstition, and taught, instead of the unchanging truths of the Everlasting Gospel, the theory that every man fared in this life according to his genius, and conquered according to his strength. Further, he announced that whatsoever a man did was no crime, for that when a man was dead, there was an end thereof.

It is almost needless to say that those who accepted such dogmas gave way to all manner of evil doing. They became overbearing to others, exceeding keen in business transactions, were full of covetousness, duplicity and lasciviousness, and indulged in various wanton pleasures. Their motto might be said to have been, "Let us eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die; and what we do here will not be brought against us hereafter."

Korihor also gained a strong hold among the discontented, for such are ever found where universal perfection does not dwell. He railed at the Holy Priesthood with fierce words of falsehood. He charged that they sought to keep the people down, that they encouraged ignorance in the masses, that they bound their minds with foolish traditions; all this and much more, that they might usurp power and authority, and glut themselves with the results of their victim's toil.

In Alma's answer to this charge we have a pleasing insight into his private life. Alma said: "Thou knowest that we do not glut ourselves upon the labors of this people, for behold, I have labored even from the commencement of the Reign of the Judges until now, with mine own hands, for my support, notwithstanding my many travels round about the land to declare the word of God unto my people; and notwithstanding the many labors I have performed in the Church, I have not so much as received even one senine for my labor; neither has any of my brethren, save it were in the Judgment Seat, and then we have received only according to law for our time."

As a propagandist, Korihor, for a short time, was a success. We first hear of him preaching his satanic doctrines in the Land of Zarahemla, and as he claimed to fully believe all he taught, the law could not touch him, as full religious liberty was guaranteed under the constitution and laws of the Nephite Commonwealth. From Zarahemla he went to the Land of Jershon to innoculate the Ammonites with his soul-destroying vagaries. But they were a wiser and more zealous people for the Gospel than were many of the Nephites. They took him, bound him, and carried him before Ammon (son of King Mosiah), their High-Priest. He directed that Korihor should be removed beyond the borders of their land, which order having been obeyed, we next find the unabashed imposter laboring among the people of the Land of Gideon. There he met with rebuffs. He was arrested by the people and taken before the chief officers in that land. They found that they could do nothing that would be satisfactory with him, so they remanded him into the custody of the proper officers, with instructions to carry him before Alma and Nephihah in Zarahemla.

When brought before these worthies—the highest dignitaries of both Church and state—Korihor continued in his course of loudmouthed blasphemy, defiant assumption, and willful falsehood.

He argued against the existence of the Father and the coming of His Only Begotten. Alma accused him of arguing against his convictions, but this he stoutly denied, and clamored for a sign to be given as he pretended that he might be convinced. Alma, at length, wearied by his impious importunities, told him that God, as a sign, would smite him dumb. This terrible warning, though it caused the pretender some uneasiness, only resulted in an attempt at prevarication on his part. Korihor said: "I do not deny the existence of a God, but I do not believe there is a God; and I say also, that ye do not know that there is a God; and except ye show me that there is a God; and except ye show me a sign I will not believe." Then Alma answered: "This will I give unto thee for a sign, that thou shalt be struck dumb according to my words; and I say that ye shall no more have utterance."

Korihor received his sign; Alma's words were fulfilled; the sign-seeker never more spoke on earth. When the hand of the Lord fell upon him, he recanted. By writing, as he could not speak, he confessed the power of God, and acknowledged that he had been led astray by Satan, who had come unto him in the form of an angel of light. He begged that the curse might be removed, but Alma, well knowing the baseness of his heart, refused to intercede before Heaven in his behalf lest when removed and he was restored to speech, he would again strive to deceive the people.

And it came to pass that the curse was not taken off Korihor; but he was cast out and went about from house to house begging for his food.

A proclamation was sent throughout all the land. In it the Chief Judge recited what had happened to Korihor, and called upon those who believed in his words to speedily repent lest the same judgments should come upon them.

The proclamation put an end to the iniquity of Korihor, for his followers were all brought back again to the truth. But Korihor, deserted by the devil, a vagabond and a beggar, still continued to beg his way from town to town, from house to house; until, one day, in a city of the Zoramites, he was run over and trodden down. The injuries that he received at this time were so great that he soon after died.

We have just stated that Korihor, the Anti-Christ, was killed in a city of the Zoramites. Who was Zoram? and who were the Zoramites? are the questions that now present themselves.

There were two distinct classes of people called Zoramites in the Book of Mormon. The first, the descendants of Zoram, the servant of Laban, who accompanied Lehi and Nephi from Jerusalem. The second were the followers of the Apostate Zoram, whose defection and treason caused so much bloodshed in the Nephite Republic.

Of the last named Zoram and his personal life we have no history. We only know him through his pernicious teachings, and the sad results thereof. But it is altogether probable that before he started out as a religious reformer on his own account, he was a follower of Nehor, as the majority of his adherents appear to have been gathered from that sect and to have belonged to that order.

Zoram assembled his people in a region of the South American Continent, at that time but very thinly settled by the Nephites. It was called the Land of Antionum, and lay to the east of the River Sidon, while it stretched from the Land of Jershon in the north, to the great wilderness south, which was infested with the more savage, wandering Lamanites. To this broad land the Zoramites gathered, and there built their cities, erected their synagogues, and grew in material wealth, until in the year 75 B.C., they had become an important, though undesirable portion of the Nephite Commonwealth. As friends they were unreliable, as enemies formidable.

In the various apostasies, partial or total, that from time to time disgraced the Nephites, there is one characteristic feature that seems universal to them all, however much they may have differed on minor points; it was the denial of the coming of the Savior in the flesh, and of the necessity of His Atonement for the sins of the world. This was the evil one's strong point in his efforts to mislead the ancient Nephites. Let him but persuade any people to reject Christ's Messiahship, the foundation of the Gospel scheme, and little he cares what else they believe or disbelieve; for when this fundamental truth is rejected their spiritual enslavement is secured.

This was the case with the Zoramites. They claimed to be a chosen and a holy people, separate from their fellowmen, and elected by God to eternal Salvation, while all around were predestined to be cast down to hell. This atrocious creed naturally resulted in its adherents being puffed up in vanity and consumed with pride. They became tyrannical, haughty, uncharitable, and oppressors of their poorer neighbors. They covered their bodies with the finest apparel, and profusely adorned their persons with costly ornaments of gold and jewels. In their arrogance and self-righteousness they became the Pharisees of their age and country; but in other phases of iniquity they far exceeded their counterparts in the Holy Land. They bowed down to idols, denied the coming of Christ, declared the doctrine of the Atonement to be a foolish tradition, and, like many of the sects of modern Christendom, they misinterpreted the teachings of Holy Scripture with regard to the being of God. Their declaration of faith was: "Holy, holy God; we believe that thou art God, and we believe that thou art holy, and that thou wast a spirit, and that thou art a spirit, and that thou wilt be a spirit forever."

This strange medley of ideas gave birth to corresponding vagaries of worship. They left off praying. Being chosen and elected to be God's holy children, they had no need of prayer. Once a week they assembled in their synagogues and went through an empty form, which was a little prayer, a little praise, and considerable self-glorification. Having done this, they never mentioned God or holy things again throughout the week; indeed it was a portion of their creed that their synagogues were the only places in which it was lawful to talk or think of religious matters.

Their services were as absurd as their creed. In the center of each of their synagogues was erected a holy stand, or pulpit, called by them, Rameumptom, which stood high above the congregation. From the slight description given of it in the Book of Alma we judge it may have been somewhat pyramidal in form, the top being only large enough for one person to stand upon. Each worshiper mounted to the top thereof, stretched out his hands toward Heaven, and, in a loud voice, repeated their set form of worship. Having done this, he descended and another took his place, and so on until all who desired to go through the mummery had satisfied their conscience or gratified their pride.

The tidings of this defection having reached Alma, he selected several of the leading members of the Priesthood, and, as soon as possible proceeded to the Land of Antionum. Those who accompanied him were his two younger sons, three of the sons of King Mosiah, Amulek and Zeezrom. To Alma's anxiety to bring these dissenters back from the error of their way, and to avert Heaven's righteous wrath from falling upon them, was added the fear that if they remained in their wickedness they would join the Lamanites and bring trouble upon the faithful Nephites by urging the renewal of war.

On the arrival of Alma and his fellow-laborers at the seat of this apostasy, they at once commenced their ministrations. They taught in the synagogues and preached in the streets. They visited the people from house to house, using every possible effort to bring these misguided dissenters to an understanding of their perilous condition. To these labors we are indebted for some of the plainest and most powerful Gospel teachings contained in the Book of Mormon. In this resume, let it suffice to say that many of the poor and humble, those who were oppressed, abused and trodden down by their false priests and unrighteous leaders, as well as by their wealthier brethren, received the words of Salvation, while the majority rejected them with contemptuous scorn. Some of the missionaries were maltreated. Shiblon, the son of Alma, was imprisoned and stoned for the truth's sake, while others fared but little better. Unfortunately the work of God was retarded by the misconduct of Corianton, the brother of Shiblon, who for a time, deserted his ministerial duties for the company of a harlot. This folly caused Alma great sorrow, as it gave the ungodly a pretext for rejecting the Gospel, of which they were not slow to avail themselves.

When Alma and his associates had done all the good they deemed possible, they withdrew to the neighboring Land of Jershon. No sooner had they left than the more crafty of the Zoramites devised a plan to discover the feelings of the community. They gathered the people together throughout the land and consulted with them concerning that which they had heard. In this way they discovered who favored the truth and who rejected it. Finding that the poor and uninfluential were those who had received it, they resorted to persecution and to plunder. They drove the believers from their homes and out of the land. Most of these fled to the Land of Jershon, whither Alma and his co-workers had previously gone.

The Land of Jershon was inhabited by the people of Ammon. They had also left home and country for the truth's sake, and now that others were suffering from the same cause, they received them with open arms. They fed and clothed those who needed such help, and gave them lands whereon they might build up new homes.

When the wicked Zoramites heard of the kind reception their injured fellow-citizens had received in Jershon they were greatly angered. They were not content to spoil them, themselves, but they wanted to make them fugitives and vagabonds on the face of the whole earth. Their leader, a very wicked man, sent messages to the Ammonites suggesting that they expel the refugees, adding many threats of what would follow should the cruel demands not be complied with. But the Ammonites were a brave people; they had already suffered unto death for the cause of the Lord and they were not of the stamp to desert their afflicted brethren. Rather than do so, they would again forsake their homes and find in some other region a land of peace; for we must remind our readers that the Ammonites had entered into a covenant with God never again to bend the bow or draw the sword to take human life. They, therefore, withdrew to the Land of Melek, and the armies of the Nephites occupied the Land of Jershon.

The cause that led the armies of Nephites to occupy Jershon was that the Zoramites, finding that their haughty and unjust demands would not be complied with, had excited the Lamanites to invade the territory of the Nephites. The Lamanite forces which were commanded almost entirely by Nephite apostates, on account of their fierce hatred of their former associates, marched first to the Land of Antionum, where they joined the Zoramites. Then the whole of the invading hosts, under command of a dissenter named Zerahemnah, advanced northward towards the Land of Jershon.

This was a day of peril to the Nephites. Their enemies were much more numerous than they, and were filled with a savage thirst for blood, which was especially felt against those who were of their own race and kindred who had bowed in obedience to Heaven's commands. At this juncture the Lord raised up one of the greatest heroes ever born on American soil. He was not only a military leader, but a priest and prophet, and who by his inspiration and devoted courage the Nephites were for many years led to uninterrupted victory. Such was Moroni, who now, though but twenty-five years old, took the command of the armies of his nation.

Though the forces of the Lamanites were much more numerous, all other advantages were on the side of the Nephites. The discipline of the Nephites was better by far; the bodies of their soldiers were protected by armor which included breastplates, helmets, shields, etc., and they were fighting for the sacred cause of their religion and their country, their altars and their firesides, their wives and little ones. Inspired by the justness of their cause and the extremity of their circumstances, they fought with a courage and a desperation never exceeded in Nephite annals.

The Lamanites, on the other hand, had no such holy impulse to nerve their arms for the combat. They were the aggressors, and were hasting to shed the blood of their brethren. Insane and infernal hatred alone inspired them for the warfare. Besides, they were ill-prepared to meet the Nephites, who had such a tactician as Moroni for their Commander-in-Chief. The descendants of Laman were simply armed with swords and cimeters, bows and arrows, slings and stones. Their bodies were naked with the exception of a skin wrapped about their loins. The Zoramites and other dissenters from the Nephites were better clothed; in dress they followed the fashion of the people from whom they sprang.

The Lamanites, finding that Moroni was too well prepared for their attack on the Land of Jershon, retired through Antionum into the wilderness where they changed direction and marched towards the headwaters of the River Sidon, with the intention of taking possession of the Land of Manti. But Moroni was too vigilant to allow his enemies to slip away without knowing what had become of them. He had his spies watch the movements of Zerahemnah's forces, and in the meantime sent to Alma to inquire the mind and the will of the Lord with regard to his future course. The word of the Lord was given to Alma, and he informed Moroni's messengers of the movement of the Lamanites. The young general, with becoming prudence, then divided his army. One corps he left to protect Jershon, and with the other part he advanced by rapid strides and marches toward Manti, by the most direct route. On his arrival he at once mustered all the men who could bear arms into his forces, to help in the defense of their right and liberties against the advancing foes. So rapid had been his movements and so prompt had been the response to his calls that when the Lamanites reached the neighborhood of the Sidon he was prepared for their coming.

The battle that was fought when the opposing armies met was one of the most stubborn and bloody in Nephite history. Never from the beginning had the Lamanites been known to fight with such exceeding great strength and courage. Time after time their hosts rushed upon the well-ordered ranks of the Nephites, and notwithstanding the latter's armor they crushed in their heads and cut off their arms. But the cost of these charges to the Lamanites' own numbers was terrible. The battle began at a Hill called Riplah, and afterwards extended to both banks of the Sidon. At one time a lull took place in the carnage, and Moroni, who had no pleasure in the shedding of blood made an offer of such terms of the Lamanites' surrender as he considered the circumstances warranted. But Zerahemnah and other captains of the Lamanite hosts rejected the offer and urged their troops to renewed resistance. So the battle recommenced with unabated ferocity. At last the faith and valor of the Nephites prevailed; many of the Lamanites surrendered and agreed to a covenant of peace. Even Zerahemnah, himself, wounded and scalped by one of Moroni's body guard, to prevent the total annihilation of his armies, at last consented to Moroni's proposed terms and entered into the required covenant of peace. So great were the losses on both sides, especially of the Lamanites, that the dead were not counted.

Thus ended the war, but not the Zoramite heresy, for we read in the account of other wars between the two nations, that certain Lamanite captains were Zoramites. Foiled in their attempts to destroy their former brethren and to overthrow the Church of God, they still adhered to their false faith, and on every possible occasion made manifest their undying hatred to those whose only offense was that they would not join them in their crimes nor consent to the destruction of the liberties of the people.

THE ACCOUNT OF THE PEOPLE OF NEPHI, AND THEIR WARS AND DISSENSIONS, IN THE DAYS OF HELAMAN, ACCORDING TO THE RECORD OF HELAMAN, WHICH HE KEPT IN HIS DAYS.

THE BOOK OF ALMA

CHAPTER 45

Verse 1

The Nephites did worship God with exceeding great joy. Notwithstanding the bitterness evinced by the Nephites in the terms of peace that their military leader, Moroni, demanded, ending their recent struggle with the Lamanites, the Nephites were quick to forgive and almost forget the atrocities the barbaric Lamanites committed during that sanguinary war. This appears especially true to us because the Nephites were imbued with high ideals and the Lamanites were not. It is not at all to be wondered at when we consider that the Nephites had been taught from the very first that the Lamanites were indeed their brethren, but that because of false tradition they had gone astray. In addition to that and in fulfillment of God's promise to their forefathers: "If you will keep My commandments you shall prosper in the land," the Nephites regarded themselves as being much more blessed than were the Lamanites. The Nephites usually were prosperous, and therefore looked with great compassion upon their unfortunate brethren. Too, the Nephites considered that the Lamanites were often the victims of treachery in that they yielded themselves to deceitful persuasion into making savagely brutal attacks upon them, and of being led therein by Nephite apostates who sought for power and authority over their fellow men, and who saw no surer nor quicker way to obtain it than by stirring up the smoldering debris of hatred for all that was Nephite that was inherent in the savage breasts of the Lamanites.

The People of Nephi perceived to a high degree that the Lord had abundantly blessed them in again delivering them "out of the hands of their enemies." But, they pondered, once more they, themselves, were now the victims of ambitious men who had denounced their God and their country, and who had in the satisfaction of their inexhaustible spite, determined to wrest the government-of-the-people from its proper hands and invest its powers and prerogatives to the meanest purposes of crime, degradation, and filth. The Zoramites, an apostate sect dwelling in the Land of Antionum, had joined the Lamanites, and together they were pillaging and murdering the peaceful Nephites wherever they were to be found.

The Nephites were men of faith. Many mighty prayers were lifted up to the Throne of Grace for needed help, and He who reigns On High sent succor according to the hour and the power of their need. Moroni, the leader and commander of the Nephite armies, was not only a man of valor, but an upright, God-fearing, leader who went into battle, not for glory nor for the sake of ambition, but for God, Country, and Liberty. Future reference to his courage and his ability to raise his men to higher levels of faith and firmness in a righteous cause, so stiffened their morale that the Lord, in answer to their supplications, posted victory upon their banners.

The story of Moroni's prowess as told in the Book of Mormon is not far different in its spirit than that of Mattathias and of Judah as related by the Jews in I Maccabees. The valor and steadfastness of these men of faith are apparent in what they did, and in the similar reactions of the Nephites and the Jews in praising God: "And the days of Mattathias drew near that he should die and he said to his sons: Be ye zealous for the Law and give your lives for the Covenant of your fathers. Remember what our fathers did in their generations. Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation, and it was accounted to him for righteousness? Phineous, our father, for that he was zealous exceedingly, obtained the covenant of an everlasting priesthood. David, for being faithful, inherited the throne of a kingdom for ever and ever. Throughout all the ages none that put their trust in God were overcome. Therefore, my sons, be strong, and show yourselves men in behalf of the Law; for therein shall ye obtain glory. And he blessed them and was gathered to his fathers.

"Then Judah, called Maccabee, rose up in his stead, and all his brethren aided him, and they fought with gladness the battle of Israel. He cheered Jacob by his mighty acts. He battled like a lion and the lawless shrunk for fear of him, and his memorial is blessed forever. And when all the people feared and trembled at the sight of the great number of the enemy, and said: "What? Shall we be able, being a small company, to fight against so great and so strong a multitude? Judah answered: With the God of Heaven it is all one to save by many or by few. And all the people shall know that there is One who redeemeth and saveth Israel. And Judah led them into battle, and behold the hosts of the enemy were discomfited before him. And Israel had a great deliverance. And they sang songs of thanksgiving, and praised the Lord of Heaven for His goodness, because His mercy endureth forever. . . . And the people praised the God of Heaven Who had given them great victory . . . and there was great rejoicing among the people." (I Maccabees) We can see in this and in the scene presented in the story of Moroni in the Book of Alma that both peoples and their leaders reacted the same when similar conditions presented themselves to their understanding.

Verses 2-8

Alma, to his son, Helaman. In the Nineteenth year of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi, or about 72 years before the birth of Christ, when peace had been established throughout all the lands wherein the Nephites dwelt, Alma, who had been the Presiding High Priest of God's Church now for many years, feeling that age was adding many burdens to his already numerous duties which he could no longer carry, called his son, Helaman, to him and further instructed him in regard to the high and holy office to which Helaman had been set apart. Alma's anxiety over the future of his people prompted him to more thoroughly impress upon Helaman's mind the greatness and the grandeur of his new calling, and also to deliver to him a prophecy concerning the unhappy end of the Nephite people.

By a series of questions which Alma asked Helaman, he discerned Helaman's integrity "concerning those records which have been kept" on the Plates of Nephi from the very beginning, or since Nephi was commanded by the Lord to prepare them for a certain purpose yet unknown to him. Helaman made no apologies, pretexts, or excuses, to his father, but boldly and unequivocally, he affirmed his conviction of the truth of Alma's words testifying of their genuineness. Helaman was willing to stand by his statement regarding, not only the Plates of Nephi, but all the other records his father had entrusted into his hands, including the Brass Plates of Laban. Behind Helaman's acknowledgment of the divine source from which the records came stood the evidence of experience, faith, and the knowledge that his father was an honest and upright man who had never on any occasion misguided him.

Equally important to Alma was his son's belief in the Messiah, Jesus Christ, whose coming they looked forward to. The last question Alma asked Helaman, but not the least important because it embraced all else, was, "Will ye keep my commandments?" Alma's commandments were God's commandments, and Helaman assured his father that the plates whereof he spoke would be kept in the manner he had indicated. Helaman also promised Alma that he would keep a record of the Nephites' doings in his days as others before him had done.

Verses 9-16

I have somewhat to prophesy unto thee. Alma's questioning of Helaman revealed to him that Helaman was indeed a man of great faith, and that it was safe to prophesy to him of things not yet ready for publication. Alma cautioned Helaman "what I prophesy unto thee shall not be made known, even until the prophecy is fulfilled." Alma then instructed his son to "write the words which I shall say," evidently for the good reason that they would then not be forgotten and also that no future historian, whether conscious of it or not, should make an error in transcribing it. "What I shall prophesy shall not be made known. . . ." Alma's prophecy as we shall presently see was not an assuring one. It foretold of God's fierce anger because of His people's iniquity. The closing scenes of their history were dark. Destruction awaited them. To publish it now, we think Alma meditated, might discourage many laborers in God's Vineyard from diligently pursuing their task, but instead thereof encourage them to await the coming of that dreadful day with fears, and tears, and in trembling. The spirit of revelation that imbued Alma's whole being was the power within him to make known the future and also to interpret the past. The spirit of revelation is the forerunner of prophecy; in fact, they are counterparts. Prophecy fulfilling by way of promise what the spirit of revelation makes known.

The spirit of revelation was a gift abundantly had among the Nephites; it brought forth many exclamations of heavenly joy, and lifted them to higher levels of praise and thanksgiving. Their solemn assemblies were motivated by the thought, "O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name together." ( Ps. 34:3 ) As early as Jacob's, Nephi's brother's time, there were many Saints dwelling among the Nephites who could not resist the urge to give expression to this wonderful talent. They prophesied of many things, often stumbling in their use of words. Jacob who was their High Priest, reproved them, saying: Behold, my brethren, he that prophesieth, let him prophesy to the understanding of men; for the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifest unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls. But behold, we are not witnesses alone in these things; for God also spake them unto prophets of old. ( Jacob 4:13 )

The plainness with which Alma prophesied to Helaman was typical of the inspired leaders and teachers who presided over this Branch of the House of Israel transplanted in the new Land of Promise. Almost 500 years before the time of Alma, the Prophet Nephi had this to say: And now I, Nephi, make an end of my prophesying unto you, my beloved brethren. And I cannot write but a few things, which I know must surely come to pass; neither can I write but a few of the words of my brother Jacob. Wherefore, the things which I have written sufficeth me, save it be a few words which I must speak concerning the doctrine of Christ; wherefore, I shall speak unto you plainly, according to the plainness of my prophesying. For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the understanding; for He speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their understanding. ( 2 Ne. 31:1-3 )

No prophecy of God is obscure to those who desire to know the truth. By faith it may be easily understood. It need not be added to, nor taken from. It needs no interpreter. Prophecy knows only the truth. It does not speak falsely nor foolishly. It is one of the most wonderful manifestations of the Spirit upon the minds of holy men. "For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." ( 2 Pet. 1:19 )

In his prophecy to Helaman we note that Alma followed the long-established custom of the Nephite servants of God in that he delivered his message in words that all men could understand. The inherent strength of Alma's words is far more apparent in their simplicity than if they were hidden behind a group of meaningless phrases which would only obscure the message he bore and confuse those to whom it was delivered. As it was it sank deeply into Helaman's heart.

Helaman wrote his father's words as Alma had commanded him, and he further notes that his father, after uttering his divine message, blessed him and his brothers. Alma also blessed the earth wherein they lived for the sake of the righteous and for the cause which they served. (V. 15)

Not only did Alma pronounce a blessing upon the land which God had given them, but he declared that woe would come to every people and nation who dwelt therein who refused to serve the Lord, and who continued to do wickedly while partaking of its bounties. Their destruction would surely come, Alma said, "For this is the cursing and the blessing of God upon the land." This blessing and cursing Alma pronounced in the Name of the Lord God, for he also said, "the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (V. 16) Indeed Alma blessed all those who should stand firm in the truth of Christ from that time forth.

Verses 18-19

When Alma had done this he departed out of the land. . . . Alma's last days were as a benediction upon the heads of the righteous. God's servants take extreme satisfaction in blessing the righteous, as well as does their Master. The Almighty Father does not delight in punishing His children, but we must accept God's corrections as a mark of His chastening love that comes, as does the refiner's fire to precious metals, to purify and strengthen us. Just so, were Alma's words before his departure, for shortly thereafter he departed out of the Land of Zarahemla "as for if to go to the Land of Melek," and "was never heard of more."

Of Alma's death and burial nothing is known, but it was said throughout the Church that "even as Moses" was, the Lord took His faithful servant "unto Himself."

Although his name is not mentioned here, a comment concerning Zeezrom is appropriate. Zeezrom as is well known, was an upright and staunch missionary companion of Alma's, firm and trustworthy in every calling Alma made of him. After the departure of Alma we learn no more of Zeezrom's life though his name and teachings are referred to by later servants of God. A City of Zeezrom is also mentioned as having been captured by the Lamanites in the war waged against the Nephites under the leadership of Amalickiah and his brother Ammoron. As it was the custom of the Nephites to name their cities, towns, and villages, after whoever founded them, it is highly probable that, in the colonization of their country so vigorously carried on in the age that Zeezrom lived, he commenced the building of this place which we hold was named after him. It would not be unreasonable to suppose that he dwelt in the midst of its citizens as their High Priest or Chief Judge.

Verses 20-24

Helaman went forth among the people. Alma's son, Helaman, appears to have succeeded him as the Presiding High Priest of God's Church. Helaman and several other members of the Priesthood went through the cities of the Nephites, where the devastating effects of a long war with the Lamanites had disrupted its orderly procedure, and there regulated the affairs of the Church.

Owing to the pride of many, who because of their riches, would not give heed to the instructions given them, nor walk uprightly before God, dissensions arose, which in after years led to numerous evils. Among the greatest of these evils was a long continued war, or series of wars, between the faithful Nephites on one hand, and apostates together with the Lamanites on the other. Still, for four years, Helaman and his associates in the work of restoration were enabled to maintain order in the Church. Many died in full faith of the Gospel, and in joyous hope of its never-ending rewards; indeed, during that period there was much peace and great prosperity enjoyed by those who remained faithful.
