Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 46

Verses 1-10

As many as would not hearken to the words of Helaman . . . were gathered together against their brethren. In spite of the "exceeding great care" Helaman and his brethren exercised over the Church, and "notwithstanding their great victory which they had had over the Lamanites, and their great rejoicings which they had because of their deliverance by the hand of the Lord," all of which was fresh in their minds, many of the Nephites turned away from the God who had preserved them and helped them, and quickly forgot His mercy and His goodness to those in need. Of them it may be said, "There was a change without; therefore there was a change within." They no longer sought to serve Him; the desire for riches and for the things of the world crowded all thoughts of God from their hearts. Internal strife and angry passions marked their relations with each other. Dissension and discord took the place of joy and thanksgiving. The intrigues of apostates and royalists who desired the return of a monarchial form of government convulsed the whole Nephite community.

The rebels were led by a descendant of Zoram, the servant of Laban, named Amalickiah, one of the most ambitious, cunning, and unscrupulous characters that ever disgraced the history of ancient America. It was a perilous day for the Nephite Nation when this subtle creature bent all his brilliant energies to the fulfillment of his ambitious dreams. True, he had been a member of Christ's holy Church, but now the love of God had given place to the hatred of His servants; he was a citizen of a republic, but he aspired to overthrow its liberties and reign as king over his fellowmen. Indeed he had cherished thoughts of still greater power, even to be monarch of the entire continent; both Nephite and Lamanite should bow to his undisputed sway. Such were his dreams, and the continual thoughts of his waking hours, and to this end he bent all the energies of his mind, all the craft of his soul, all the cunning of his tongue, all the weight of his influence. With promises rich as gold and numerous as snowflakes in a winter's storm, he beguiled his weaker fellows; men, who, like him, loved power, hated the truth, delighted in iniquity, but who had not the lofty ambition, the unhallowed valor, and the deep designing cunning that distinguished their leader. To his call the dissatisfied, the corrupt and the apostate rallied.

That the corruption sown by one wicked man may yield a harvest of misery and woe to a nation or to any number of individuals is amply shown in the experiences of Amalickiah. He even sought to destroy God's Church, and not only that, but bring to naught the government of the people which "God had granted to them," which was in effect "the foundation of liberty" to all men who desire to serve Him.

We also see how "quick" man is to turn away from righteousness and become the servants of evil when earthly goods are presented or are promised him. In the days of Amalickiah the righteous man among the Nephites was upbraided because of his righteousness, and the wicked one held in repute. Instead of the joy and happiness which God had intended for those who dwelt in the New Land of Promise, there was grief and sorrow. Sorrow because the children of men refused to heed His word, and grief because that is the price of iniquity.

Verses 11-13

Moroni rent his coat; and he took a piece thereof, and wrote upon it. . . . Opposed to Amalickiah stood Moroni, the dauntless leader of the armies of the Nephites. Inspired by an unquenchable love for truth and liberty, he sensed with every pulsation of his great heart that no man could fight for a holier, more glorious cause than virtue and liberty. Thus inspired, he tore a portion of his coat from its surrounding parts, and inscribing thereon his battle cry, he lifted it high upon a pole. Girding on his armor, incasing his head with its fit covering, shielding his body with its breastplates, placing the proper pieces around his thighs and loins, he kneeled in humble prayer before Jehovah, presented his Title of Liberty before Him and asked His blessing, protection, guidance and victorious aid in the coming struggle. Then he gathered the hosts of the Nephites. From place to place he sped, waving in the air the ensign on which all could read the burning words he had inscribed: IN MEMORY OF OUR GOD, OUR RELIGION AND FREEDOM, AND OUR PEACE, OUR WIVES AND OUR CHILDREN.

Verses 14-18

All those who were true believers in Christ took upon them, gladly, the name of Christ. Those who did not belong to the Church of God and who did not believe in the coming of Christ to Atone for the sins of the world, called the true believers, Christians. The latter, the Sacred Record says, "took upon them, gladly, the name of Christ," and suffered themselves to be treated with scorn and become despised "because we take upon us the name of Christ." Surely, of a certainty, unless we by transgression forsake the Lord, He will not suffer, Moroni said, that we be "trodden down and destroyed." "He will not forsake us nor leave us in our grief;" he thought of the Psalmist, "My help cometh from God. Upon Him I cast my burden, and He will grant me strength according to the days He has apportioned to me." All of us, he undoubedly mused are His, and no power no matter how great can take us out of His hands.

Thus strengthened by his call upon the Lord, Moroni proclaimed all the land wherein they lived, both north and south, "A chosen land, and the Land of Liberty," or in other words, "the Land of Zion."

Verses 19-22

Behold, whosoever will maintain this title upon the land, let him come forth in the strength of the Lord. After Moroni had so proclaimed the Land of Promise, a Land of Liberty, and had sanctified to God's purposes the freedom of its soil, he went forth as we have said, and cried with a loud voice, saying: "Behold, whosoever will maintain this title upon the land, let them come forth in the strength of the Lord, and enter into a covenant that they will maintain their rights, and their religion, that the Lord God may bless them."

Nor did Moroni cry in vain; the patriot Nephites, the members of the Church of Christ, hastened with ready feet to the response. The streets of Zarahemla were alive with the gathering hosts. Each warrior, to show his devotion to the liberties with which God had endowed them, and his fealty to the Great Giver, rent his robe, as the young general had done, and thereby made covenant with God and his brethren to be faithful and true, in life and in death, in the council chamber and on the battlefield, while an enemy remained to menace their liberties, national or religious.

In every community where Moroni hastened or his sub-lieutenants went, the same scene enacted in Zarahemla was repeated. Nor was Zarahemla alone in her manifestation of her patriotic love. Moroni's stirring appeal was spread far and wide throughout all the lands of the Nephites. Swift-footed, banner-bearing messengers quickly hastened down the Sidon's banks to the dwellers in the north, arousing the patriots of each peaceful city to their hour of peril. Onward they hurried until Desolation echoed back to Bountiful the battle cry of Liberty. Others gave no rest to their tired feet until Mulek, and her sister cities that lined the Caribbean Sea had flown from their towers the hallowed banner. Through the narrow defiles and rocky canyons that lay between the Andes' lofty peaks, other couriers pushed their unwearied way into the western wilderness and hence to the Pacific's Strand, until every city held by the Nephites had gathered her sons to the defense of their rights and their liberties, their altars and their firesides. Nor were Manti and the other cities of the south forgotten; the faithful and the brave who lined the borders of the great southern wilderness heard the rallying cry. From every city, every vale, the converging hosts poured forth with sword and spear, with bow and arrow, with slings and stones; while from the top of every tower and citadel throughout the Nephites' lands, the sacred standard fluttered in the breeze. Men of strong arms and stout hearts were they, of faith unfaltering, and courage undiminished.

Verses 23-28

Moroni said unto them: Behold, we are a remnant of the seed of Jacob. Appealing to their noted ancestry, Moroni drew to the attention of the Nephites that they were descended from Jacob through Joseph who was sold to some Ishmaelitic traders who were going down into Egypt. His own brothers did this outrageous thing, and before doing so contrived a scheme to deceive their aging father, Jacob. They took Joseph's coat, tore it into many pieces, and taking one piece of it to their father, declared that his youngest son had evidently been killed.

Moroni drew from this incident a plausible comparison between their own and Joseph's experiences in that both point to the fulfillment of God's purposes in preserving His people. Moroni quoted the words of Jacob before he died, saying that the great patriarch prophesied that as was the part of Joseph's coat that was saved and had not decayed, so also would a portion of his son's seed. "Even as this remnant of garment of my son hath been preserved, so shall a remnant of the seed of my son be preserved by the hand of God, and be taken unto Himself, while the remainder of the seed of Joseph shall perish, even as the remnant of his garment. Now behold, this giveth my soul sorrow; nevertheless, my soul hath joy in my son, because of that part of his seed which shall be taken unto God." "Now behold," the Sacred Record says, "this was the language of Jacob." Then Moroni asked the question: "Who knoweth but what the remnant of the seed of Joseph, which shall perish as his garment, are those who have dissented from us? Yea, and even it shall be ourselves if we do not stand fast in the faith of Christ." This stirring appeal had the effect upon the Nephites of rousing them to unprecedented heights of patriotism and courage. They saw in this call the fulfillment of a prophecy uttered many hundred years ago by the remote father of their race. To be an instrument in the hands of God in the fulfilling of the words of His prophet, instilled in their hearts valor for the righteous cause Moroni proclaimed. As we have noted, he, after having thus urged his co-patriots on, went throughout the Nephite lands, gathering together all those who "were desirous to maintain their liberty, to stand against . . . those who had dissented, who were called Amalickiahites."

Verse 29

Amalickiah . . . took those of his people who would and departed into the Land of Nephi. When Amalickiah saw the great resurgence of life and the desire of liberty that was awakened in the hearts of the people by Moroni's appeal to God, and also the dramatic course he afterwards pursued, bringing order out of chaos and thereby adding untold numbers to the Nephite hosts, he faltered in his purpose, his followers lost heart, and retreat was deemed by him the fittest show of wisdom, and discretion the better part of valor. "He took those of his people who would and departed into the Land of Nephi."

Verses 30-36

Amalickiah fled with a small number of his men. Moroni sensing that if allowed, the army of Amalickiah joined with the Lamanites would give the Lamanites a vast superiority in numbers; and that it would be Amalickiah's strategy to stir the Lamanites up to war against the Nephites, and thus "that he might obtain his purposes."

To cut them off from reaching the Land of Nephi, the Nephite armies, headed by Moroni, marched forth into the wilderness lying between Zarahemla and the Land of Nephi. The armies met headon; the rebels succumbed and surrendered, and Amalickiah fled precipitously with "a small number of his men." Those of his army whom Amalickiah abandoned quickly gave up to Moroni's forces and were taken back to Zarahemla which was the center of Nephite activities. Once ensconced within its borders, Moroni, who, by the Chief Judge and the voice of the people, had been empowered to act according to his own judgment in such cases, and to "exercise authority over them," caused the captured Amalickiahites to forswear their intended revolt, and covenant "to support the cause of freedom." There were but few, the Sacred Record notes, who denied "the Covenant of Freedom." They were put to an ignominious death.

The Title of Liberty, the almost inspiring, certainly inspiriting banner under which the Nephites marched forth to preserve their liberties, their religion, their homes, their wives and children, continued to float uninterruptedly from the Atlantic to the Pacific Coasts, as far as Nephi's children ruled or Nephite homes were found. Moroni's people rejoiced with him with intensified joy in their liberties, now more than ever dear to them through the valorous efforts they had put forth for their preservation.

Verses 37-41

Helaman and the High Priests did also maintain order in the Church. Peace, God's most precious gift, again brought untold blessings to the righteous. Among these blessings were the riches of the world. We often measure the blessings God bestows on us in a materialistic manner. Our gold and silver is the standard by which we judge prosperity. In the Book of Mormon, peace and prosperity go hand in hand. Prosperity abounds when peace is established. The people prospered as righteousness prevailed. Peace ever lies in keeping God's commandments. Any peace in opposition to this, is all Peace, Peace, when there is no peace at all. The Saints of God want peace, but not every and any peace. They do not want the peace that is purchased on the battlefield; they do not want the peace that is woven into treaties in the distant capitals of the world, nor the peace of mere conventionalism; but they want peace, founded upon truth, upheld and sustained by the righteousness of God's children everywhere. In this peace, the peace of our Lord Jesus Christ, many of the Nephites of this period died firmly "believing that their souls were redeemed by the Lord Jesus Christ; thus they went out of this world rejoicing."

AMALICKIAH

A Nephite traitor and apostate in the days of the Republic and afterwards king of the Lamanites. He was descended from Zoram, the servant of Laban.

We judge from the conspicuous military ability shown by Amalickiah that his early training was that of a soldier, as no one would be more likely to be chosen by the disaffected monarchists as their leader than a brilliant and ambitious officer in the national army. It appears that in the nineteenth year of the Judges (73 B.C.) one of those frequently occurring outbreaks in favor of a change in the form of the Nephite government took place. The hallowed glories of Mosiah's reign were still bright in the hearts of many, while others by ambition led, intrigued for the restoration of the kingly power that they might find place and profit at court. The plan for a revolution was laid, the King-men gathered in armed array and Amalickiah was chosen as their general; but they were disappointed, the masses did not join their standard in the expected numbers. On the other hand Moroni, the Nephite commander, gathered so great a force for the defense of the Commonwealth that retreat was considered the better part of wisdom; but his followers being out-generaled by Moroni, Amalickiah fled to the court of the king of the Lamanites.

The king received him with much honor. It is altogether probable that the monarch also was of an apostate family. Seven or eight years previously the Christian Lamanites, with the king at their head, had been ruthlessly driven from their homes by their unbelieving fellow countrymen led by members of the various Nephite apostate orders who had taken up their residence amongst the Lamanites. A leader of one of these sects would naturally work his way to the throne when the rightful king and his family sought refuge in the Land of Zarahemla. What makes this idea more probable is that Amalickiah afterwards married the widowed queen, a thing he was much more likely to do if she were a fair Nephite than a dark-skinned daughter of Laman. On the first favorable opportunity Amalickiah commenced to rekindle the fires of hatred in the bosoms of the Lamanites toward his former friends. At first he was not successful; the recollection of their recent defeats was too fresh in the memory of the multitude. The king issued a war proclamation but it was disregarded. Much as his subjects feared the imperial power they dreaded a renewal of war, more. Many gathered to resist the royal mandate. The king, unused to such objections, raised an army to quell the advocates of peace and placed it under the command of the ambitious Amalickiah.

The Free-men had chosen an officer named Lehonti for their king and leader and he had assembled his followers at a mountain called Antipas. Thither Amalickiah marched but with no intention of provoking a conflict; he was working for the good feelings of the entire Lamanite people. On his arrival he entered into a secret correspondence with Lehonti in which he agreed to surrender his forces on condition that he should be appointed second in command of the united armies. The plan succeeded. Amalickiah surrendered to Lehonti and assumed the second position. Lehonti now stood in the way of his ambition; it was but a little thing to remove him. He died by slow poison administered by Amalickiah's direction.

Amalickiah now assumed supreme command and at the head of his forces marched towards the Lamanite capital. The king, supposing that the approaching hosts had been raised to carry the war into Zarahemla, came out of the royal city to greet and congratulate him. As the monarch drew near he was treacherously slain by some of the creatures of the subtle general, who at the same time raised the hue and cry that the king's own servants were the authors of the vile deed. Amalickiah assumed all the airs of grief, affliction and righteous indignation that he thought would best suit his purpose. He next made apparently desperate but purposely ineffectual efforts to capture those who were charged with the crime and so adroitly did he carry out his schemes that before long he gained the affections of the queen, whom he married, and was recognized by the Lamanites as their king.

Amalickiah now cherished the stupendous design of subjugating the Nephites and ruling singly and alone from ocean to ocean. To accomplish this iniquitous purpose he dispatched emissaries in all directions whose mission was to stir up the angry passions of the populace against the Nephites. When this base object was sufficiently accomplished and the deluded people had become clamorous for war, he raised an immense army, equipped with an excellence never before known among the Lamanites. This force he placed under the command of Zoramite officers and ordered its advance into the western possessions of the Nephites, Ammonihah and Noah.

This war was a disasterous one to the Lamanites. It failed in all its objects and cost them many lives. Great was the anger of Amalickiah at this miscarriage of his schemes; he cursed God and swore he would yet drink the blood of Moroni. But it was not until 67 B.C. that he was able to carry out his ambitious projects. He then commenced an invasion of the country of the Nephites with an army which, for equipment and discipline, had never been equaled in the annals of the Lamanites. While other officers commanded in the west and south he personally led the troops intended for the subjugation of the Nephite Atlantic provinces. In this invasion he was eminently successful, for he had chosen a time for his operations when the Nephite Commonwealth was rent by internal dissensions, another uprising having taken place in favor of a monarchy. One after another, Amalickiah's forces captured the Nephite cities of Moroni, Nephihah, Lehi, Gid, Morianton, Omner, Mulek and others along the coast until toward the close of the year he reached the borders of the land Bountiful, driving the forces of the republic before him. At this point he was met by Teancum and a corps of veterans renowned for their courage, skill and discipline. The Lamanite leader endeavored to force his way to the Isthmus, with the intention of occupying the northern continent. In this he was foiled for the trained valor of Teancum's warriors was too much for that of Amalickiah's half-savage hordes. All day the fight lasted and at night the worn-out soldiers of the two armies camped close together, the Lamanites on the sea-beach and the Nephites on the borders of the Land Bountiful.

It was the last night of the old year according to Nephite reckoning. The great heat and the terrible efforts of the day had overcome both officers and men. The murmur of the Atlantic's waves sounded a soft lullaby in the ears of Amalickiah and his hosts, who, for the first time during the campaign had suffered a check in their triumphal march. Even Amalickiah slept but not so with Teancum; he determined by one desperate stroke to put an end to the war; or, if not that, at least to slay the cause of it. Taking one servant with him he secretly stole out of his own camp into that of the enemy. A death-like silence reigned in both. Cautiously and unobserved he searched out the royal tent. There lay the foe, there lay his guards, all overcome with resistless fatigue. To draw his javelin, thrust it into the king's heart and then flee was but the work of a moment and so adroitly did he fulfill his purpose that Amalickiah died without a struggle or a cry and it was not until the morning that his guards discovered that the hosts of Laman were without a head. His warriors then hastily retreated to the fortified city of Mulek.

Amalickiah was succeeded on the Lamanitish throne by his brother Ammoron who continued the war with unrelenting vindictiveness.

AMALICKIAHITES

The Amalickiahites were the followers of Amalickiah in his efforts to destroy the Church of God, to uproot the Nephites Commonwealth, and establish a monarchy in its stead. Their leader, finding that they were not so numerous as those who wished to maintain the Republic, and that many of them doubted the justness of their cause, led those who would follow him towards the Land of Nephi, with the intention of joining the Lamanites. Moroni, the general of the Nephites, by rapid marches reached the wilderness lying between Zarahemla and Nephi, where he intercepted them in their flight, and where Amalickiah and a few others escaped to the Lamanites, while the great majority were taken prisoner and carried back to Zarahemla. The Amalickiahites were then given the opportunity to make covenant to sustain the cause of Liberty which the Nephites were fighting for, or be put to death. "There were but few who denied the covenant of freedom." (73 B.C.)
