Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 47

Verses 1-4

The king of the Lamanites sent a proclamation throughout all his land. When Amalickiah fled to the court of the Lamanite King, he evolved a plot worthy of a demon, which only ceased with life. In ambition, diplomacy, and military skill, he compares favorably with some of the dictators of our own times. On his first opportunity after reaching the Land of Nephi where the Lamanites paid their offerings of homage to the king, he commenced to rekindle the fires of hatred toward his former friends. At first his efforts to do so were unsuccessful; the recollection of their late defeats was too fresh in the memory of the multitude. The king issued a war proclamation, but many of his subjects disregarded it. Much as they feared his imperial power, they dreaded a renewal of war even more. Most of them gathered to resist the royal mandate. The king unused to such objections, raised an army to quell the advocates of peace, and placed it under the command of the now zealous Amalickiah. The king commanded Amalickiah to compel the insurgent Lamanites to bear arms for him.

To be placed in such a position of power was the desire of Amalickiah, for it gave him a platform, as it were, to start on a program of self-aggrandizement.

Verses 5-8

Amalickiah had got the command of those parts of the Lamanites who were in favor of the king. Amalickiah, having accomplished the first of his evil plan—he having obtained control of those of the Lamanite army who obeyed the king's proclamation—was now desirous to gain the favor of those who opposed him.

On the other hand, the Lamanites who desired peace had chosen a man named Lehonti for their king and leader, and he had assembled his followers "in a place which was called Onidah." This place, or region, was known to the Lamanites as "the place of arms," and within its borders was an elevated tract of land, or plateau, to which Lehonti and his army of dissident warriors retreated when they beheld the soldiers of Amalickiah approaching them. This mountain, or plateau was named Antipas.

Thither Amalickiah marched, but with no intention of provoking a conflict. He was working for the good feelings towards himself of the entire Lamanite people. He, himself, wanted to be their king. To this end he bent every effort of his cunning, and every impulse of a depraved and corrupt heart. Amalickiah hoped thereby to "dethrone the king, and take possession of the kingdom."

However, Lehonti's men were determined not to battle the Nephites even though they were forced therein to face the army of Amalickiah. They, therefore, prepared for such a struggle.

Verses 9-12

Amalickiah sent messengers to Lehonti to come down out of the mount for he desired to speak to him. Amalickiah, upon reaching the rendezvous of the insurgents, sent messengers to Lehonti requesting that he come down out of his refuge to meet him at some prearranged place, and there converse and if possible come to an understanding. Lehonti suspected some kind of foul play, and refused Amalickiah's bidding. Amalickiah sent the same message three times, and three times Lehonti rejected it, and not until Amalickiah, himself, assured Lehonti that his offer of peace was sincere and at length came up to near where Lehonti sought asylum for himself did Lehonti listen to his proposals.

Verses 13-14

Amalickiah's proposal to Lehonti. When the two commanders met at Amalickiah's request he proffered Lehonti a scheme that to Lehonti's reasoning would immediately solve their problems. Amalickiah, under this arrangement, would surrender the army over which the king had given him command, and he would deliver them up to Lehonti's soldiers, if Lehonti would make him second in command over the combined forces. This was agreed upon, and when night fell the soldiers of Lehonti moved quietly down to where the army of Amalickiah was encamped. They surrounded the army of the king, and when daylight came his loyal troops saw the hopeless position they were in and surrendered to Lehonti.

Verses 15-16

Now this was the very thing which Amalickiah wanted. To the rank and file of the king's army over which Amalickiah was in command, their capture was a military venture that succeeded in its purpose. They plead with their commander to permit them to join their brethren in Lehonti's army instead of being destroyed by them as was their wartime privilege so to do. Little by little the plan of Amalickiah succeeded. To combine into one force all the soldiers of Laman, and to obtain control of them, was "the very thing Amalickiah desired," for it aided him to "accomplish his designs in dethroning the king."

Verses 17-19

The custom among the Lamanites. Upon the death of their chief leader it was the custom of the Lamanites for the second in command to succeed to the position of chief leader. Amalickiah knew this, and deeply plotted the death of Lehonti, the commander-in-chief. He fomented a plan whereby Lehonti would die, as it were, a natural death, and caused that a trusted servant of his own would administer a slow poison to Lehonti until he died. With Lehonti out of the way, Amalickiah became their leader and chief commander.

Verses 20-24

Amalickiah marched at the head of his combined armies to the City of Nephi. The City of Nephi, the chief city of the Lamanites where also the king held court, now became the goal of the traitorous Amalickiah. As a conquering hero, at the head of his combined armies, he marched to where the king was ready to receive him. The king, thinking that Amalickiah had accomplished what he had commanded him to do, and had gathered together a huge army to fight the Nephites, came out of his palace ready to pay his respects to a valiant servant. Amalickiah, ever ready to play a good part, sent his servants to greet the king, seemingly to pay him reverence because of his greatness. As was also a custom among the Lamanites, they bowed down to the ground to show their homage to him. Everything went as protocol among them provided. The king put forth his hand to raise them from their position of nothingness, and when he raised the first, the servant immediately stabbed him in the heart; the Sacred Record says, "and he fell to the earth."

Verses 25-35

Now the servants of the king fled. In the last verse we noted that the king was traitorously slain by some of the vile creatures of the subtle general, who at the same time raised the hue and cry that the king's own servants had committed the repulsive act. Amalickiah assumed all the airs of grief, affection, and righteous indignation that he thought would best suit his purpose. He next made apparently desperate, but purposely ineffectual, efforts to capture those who were charged with the crime, and so adroitly did he carry out his schemes, that before long he wheedled himself into the affections of the queen, whom he married, and was recognized by the Lamanites as their king. Thus far was his ambition realized, but it was far from satisfied; ambition seldom is.

Verse 36

These dissenters became more hardened and impenitent . . . than the Lamanites. The Lamanites of that period were not only the descendants of Laman and Lemuel, but of Ishmael and many Nephites who had dissented from that more enlightened race. The Lamanites were a mixed race. Their leaders, almost invariably, were apostate Nephites who had been taught the ways of the Lord, but who through ambition or greed, had left the true Church, and sought their welfare among the traditionally inept Lamanites.

The Sacred Record notes that shortly after their dissensions from the Nephites to the Lamanites, "they became more hardened and impenitent, and more wild, wicked and ferocious than the Lamanites . . . giving way to indolence, and all manner of lasciviousness; yea, entirely forgetting the Lord their God."

ANTIPAS

A mountain, locality uncertain, but somewhere within the borders of the Lamanites. It was chosen by Lehonti and those who refused to heed the Lamanite King's war proclamation as their place of rendezvous. They gathered to its summit; Amalickiah, by the king's command followed with an army to compel their obedience. This army was treacherously surrendered by Amalickiah to Lehonti and the latter took command of both armies. He was soon after killed by slow poison, administered to him by Amalickiah's command, when the last named succeeded to his position as chief leader. (73 B.C.)

ONIDAH

A place where the dissatisfied Lamanites, led by Lehonti, gathered in their refusal to give heed to the king's war proclamation against the Nephites. (73 B.C.) Thither the malcontents were followed by Amalickiah, and an army of the king's. By the strategy of Amalickiah, their commander, and by his plotting, he obtained an interview with Lehonti on Mount Antipas and arranged to surrender his soldiers. Onidah is called "the place of arms," and may possibly be the Hill Onidah in the Land of Antionum, though we are of the opinion that it was not, it being within the borders of the Lamanite possessions.

LEHONTI

A Lamanite officer, chosen by the opponents of the war policy of the reigning sovereign, as their leader in their armed resistance to the royal proclamation. (73 B.C.)

When the Nephite traitor Amalickiah fled to the Lamanites, the first step he took to accomplish his ambitious, though at present defeated, purposes was to excite public feeling against the Nephites. The king gave way before his wiles and persuasiveness but the great mass of the people, not being brought in contact with his brilliant person and shining abilities, were adverse to hostilities. They too well remembered the horrors and disasters of the previous campaign. Amalickiah had, however, gained such influence over the king's mind that he was inexorable and insisted on the invasion of Zarahemla. For this purpose he issued a proclamation and sent it among all his subjects commanding them to gather to his standard. The people greatly dreaded the arbitrary power of the throne but they feared the Nephites more. Consequently many refused to heed the proclamation and assembled themselves at Onidah, the place of arms, for protection against an army the king had placed under the command of Amalickiah to bring them to terms and which was now rapidly advancing towards them. Here they chose Lehonti as their leader and king, for they were strong in their determination not to go to war with the Nephites. Lehonti assembled his forces on a mount called Antipas and there awaited the arrival of the royal troops.

Lehonti, however, little knew the temper or craft of the man with whom he was dealing. Amalickiah had no intention to spill Lamanite blood. He wanted their friendship now that he might use them as his willing tools hereafter. To this end, when night came, he sought an interview with Lehonti who fearing treachery refused to go down near to his camp. Three times did Amalickiah send his message and as often was the proposal declined. At last the plotter went up the mountain, to near where Lehonti's camp was situated and there told him to come out and meet him and if he feared any evil to bring his guard with him. This time the cautious Lehonti acquiesced. At the interview that followed, Amalickiah agreed to surrender his forces to Lehonti on condition that he (Amalickiah) should be placed second in command of the united forces. The plot was successfully carried out. Lehonti surrounded the royal troops before morning; they, seeing their predicament, were loathe to do battle with their countrymen and pleaded with their commander to surrender. This he did, for it was exactly what he had been working for. Lehonti faithfully carried out the terms of the agreement and placed Amalickiah second in command. The conscienceless traitor soon removed the commander-in-chief; Lehonti was killed by slow poison, administered by a creature of his subordinate and Amalickiah assumed supreme command.
