Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 48

Verses 1-6

As soon as Amalickiah had obtained the kingdom he began to inspire the hearts of the Lamanites against the people of Nephi. As we have noted, Amalickiah, through his treachery, had become king of all the Lamanites, and had thus far accomplished his designs. He now cherished the stupendous scheme of subjugating the Nephites, and of ruling, singly and alone from ocean to ocean (73 B.C.). To this end he dispatched emissaries in all directions, whose mission was to stir up the angry passions of the populace against the Nephites. When this vile objective was sufficiently accomplished, and the deluded people had become clamorous for war, he raised an immense army, armed and equipped with an excellence never before known among the Lamanites. This force he placed under the command of Zoramite officers, and ordered its advance into the western possessions of the Nephites, where, amongst others, stood the cities of Ammonihah, now rebuilt, and Noah.

Verses 7-10

Moroni had been preparing the minds of the people to be faithful unto the Lord their God. During the time that Amalickiah was obtaining personal power by "fraud and deceit," Moroni had been busy building up the spiritual enterprise of the Nephites. He taught them to rely on God Who in the past had kept and preserved them. Not only that but he also instructed them in the Ways of the Lord, to keep His commandments, and in all things to be faithful in serving Him.

The Nephites, alert to Moroni's leadership in things temporal as well as spiritual, had been watching Amalickiah's movements, and energetically preparing for the war which they saw was coming. Under Moroni's supervision, the Nephite Army was notably strengthened, fortifications were set up, their cities were protected against assault, and in the weakest places under his command, he concentrated the most troops. The Sacred Record notes that in this way "he did fortify and strengthen the land which was possessed by the Nephites." Directly opposite to, and withstanding Amalickiah's dream of sovereign dominion over both Nephite and Lamanite lands and people, Moroni stood adamant; his inflexible purpose in arming the soldiers of the Nephites was "to support their liberty, their lands, their wives, and their children, and their peace, and that they might live unto the Lord their God, and that they might maintain that which was called by their enemies the cause of Christians."

Verses 11-13

Moroni was a strong and a mighty man. Notwithstanding the stern role into which he was cast, that of Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite Armies where we could expect to find a man of severe countenance and unyielding deportment, Moroni was a Christian gentleman who was possessed of all the qualities of one Who Himself sought only to lead, guide and direct others along the path of duty and loyalty even if it cost "his own blood." "Moroni was a strong and a mighty man; he was a man of a perfect understanding; yea, a man that did not delight in bloodshed; a man whose soul did joy in the liberty and the freedom of his country, and his brethren from bondage and slavery," such is the comment of Mormon, the abridger of Helaman's record, on the character of Moroni.

Verses 14-18

All the Nephites were imbued with this promise, it was a part of their lives, and was a source of strength when they were assailed by enemies from within and from without. They believed that prosperity and righteousness went hand in hand, and that when danger threatened them, they would be warned thereof, and would know what to do. This was the faith of Moroni, and in it he took delight, for his heart was not upon warfare; not upon the "shedding of blood, but in doing good, in preserving his people, yea, in keeping the commandments of God, yea, and resisting iniquity." Like unto Ammon, the son of King Mosiah and his brothers, like also unto Alma and his sons, all men of God, Moroni rejoiced in a righteous cause, and his efforts, even every thought of his heart, was that his people would be benefited and blessed, thereby bringing to pass the fulfilling of God's promise to their fathers. Faith in Christ and doing the Lord's will, was meat and drink to Moroni, and in that faith he lived. The inspired historian of the Book of Mormon says of Moroni, that if all men were like unto him, now and forever more, the "very powers of hell would be shaken forever; and the devil would never have power over the hearts of the children of men."

Verses 19-25

Helaman and his brethren were no less serviceable unto the people than was Moroni. Another great source of good, was that Helaman and his brethren who went forth among the people preaching God's holy Word, and baptizing all those who through repentance showed that they hearkened unto the words of God's servants. For a period of several years, the Presiding High Priest and others who held the Holy Priesthood, went forth and in much power proclaimed the Gospel of Repentance; the people in great numbers received their message and humbled themselves "insomuch that they were highly favored of the Lord, and thus they were free from wars and contentions among themselves, yea, even for a space of four years."

Notwithstanding the peace that abounded among them because of the teachings of Moroni and Helaman, the Nephites were again forced into conflict with the Lamanites. They struggled against the powers that bid them on, and only with great reluctance did they enter into contention with their brethren. The latter end of the nineteenth year of the reign of the Judges saw their peace destroyed by their ancient enemies.
