Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 49

Verses 1-3. The armies of the Lamanites were seen approaching towards the Land of Ammonihah. During the time Amalickiah was preparing the Lamanites to make an unwarranted attack upon the Nephites, the Nephites, themselves, were not idle in making ready for the impending struggle which was rapidly approaching. With all the energy born of a righteous cause, Moroni, the Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite armies, masterminded a plan of defense that was worthy of the best traditions of a soldier who was enlisted under the Banners of the Prince of Peace. Moroni's battle-plan was one of defense, not offense. As we have said, "he was not bloodthirsty, nor did he glory in war; he loved peace and liberty." He wanted primarily to establish a peace that was not purchased upon the battlefield, or a peace dictated by might. He knew that his strength, or the strength of his armies, lay in obedience to the commandments of the Lord God, their King. Moroni sought a peace that was founded upon truth and justice; a peace upheld and sustained by the righteousness of his people. (See Chapter 48:11-13)

In the latter part of the nineteenth year of the Reign of the Judges, which was the year 72 B.C., war was commenced by the savage hosts of Amalickiah. Their campaign started with an assault upon the well-fortified City of Ammonihah which had been turned into a bastion by the Nephites under Moroni's direction. Ammonihah, a few years previously, had been utterly destroyed by the Lamanites, and its wicked citizens massacred in a terrible onslaught brought about by the evil forces of Laman. (See Alma 16:1-3 ) Then the city was unprepared for war. Bulwarks and battlements guarding its environs were almost totally unprovided. Its ramparts, if such they may be called, were easily overcome, and the savage hordes of the Lamanite invaders left scattered in great numbers the dead bodies of its citizenry to rot and decay thereby polluting the land, and rendering the befouled air unfit for habitation. "Nevertheless, after many days their dead bodies were heaped up upon the face of the earth, and were covered with a shallow covering. And it was called Desolation of Nehors; for they were of the profession of Nehor, who were slain; and their lands remained desolate."

In after years, when the memory of their apostate derelection was not so acute with the Nephites, and pity for its slain inhabitants replaced thoughts of stern and merited justice, Ammonihah had been partially rebuilt, and Moroni, in keeping with his master-plan, garrisoned its outer defenses. He caused that the soldiers under his command should dig trenches round about the city and cast up into protective barriers the dirt therefrom which would "shield them from the arrows and the stones of the Lamanites; for behold, they fought with stones and with arrows."

When the Lamanites, about nine years previous to the narrative herein recorded, destroyed the wicked City of Ammonihah they found the task easy because the people of that great city were so engrossed in thoughts of the world and the things of the world that in consequence all thoughts of God were crowded from their hearts. They had followed Nehor who taught that all men would be saved no matter what they did. They forgot God who in times past had delivered their fathers from destruction. The Nephites believed that if they kept the Lord's commandments He "Would make it known unto them whither they should go to defend themselves against their enemies, and by so doing, the Lord would deliver them." But the Ammonihahites were proud in their own eyes; they suspected nothing and prepared for little. Despite the warnings of Alma and Amulek, they continued on in the wicked pursuit of whatsoever pleased their fancy or satisfied their lusts. Disaster awaited them. "Behold, the armies of the Lamanites had come in upon the wilderness side, into the borders of the land, even into the City of Ammonihah, and began to slay the people and destroy the city. And now it came to pass, before the Nephites could raise a sufficient army to drive them out of the land, they had destroyed the people who were in the City of Ammonihah." ( Alma 16:2-3 ) Because of the easiness of the way in which the Lamanites had aforetime destroyed Ammonihah, they supposed that conditions were not changed and it would again fall a prey to sudden incursion. In this they were mistaken.

Verses 4-9

The chief captains of the Lamanites were astonished exceedingly. While the warlike activities of Amalickiah's followers continued unabated, the Nephites lost no time, nor left a thing undone that would rally to their side such strength as the terrain afforded. Amalickiah had appointed some of the apostate Zoramites to be chief captains over his armies because of their bloodthirsty dispositions, and too, he thought their knowledge concerning "the strength of the Nephites, and the places of their resort, and the weakest parts of their cities," stood them well in hand. No doubt they felt equal to any task that confronted them, but when Amalickiah's warriors reached Ammonihah they found it too strongly fortified to be taken by assault, let alone to stumble, as it were, into victory like the Lamanites did nine years before. The soldiers of the Nephites had "dug up a ridge of earth round about them, which was so high that the Lamanites could not cast their stones and their arrows at them that they might take effect, neither could they come upon them save it was by their place of entrance."

The Nephite's preparation for hostilities caused great consternation to come upon the Lamanite leaders. They had supposed, and had expected, that no restraints, such as disposition of Nephite manpower or mode of battle, would confine their tactics to watchful waiting, or with being content with only a show of their might. Their wonder grew apace with their efforts to force battle. The Nephites were entrenched; only by a display of their utmost power could the Lamanites hope to dislodge them. Moroni's incredible wisdom in providing an adequate defense for Ammonihah struck with sudden fear the hearts of the would be attackers; their expectations of another orgy, as was their hope, turned into utter dismay and then horror when they thought of King Amalickiah and his demands.

There were many arguments that buoyed up the Lamanite's hopes for victory. Besides their vast number, they had adopted to their own use that which was introduced by the Nephites in previous encounters, viz., shields and breastplates; they had also made for the protection of their naked bodies thick garments of skins which would soften a blow aimed at an exposed bodily part, especially an arm or leg. With these military aids to urge them on, they looked forward to no difficulty in the accomplishment of their designs, and "easily overpower and subject their brethren to the yoke of bondage, or slay and massacre them according to their pleasure."

But on the other hand, the Nephites had made themselves ready for any eventuality. At no time in the past had they been instructed in the art of warfare as now; Moroni's wisdom, inspired from above, continued to inspirit his soldiers, while despair and hopelessness took possession of the Lamanites. The Sacred Record notes that their leaders were astonished; that means that they wondered at the efficiency with which the Nephites were prepared, a state that arose from fear; they were amazed bewildered, and astounded.

Verses 10-11

Amalickiah did not come down himself to battle. Amalickiah, conspicuous for his military ability, nevertheless failed in his strategy when he neglected to lead his soldiers into battle. His presence there undoubtedly would have urged them to deeds of valor in forwarding his plans which otherwise in accomplishing them, they contributed nothing. "He did not care for the blood of his people," and in spite of the calculated loss involved therein, he may have ordered an attack on the Nephite stronghold.

But notwithstanding the prize involved, "Amalickiah did not come down himself to battle." And the Zoramite captains he had appointed over his army were already defeated in their minds, and dared not seek to overcome the solidly entrenched Nephites. Moroni had changed the former routine of battle; the rendezvous of his soldiers was not where the Amalickiahites believed them to be, and their stations involving action were empty and different ones assigned them. The Lamanites could not come in upon them en masse to grips; there was nothing they could do but retreat.

Verses 12-15

Therefore they retreated into the wilderness. The Lamanites, seeing that to attack Ammonihah was folly, they therefore retired to Noah, originally a very weak place, but now, through Moroni's foresight and energy, made stronger than Ammonihah.

Verses 16-17

Moroni had appointed Lehi to be chief captain of the forces at Noah. Lehi was one of the greatest of Nephite army commanders. It is not evident from the record, but we think it highly probable that this Lehi was the same person as Lehi, the son of Zoram ( Alma 16:5 ), that young man being then (81 B.C.), a distinguished officer under his father. Lehi first prominently appears in the Nephite annals in the great battle fought (74 B.C.) with the Lamanites under Zerahemnah on the banks of the River Sidon not far from Manti. Moroni was Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite forces while Lehi commanded an army corps. Before the battle commenced Moroni skillfully concealed his troops on both sides of the river and permitted the Lamanites to pass between. Lehi's men, who had massed on the east of the river on the south of a hill named Riplah, closed in on the rear of the Lamanites when the latter faced about and gave battle. The fight soon became fast and furious. The Lamanites perceived that Moroni was attacking them on both sides, fought with desperation but with immense loss, and in a short time they fled before Lehi and were driven by him into the waters of the river. Lehi did not cross in pursuit, but halted his soldiers on the eastern bank while the troops more directly commanded by Moroni drove the enemy before them on the western banks. The day ended in complete victory for the Nephites. When the devastating wars which Amalickiah inaugurated were begun, we again find Lehi in high command. He was appointed by Moroni, chief captain in the City of Noah, and when the Lamanites attacked it, his name alone added to their discomfiture for the Sacred Record tells us "they feared Lehi exceedingly." (v. 17) But notwithstanding their fear of him, the Lamanite commanders "swore with an oath to attack the city," and for that reason, but with little hope of success, "they brought up their armies."

Verses 18-20

The Lamanites could not get into their forts of security by any other way save by the entrance. There was no other way for the Lamanites to enter the City of Noah except it was by the entrance made therefor. Moroni's system of defense provided for one, and only one, ingress into its environs. He had provided that a ring of forts be built which would encompass or surround the main parts of each city that was to be defended. The City of Noah was only one of the cities so defended. A wide ditch was dug by the defenders which encircled the city, and the dirt therefrom "thrown up" into high embankments which made capture or surprise almost impossible. Too, it had this advantage for the defenders, the Nephites were thus "prepared to destroy all such as should attempt to climb up to enter the fort by any other way, by casting stones and arrows at them."

On the apex of this bank of dirt, the Nephites stationed "a body of their strongest men, with their swords and their slings, to smite down all who should attempt to come into their place of security by the place of entrance; and thus were they prepared to defend themselves against the Lamanites."

Arrows and slings. At the time of Lehi, the Jews were not, generally speaking, great hunters. In the early days, the pursuit of wild beasts either for the protection of the domestic animals and the cultivated fields, or for food, was a common occupation, both necessary and dangerous. We read of Nimrod, the "mighty hunter before the Lord" ( Gen. 10:8 , 9); Esau was a "cunning hunter," a man of the field ( Gen. 25:27 ), skilled in the use of the bow ( Gen. 27:3 ). But generally the Hebrews in later times did not practice archery either for hunting or for sport. The bow and the arrow became weapons of war, the play things of soldiers and rulers in times of peace. To use either the bow or the sling successfully, it was necessary to possess great strength and long practice.

These facts account for the predicament of Nephi and his brothers. They were not really skilled archers. Or, their bows may not have been of the best material, or make. Or, they may not have understood how to take good care of them, since they were out of commission at an early stage of their journey.

At all events, Nephi was inspired to come to the rescue. The Lord could use him as His instrument. The older brothers, who ought to have had the knowledge and experience necessary to overcome the difficulty, proved their weakness by their inactivity and grumbling. Nephi proved his strength by his activity.

Slings. These were also effective weapons in the hands of a youth, like Nephi. The story of David and Goliath was well known by these boys. ( 1 Sam. 17:32-53 )

At the time of the Judges, the men of the tribe of Benjamin were celebrated for their skill as stone slingers. "Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not miss." ( Judg. 20:16 )

Verses 21-25

Thus the Nephites had all power over their enemies. The Zoramite officers well knew that to return home without having attempted something would be most disastrous to their own selves, and therefore, though with little hope, made an assault upon the City of Noah by way of seeking to breach its strongholds. They commanded the Lamanite troops to attack it at the entrance which the Nephites had provided. Many times they attempted to break down the Nephite resistance by repeated blows or thrusts, but the defenders never faltered in protecting their charge. With each assault the Lamanites made, they endured an "immense slaughter."

Unable to gain a foothold whereby they could break or batter down the fortifications that confronted them, the Lamanites, in a last effort to subdue their intended victims, began to level the ridge of dirt the Nephites had encircled about the city. Their idea was, at the same time, to fill the moat from which the embankment had been cast. They hoped thereby to swarm in upon the hapless Nephites and as man for man, they being in superior numbers, would end up the victors. But, they, out in the open, unprotected by man-made parapets, were lively targets for the stones and arrows of the Nephites. This ill-advised step on the part of the Lamanites reacted upon their own plans, and instead of success crowning their efforts the ditches "were filled up in a measure with their dead and wounded bodies."

Assault after assault was made by the Lamanites, but the Nephites stood almost untouched by death and injury. Continual pressure exerted by the Lamanites eventually resulted in the death of all their chief captains and the throwing away of a thousand lives outside the city's walls. The Sacred Record notes, that "while, on the other hand, there was not a single soul of the Nephites which was slain." However and equally to be wondered at, only fifty Nephite soldiers were wounded. The attacking Lamanites, nowhere executed a threatening maneuver, their combat strength was employed entirely at overpowering the Nephites, and we can easily see the truth of the Jewish saying that with God, it mattereth not whether He gives victory with one, or with many. Through the aperature the Nephites had made in the great dike surrounding Noah which was used for an entrance to the city, the Lamanites cast stones and arrows at the defenders, but because the Nephites also were protected with breastplates and shields as were the Lamanites, their wounds were confined to the legs, "many of which were very severe."

Bereft of all hope of victory, and amazed with terror, their faculties confounded over the loss of all their leaders, the hitherto well equipped and disciplined army of the Lamanites, now became a mob of rabble who fled in confusion and haste into the surrounding wilderness.

Verses 26-27

Amalickiah was very angry. Amalickiah, an apostate Nephite, was imbued with that hatred which fills the hearts of most of those who once knew the truth and then for some reason, usually a selfish one, rejects it. Personal ambition was the cause of Amalickiah's dereliction. He coveted all that was Nephite, even to be their king. He became "exceeding angry" when told of the disastrous end of his scheme. In his mind they were to be his slaves, and he their master. But the Lord, the God of the Nephites, again interposed in their behalf, and suffered them not to "the yoke of bondage." Amalickiah, the historian informs us, "did curse God, and also Moroni, swearing with an oath that he would drink his blood; and this because Moroni had kept the commandments of God in preparing for the safety of his people." (See Chapter 48:7 ff.)

Verses 28-30

On the other hand, the People of Nephi did thank the Lord their God. . . . Following the defeat of Amalickiah's army in their attempt to subjugate the Nephites dwelling in the Land of Ammonihah, Peace, God's most precious gift, with its attendant heavenly blessings, rested in triumph upon the standards of the Nephite Commonwealth wheresoever the Title of Liberty was flown. The People of Nephi saw in it all the Finger of God, His power and presence and His purposes. They were quick to render unto Him the praise and thanksgiving due their emancipator "because of His matchless power in delivering them from the hands of their enemies." They praised His Name and honored His goodness.

Hand in hand with the blessed era of peace that entered their lives, came great prosperity to God's Church. The Nephites no longer ignored, but gave heed to God's word as it was proclaimed by the sons of Alma and of King Mosiah and others who had been "sent forth to preach among the people." Again God's promise to Lehi when that Patriarch led his little band of refugees to the Promised Land was fulfilled: "Inasmuch as ye shall keep My commandments ye shall prosper in the land." Verse 29 informs us that in this happy, holy state, the Nephite people ended the nineteenth Year of the Reign of their Judges.

GENERAL NOTES

The accounts we have of the early wars between the Nephites and Lamanites are but mere notices of the fact of their occurrence and results. It is not until the days of the Judges that anything like details are given. At that time the Nephites had adopted the use of defensive armor for their heads, bodies and thighs; they also carried shields and wore arm-plates. These arts for the protection of the soldiers were carried to their greatest excellence under Moroni, during the first half of the last century before Christ. This officer, one of the greatest generals the Nephite race ever gave birth to, appears to have made a great revolution in their military affairs. He re-organized their armies, compelled more stringent discipline, introduced new tactics, developed a great system of fortifications, built towers and citadels, and altogether placed the defensive powers of the Commonwealth on a new and stronger footing. The Lamanites, who appear to have developed no capacity for originating, but were apt in copying, also, in course of time, adopted defensive measures such as armor, and when they captured a weak Nephite city, they frequently made it a stronghold by surrounding it with ditches and walls after the system introduced and put into effect by Moroni.

The foundation of Moroni's system of fortification was earthworks encircling the place to be defended. The earth was dug from the outside, by which means a ditch was formed. Sometimes walls of stone were erected. On the top of the earthworks strong defenses of wood, sometimes breastworks, in some cases as high as a man, were raised; and above these a stockade of strong pickets was built to arrest the flight of the stones and arrows of the attacking forces. Those arrows, etc., that passed above the pickets fell, without doing any injury, behind the troops who were defending the wall. Besides these walls, towers were raised at various convenient points, from which observations of the movements of the enemy were taken, and wherein corps of archers and slingers were stationed during the actual continuance of the battle. From their elevated and commanding position these bodies of soldiers could do great damage or injury to the attacking force.
