Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 50

Verses 1-6

Moroni did not stop making preparations for war, or to defend his people against the Lamanites. Not to be outmaneuvered by Amalickiah, or by Amalickiah getting an advantage over him in spite of Amalickiah's repeated defeats in battle, Moroni continued, even with greater haste, to make "preparations for war, or to defend his people against the Lamanites." (See Alma 51:9-10 )

In the Twentieth Year of the Reign of the Judges, or about seventy-two years before the coming of Christ, Moroni, knowing the ambitious designs of Amalickiah, sensed his plan to subdue the Nephites and subject them "to the yoke of bondage," which would render them slaves to the Lamanites. Therefore, to be in readiness for any surprise attack, he ordered his soldiers to "dig up heaps of earth round about all the cities, through all the land which was possessed by the Nephites." Upon the top of these ridges so dug up, Moroni caused that there should be timbers; yea, works of timbers built up to the height of a man, round about the cities. And he caused that upon these works of timbers there should be a frame of pickets built upon the timbers round about; and they were strong and high; and he caused towers to be erected that overlooked those works of pickets, and he caused places of security to be built upon these towers, that the stones and the arrows of the Lamanites could not hurt them. And they were prepared that they could cast stones from the top thereof according to their pleasure and their strength, and slay him who would attempt to approach near the walls of the city. Thus Moroni did prepare strongholds against the coming of their enemies round about every city in all the land.

Verses 7-11

In the year 72 B.C., the armies of Moroni drove the Lamanites out of that portion of the east wilderness bordering on the Land of Zarahemla into their own lands. The northern line or boundary of the latter ran in a straight course from the sea east to the sea west. The Lamanites having been driven out of those portions of the wilderness north of the dividing line, colonies of Nephites were sent to occupy the country, and build cities on their southern border, even to the Atlantic Coast. To protect the new settlers, Moroni placed troops all along this line, and caused them to erect fortifications for the better defenses of the frontier. This fortified line ran from the sea west (the Pacific Ocean) by the head of the River Sidon (the Magdalena River) eastward along the northern edge of the wilderness.

Some of the readers of the Book of Mormon have imagined that this line of defense to have been one continuous rampart, or wall—after the style of the Great Wall of China—reaching from ocean to ocean, and on this surmise have argued that the completion of such an immense work in a few years was an impossibility to a people of the limited numerical strength of the Nephites. To get over this difficulty of their own creation they have resorted to various theories of its locality quite inconsistent with its geographical details, on purpose to shorten its distance to what they deem a reasonable length, possible for the Nephites to have built in a few years. The authors hereof hold the opinion that the Book of Mormon conveys no such idea, it simply states that Moroni erected fortifications along this line; or, as they view it, Moroni took advantage of the natural features of the country, its wide rivers, far-reaching swamps, and high mountains, and built fortifications at every point where the Lamanites would find ingress, such as fords of the rivers and the passes between the mountain ridges. There he stationed bodies of troops sufficiently strong to hold their posts, and, if necessary, defend the surrounding country. This system of defense would be more powerful and effective than an artificial wall; high mountains and deep rivers largely taking the place of earthworks, masonry and heavy timbers.

The forces of both races seem to have been foot-soldiers. The authors hereof have failed to notice any passages in the Sacred Record that give a definite assurance that either cavalry or war chariots were used in their campaign. Like nearly all rude or semi-civilized races, the Lamanites depended on the strength of numbers and brute force for victory in the open field. They massed their troops in solid phalanxes, or bodies, and with wild cries rushed to the assault in the hopes of bearing down all resistance by their superior numbers, as in almost every war they greatly outnumbered the Nephites. Indeed, it is doubtful if even the Nephites used much scientific strategy previous to the days of Moroni. Before then it was a hand-to-hand conflict, wherein the Nephites, though fewer in numbers, had many advantages over their half-naked foes by reason of superior weapons and defensive armor, and above all, through the blessing and guidance of the Lord.

It does not appear, as far as can be gathered from the record, that any great improvements, either in the system of fortification, the style of defensive armor, or the manufacture of their weapons, were made by the Nephite commanders who lived after the days of Moroni. There is another kind of defensive clothing besides armor plate mentioned as being worn by the ancient American warriors. It consisted of heavy and very thick clothing, possibly made of cotton or woolen cloth, padded. Moroni uniformed some of his soldiers in this manner when he first took command of the Nephite armies (74 B.C.), and the next year the Lamanites followed his example and not only prepared themselves with shields and breastplates, but also with garments of skins "yea, thick garments to cover their nakedness."

The various enemies that the Nephite armies had to meet, from time to time, on the field of battle—Lamanites, Amulonites, Amalekites, Zoramites, Gadianton Robbers—were very differently equipped for their bloody work. Those who had dissented from the Nephites naturally held to the same tactics, used the same kind of arms and protected their bodies with the same armor as the people to whom they had turned traitors. With the original Lamanites it was different. At first, when they came against the Nephites they were clothed with a short girdle about the loins, and also with their heads shaven. Their skill was with the bow, and the cimiter, and the axe. The dissenters, while armed and equipped like the Nephites, set a mark upon themselves by which they could be distinguished on the battlefield. In doing this they unconsciously fulfilled the Word of the Lord to their fathers. Thus, the followers of Amlici, the would-be king, marked themselves with red in their foreheads after the manner of the Lamanites, though they did not shave their heads as did the direct descendants of Laman. (87 B.C.)

The description of the Gadianton Robbers, as they appeared when prepared for war (18 B.C.), is a very terrible one. They were girded about after the manner of other plunderers. They had a lamb-like skin about their loins, and they were painted with blood. To make them appear more foreboding, their heads were shorn, and they had headplates. Great and terrible was the appearance of the armies of Giddianhi, because of their armor, and because of their being dyed in blood.

Verses 12-16

The Nephites found many cities. The victorious armies of Moroni, which because of their resurgence as fighting units, gathered to their banners many potential soldiers because they saw in his continual triumphs an "assurance of protection which his works did bring forth unto them." Therefore Moroni's command grew in numbers daily, and in spite of the increased demands made of his men, he was able to meet his responsibilities in fortifying and garrisoning the vast area he now possessed.

Moroni immediately saw that, by his triumphs over the now disorganized Lamanites, he had in his hands the power to rid all the Nephite territory of these bands of savages and traitors who brought only woe and destruction to his people. To cut them off from their supplies and re-inforcements coming from their own Land of Nephi was the end and object of his further military activity. That the armies of the Lamanites should not unite and by their combined strength again assert power and dominion over the inhabitants of their own possessions, he conceived a plan to that end.

At this time, and part of Moroni's plan, the Nephites began to extend their colonization schemes so as to include the newly won land of the Lamanites in the east wilderness from which Moroni had just driven them. This land, the Sacred Record says extended eastward "even to the borders by the seashore." Here the Nephites built a city which they named Moroni. It was situated in the extreme southeast corner of the Nephites' new possessions.

Joining the greater land of Moroni which surrounded the city by that same name, the Nephites also built a city they called Nephihah. Extended to the north, but still clinging to the sea coast they chose sites for other cities which made the newly-won wilderness an area of intense Nephite colonization. One of the cities which they built to the north was called Lehi; it was of particular importance to them because of the manner in which it was built.

Mormon, the abridger of Alma's record, ends his summary of the Twentieth year's activities among the Nephites with an account of their vast extension of territory.

Verses 17-24

The Nephites did prosper exceedingly. A few years of peace and prosperity now followed. Mormon says that the Nephites multiplied exceedingly, and grew very rich. They were also blessed of the Lord. The sacred historian informs us there never was a happier time among the people of Nephi than at this time.

Again, the reason for this unprecedented era of peace and happiness was, as it always had been with other periods of goodwill, that the Nephites kept the commandments of the Lord. The Lord always fulfilled His promise made to the Prophet Lehi. "And thus we see how merciful and just are all the dealings of the Lord, to the fulfilling of all His words unto the children of men; yea, we can behold that His words are verified, even at this time, which He spake unto Lehi, saying: Blessed art thou and thy children; and they shall be blessed, inasmuch as they shall keep My commandments they shall prosper in the land. But remember, inasmuch as they will not keep the commandments they shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord." (vv. 19-20)

"And we see that these promises have been verified to the people of Nephi; for it has been their quarrelings and their contentions, yea, their murderings, and their plunderings, their idolatry, their whoredoms, and their abominations, which were among themselves, which brought upon them their wars and their destructions. And those who were faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord were delivered at all times, whilst thousands of their wicked brethren have been consigned to bondage, or to perish by the sword, or to dwindle in unbelief, and mingle with the Lamanites." (vv. 21-22)

Verses 25-36

This blessed era of peace lasted but a few years. Sad to say, this blessed era of peace lasted but a few years. A local quarrel between two cities regarding their respective boundaries was the cause of the first fresh outbreak of contention.

At this point we are introduced to another great Nephite commander, named Teancum. Teancum appears to have had command of the Nephite armies of the north (under the direction of Moroni, the Commander-in-Chief of all the forces of the Republic) and to have had committed to him the defense of the Land Bountiful and the Isthmus of Panama. His first exploit to which our attention is drawn is the defeat of the dissatisfied people of Morianton, who, having unjustly quarreled with their neighbors, the people of the City of Lehi, and being apparently aware of the unrighteousness of their cause, determined to migrate to the land northward, and there establish an independent government.

The inhabitants of the City of Lehi, unlike the people of Morianton, felt that their cause was just, therefore when they were assailed by the latter, appealed to him who was the Commander-in-Chief of their armies, Moroni, to help them in the unjust aggression of the Moriantons. When the Moriantons learned that the people of the City of Lehi had asked Moroni for assistance, "they were exceedingly fearful lest the armies of Moroni should come upon them and destroy them."

Morianton, who was the founder of the city called by his name, and the leader of its citizens, used his talents to persuade them to move en masse to the land northward which had been discovered about fifty years previously by Limhi's men, and which had an abundance of pure water. This land is adequately described in Mosiah 8:8 : "And they were lost in the wilderness for the space of many days, yet they were diligent, and found not the Land of Zarahemla but returned to this land, having traveled in a land among many waters, having discovered a land which was covered with bones of men, and of beasts, and was also covered with ruins of buildings of every kind, having discovered a land which had been peopled with a people who were as numerous as the hosts of Israel." This plan, evidently well thought out, was about to be put into effect when Morianton, a man of angry passions, and quick to be vexed and irritated, physically assaulted a maid servant with whom he became riled. She, feeling how much he had abused her, fled to the "camp of Moroni, and told Moroni all things concerning the matter, and also concerning their intentions to flee into the land northward."

Such a movement being in all its evil forebodings, dangerous to the peace and stability of the Republic, Moroni determined to prevent the accomplishment of their schemes. He dispatched Teancum with a body of troops to head them off. This the gallant officer succeeded in doing, but not until they had reached the Isthmus, where a stubbornly fought battle ensued, in which Teancum slew Morianton with his own hand, and compelled the surrender of his followers. (68 B.C.) The prisoners captured in that battle were brought back to their own land, the grievances of the two people were investigated, a union between them brought about, and both were restored to their own lands.

Verses 37-40

Nephihah, the second Chief Judge died about the year 67 B.C. Mormon, in recording the death of Nephihah, the second Chief Judge of the Nephite Republic, pays a remarkable tribute to him. He says: "Having filled the Judgment-Seat with perfect uprightness before God."

He also informs us that Alma, the younger, had such confidence in Nephihah that he desired to entrust him with the Sacred Record and other holy things, but this honor and responsibility Nephihah declined, and Alma conferred these treasures upon his son Helaman.

Of Nephihah's birth and early life nothing is said in the Book of Mormon, but at the time of his elevation to the Chief Judgeship he is called "a wise man who was among the elders of the Church."

Nephihah's son, Pahoran, was appointed to fill the position made vacant by the death of the Chief Judge, and the Sacred Record says that he was inaugurated when he took the following oath which was attended by a sacred ordinance: "To judge righteously, and to keep the peace and the freedom of the people, and to grant unto them their sacred privileges to worship God, yea, to support and maintain the cause of God all his days, and to bring the wicked to justice according to their crime." (v. 39) Pahoran commenced his reign as Chief Judge and Governor of the Nephite Republic in the end of the year 67 B.C., or in the twenty-fourth year of the reign of the judges over the Nephites.

CITY OF MORONI

An important city on the Atlantic coast, in the extreme southeast of the Nephite possessions. It was, doubtless, named after the illustrious Nephite general who was commander-in-chief of their armies at the time this city was founded (72 B.C.). It was built as an out-post to protect that portion of the Nephite dominions from Lamanite invasion and was, consequently, strongly fortified. In 67 B.C. it was captured by the Lamanite forces of Amalickiah and fortified and held by them until 61 B.C. It was here that Teancum slew Ammoron, the king of the Lamanites and was himself killed before he could get back to his own soldiery. Of this city we are told nothing more until the time of its destruction, though it undoubtedly fell into the hands of the Lamanites more than once at the times of their successful invasions of the land of the Nephites. When it was destroyed, at the hour of the Savior's crucifixion, it sank in the depths of the sea, and its inhabitants were drowned; and the blue waters of the Atlantic ocean still cover it.

LAND OF MORONI

The district immediately surrounding the city of the same name. It had for its eastern boundary the Atlantic Ocean and the great wilderness that separated the Nephites from the Lamanites lay along its southern edge; indeed, until it was settled by the Nephites (about 72 B.C.) it formed a portion of that wilderness. The events associated with this land, that are given in the greatest detail in the Book of Mormon, are those connected with the close of the great war commenced by Amalickiah and continued by his brother Ammoron. In 61 B.C. the Lamanites had been driven out of every Nephite land which they had previously captured except Moroni where their armies were massed on the borders of the wilderness. The day after their king, Ammoron, was slain by Teancum, Moroni drove the Lamanites out of the land of Moroni, into their own country and thus ended this long-continued and disastrous war.

CITY OF NEPHIHAH

We fancy there were two cities of this name; one situated on the southern frontier, some distance east of Manti and the Sidon ( Alma 56:25 ) the other on the Atlantic seaboard, north of Moroni ( Alma 50:14 ). Of this latter city it is written that in the year 72 B.C. the Nephites began a foundation for a city between the city of Moroni and the city of Aaron, joining the cities of Aaron and Moroni and they called the name of the city or land, Nephihah. This is the region again referred to as captured by the Lamanites 67 B.C. and retained by them until 61 B.C. when Moroni retook it by a night surprise. Elder Orson Pratt, in a footnote to chapter 56, draws attention to the fact that the Nephihah there mentioned is not the one spoken of in the other chapters.

PLAINS OF NEPHIHAH

Plains near that city of Nephihah mentioned in Alma, chapter 62. Here Moroni desired the Lamanites to meet him in battle but they, knowing the great courage of the Nephites and the greatness of their numbers, kept within the walls of the city.

LAND OF NEPHIHAH

The region on the Atlantic seaboard immediately surrounding the city of the same name. It appears to have been bounded by the land of Moroni on the south, while that of Aaron was contiguous in another quarter (probably north).

CITY OF LEHI

A city on the Atlantic seaboard of South America, apparently near the Caribbean Sea. It is described as lying "in the north," by the borders of the sea shore" ( Alma 50:15 ). It was founded in 72 B.C. possibly by Lehi, one of the great Nephite generals of that era. In 68 B.C., its citizens being threatened by their neighbors of the city of Morianton fled for protection to the camp of Moroni. When the difficulty was settled they both returned to their respective homes. In 67 B.C. this city, with many others, fell into the hands of the Lamanite armies under Amalickiah who appears to have retained it until 61 B.C. when it was recaptured by the Nephites. This city is not again mentioned by name in the Book of Mormon.

LAND OF LEHI

A small region of South America, on the Atlantic seaboard, immediately surrounding the City of Lehi and adjoining the land of Morianton. In 68 B.C. a feud arose between these two districts, the people of Morianton unjustly claiming a portion of the Land of Lehi. The former determined to assert their claims by force of arms when the people of Lehi for protection fled to the camp of Moroni, the Nephite commander-in-chief. Morianton, the leader of the people of that name, determined to flee northward with his followers but was stopped at the Land Bountiful by the Nephite armies. A battle ensued in which Morianton was slain and his people were escorted back to their own lands. Upon their making an agreement to keep the peace a union was effected between them and the people of Lehi who also returned to their homes.

MORIANTON

The founder of the city called by his name and the leader of its citizens. Morianton appears to have been a wicked, passionate, self-willed avaricious man and the first notice we have of him (68 B.C.) grows out of a contention that arose between his people and those of the neighboring city of Lehi. Morianton claimed for his people some of the land lying between the two cities, then in possession of the Lehites and so determined was he to carry his point that he neglected all peaceable methods of settling the difficulty and appealed to the dread arbitrament of the sword. The people of Lehi, whose cause was just, fled to Moroni, the Nephite commander-in-chief and asked his help. When Morianton learned of this move, knowing that he was in the wrong and fearing the strength of Moroni, he persuaded his people to flee to the land northward. He would probably have carried his plan into effect had it not been for his ungovernable temper. In a fit of passion he cruelly beat one of his maid servants who ran away to the camp of Moroni and told the latter of the secret intentions of Morianton and his people. Such an exodus was very repugnant to Moroni's feelings and judgment. He feared to have a hostile people in the north, who in times of war with the Lamanites, could harass the Nephite rear. He therefore detailed Teancum, with an army corps to head the people of Morianton and stop their flight northward. This the latter was not able to accomplish until they had reached the borders of Desolation at the Isthmus of Panama. Here a battle took place for so great was the power of Morianton over his people that, by flattery and wickedness, he filled them with the spirit of stubbornness to such an extent that they forcibly resisted the armies of the Commonwealth. In the battle that ensued their leader was slain by Teancum, his hosts defeated and those not slain were taken prisoners and carried back to the camp of Moroni. Here the difficulties were investigated and settled amicably. Upon their covenanting to keep the peace they were restored to their lands and a union was effected between them and the citizens of Lehi who also returned to their possessions.

CITY OF MORIANTON

The city built by Morianton in the land of the same name. After the settlement of the quarrel (68 B.C.) between its people and those of the Land of Lehi we next read that it was captured by the Lamanite armies under Amalickiah. (67 B.C.) By 63 B.C. the Lamanites had made it a very strong place and stationed a heavy garrison therein with large quantities of provisions. In this year Moroni made preparations to recapture it but whether he succeeded at that time or not until later is not clear from the record. We think it is probable that owing to the rebellion at Zarahemla, headed by Pachus, which demanded Moroni's presence there, that he did not retake Morianton until 61 B.C. when the neighboring City of Lehi was captured and also all the other cities in the hands of the Lamanites except Moroni (Alma, chapter 62).

LAND OF MORIANTON

A small section of the Nephite possessions, in the neighborhood of the Caribbean Sea. It was first settled by a man named Morianton in the days of the judges (about 72 B.C.). The only thing known of its history is the unrighteous quarrel of its inhabitants with their neighbors, the people of the Land of Lehi (68 B.C.), their attempt to escape to the north and their detention and forced return home by the armies of the Commonwealth (Alma, chapter 50).

JACOB

A Nephite apostate of the Zoramite sect. He joined the Lamanites in the war inaugurated by Amalickiah and was placed in command of the city of Mulek, the most northern of the Nephite cities on the Atlantic coast captured by the Lamanites. It was a key to the surrounding country. While it remained in Lamanite possession it was very little use for Moroni, the Nephite commander-in-chief, to attempt to carry the place by assault. Such an effort was not even made to recover the cities along the east sea, yet farther south. The Nephite generals did not consider themselves justified in making any endeavors to force their surrender. Such an effort would have cost too many noble lives and probably have proved unsuccessful. Moroni had with him at this time two of his most trusted lieutenants, Lehi and Teancum, both of whom were little inferior to the chief captain in wisdom and valor. At a council of war it was determined to attempt the capture of Mulek by stratagem. They had already sent embassies to Jacob desiring him to bring his armies into the open plain to meet the Nephites in battle but the Lamanite commanders were too well acquainted with the discipline and courage of the Nephite forces to take such a risk. There was, therefore, but one plan left, other than to patiently sit down before the city and reduce it by a regular siege and that was to decoy a portion of its defenders beyond the protection of its walls and when it was thus weakened, to carry it by storm. Moroni determined on this course (64 B.C.).

By command of Moroni, the gallant Teancum with a small force marched along the sea shore to the neighborhood of Mulek; while Moroni, with the main body of the army, unperceived by the enemy made a forced march by night into the wilderness which lay on the west of the city. There he rested. Lehi, with a third corps, remained in the city of Bountiful.

On the morrow, Teancum's small division was discovered by the Lamanite outposts and from the fewness of its numbers they judged it would fall an easy prey. Jacob at once sallied forth at the head of his warriors to attack the presumptuous Nephites. On their approach Teancum cautiously retreated along the sea shore towards the city of Bountiful. Jacob followed in vigorous pursuit. Moroni, in the meantime, divided his army into two corps, one of which he dispatched to capture the city and with the other he closed in between Jacob's army and Mulek. The first corps accomplished its work without difficulty, for Jacob had left but a small force behind him and all who would not surrender were slain.

The Lamanites crowded after Teancum in hot pursuit until they came nigh unto Bountiful when they were met by Lehi and the small force under his command. At his appearance the Lamanite captains fled in confusion, lest they should be out-generaled and cut off from their fortifications. Jacob's warriors 0were weary by reason of their long and hasty advance while Lehi's soldiers were fresh and unfatigued. But Lehi refrained from pressing too vigorously on his retreating foes, as his object was not to exhaust his men until the hour of battle came and he was anxious to avoid a conflict till he and Moroni could, at the same moment, attack the Lamanites in front and rear.

When Jacob drew near the city he found himself confronted by the soldiers of Moroni who closed in around his warriors and barred their further progress southward; while Lehi, putting forth his pentup energies, fell with fury on their rear. Weary and worn though his troops were Jacob would not surrender. He determined, if possible, to cut his way through to Mulek. With this intent he made a desperate, though ineffectual charge on Moroni's lines. The Nephites being fresh and unwearied, never wavered. The battle here raged with indescribable fierceness and with heavy losses to both sides. The wild Lamanites, in the frenzy of desperation, dashed with all their strength and prowess against the well-ordered ranks of the Nephites in the one-absorbing endeavor to force their way through. While the Nephites, in the heroic courage which religion and patriotism inspire, stood cool and undismayed. In this desperate encounter Moroni was wounded and Jacob slain.

While Jacob was thus impetuously charging on Moroni's corps, Lehi with his "strong men" was as furiously driving in the Lamanite rear. At last the soldiers of Jacob in that part of the field surrendered. Their leader being slain, the remainder of the troops hesitated between throwing down their arms and continuing the hopeless strife. Moroni, with his intense hatred of unnecessary bloodshed, when he noticed that they wavered, cried out that if they would lay down their weapons and deliver themselves up he would spare their lives. His offer was accepted. The chief captains, who remained, came forward and placed their weapons at his feet and commanded their men to do the same. Most of the warriors obeyed, yet numbers would not. They preferred death to surrender and force had to be used to wrest their weapons from them. The Lamanite prisoners were then sent under an escort to the city of Bountiful and when counted were found to exceed in numbers the slain on both sides in the late battle.

TEANCUM

One of the bravest, most disinterested and most illustrious soldiers who served the Nephite Commonwealth. Of his life we are told nothing until he is presented to us as one of Moroni's lieutenants.

Teancum appears to have had command of the Nephite army of the north and to have had committed to him the defense of the Land Bountiful and the Isthmus of Panama. His first exploit to which our attention is drawn was the defeat of the dissatisfied people of the hot-headed Morianton, who, having unjustly quarreled with their neighbors, the people of the City of Lehi and being apparently aware of the unrighteousness of their cause, determined to migrate to the land northward and there establish an independent government. Such a movement being evidently dangerous to the peace and stability of the Republic, Moroni determined to prevent the accomplishment of their scheme. He dispatched Teancum at the head of a body of troops to head them off. This the gallant officer succeeded in doing but not until they had reached the Isthmus, where a stubbornly-fought battle ensued, in which Teancum slew Morianton with his own hand and compelled the surrender of his followers. (68 B.C.) The prisoners were brought back, the grievances of the two peoples were investigated, a union between them brought about and both were restored to their own lands.

In the following year (67 B.C.) Amalickiah, the apostate Nephite who reigned over the Lamanites, commenced his devastating invasion of the Atlantic provinces of the Nephites. Commencing at Moroni, on the extreme south-east, he gradually advanced northward, capturing and garrisoning all the Nephite cities along the coast, until toward the close of the year, he reached the borders of the Land Bountiful driving the forces of the Republic before him. At this point he was met by Teancum and a corps of veterans renowned for their courage, skill and discipline. The Lamanite leader endeavored to force his way to the Isthmus with the intention of occupying the northern continent. In this he was foiled for the trained valor of Teancum's warriors was too much for that of Amalickiah's half-savage hordes. All day the fight lasted and at night the worn-out soldiery camped in close proximity, the Lamanites on the sea beach and the Nephites on the borders of the Land Bountiful.

When night had closed and all was still, Teancum accompanied by one soldier, stole out of his own camp into that of the enemy. He sought the tent of Amalickiah and when he found it he slew the Lamanite king with his javelin, then quickly returning, he aroused his troops and kept them on the alert all night, fearing that when the foe found they had lost their chief they would make a sudden attack on the Nephites but it did not so happen. Amalickiah's death was not discovered until the morning and then his followers hastily retreated to Mulek where they shut themselves up. Each commander now felt only sufficiently strong to act on the defensive and Teancum employed his soldiery in vigorously strengthening the fortifications of the Land of Bountiful and the Isthmus which formed the natural northern boundary of that land. Moroni likewise desired him to harrass and scourge the enemy whenever opportunity offered but they kept too closely within their fortifications for much to be done in that way. This state of mutual watching, without any aggressive movements, continued for some time. Once Teancum, by Moroni's direction, made reconnaissance in force towards Mulek but he found it too strongly fortified to warrant an attempt to capture it by assault. He therefore retired to Bountiful and awaited Moroni's arrival, that officer being now conducting operations in the southwest. Moroni did not rejoin Teancum until the end of the year 65 B.C.

At the commencement of the next year a grand council of war was held at the Nephite headquarters. Efforts had been made to induce the Lamanites to come out and fight on the open plains between Mulek and Bountiful but their leaders very prudently declined. It was therefore decided to make an effort to draw them out by stratagem. The Nephite army was divided into three divisions, commanded by Moroni, Lehi and Teancum respectively. Teancum advanced with a small body of men near to the walls of Mulek. The Lamanites, noticing his weakness, sallied forth to capture him. He retreated rapidly northward along the seabeach in well-feigned trepidation. The enemy followed in hot pursuit. When they neared Bountiful, Lehi and his men marched out, covered the retreat and confronted the now fatigued legions of Laman. Jacob, their leader, ordered a retreat to Mulek, Lehi leisurely advanced till they reached the place where Moroni's command blockaded the road then both Nephite commanders met the Lamanites in the shock of battle, front and rear. The Lamanites were disastrously defeated, Jacob was killed and Mulek fell into the hands of the Nephites. This was the turning point in the war, for from this time the patriots gradually regained their lost cities.

We have no details of the services of Teancum in the brilliant campaign that followed, during which the tide of the victory rolled resistlessly down the Atlantic shore. We will therefore simply say that at last the soldiers of Ammoron were driven out of every Nephite city on the Atlantic seashore except the outlying one called Moroni, where the whole of the invading host was massed for a final desperate stand and around which Moroni with hurried and lengthened marches, had concentrated his warriors.

It was the night before an expected decisive battle and the Nephite officers and soldiery were too worn out to either devise stratagems or execute them. Teancum alone was in a condition of unrest. He remembered with intense bitterness all the bloodshed, woes, hardships, famine, etc., that had been brought about in this great and lasting war between the two races, which he rightly attributed to the infamous ambition of Amalickiah and Ammoron. In his anger he stole forth into the enemy camp, let himself over the walls of the city, sought out the king's tent, and when he had found the object of his search, he cast a javelin at him, which pierced him near the heart; but unlike Amalickiah, Ammoron's death was not instantaneous; he had time to awaken his servants before he expired. The alarm was given, the guards started in pursuit, Teancum was overtaken, caught and slain. On the morrow, Moroni attacked the Lamanites, defeated them with great slaughter, captured the city and drove them entirely out of the Nephite territory. (61 B.C.)

CITY OF TEANCUM

A city mentioned only in connection with the final struggle between the Nephites and Lamanites ( Morm. 4:3-14 ). It lay near the sea (probably the Pacific Ocean), a little north of the city of Desolation. When the Lamanites captured Desolation (363 A.D.) the remnants of the Nephites fled to Teancum. The next year the Lamanites attacked the city but were repulsed. They came against it again in 366-7 A.D. and drove the Nephites out, taking many women and children prisoners, whom they sacrificed to their idol gods.

AMMORON

A Nephite traitor and apostate. He was a descendant of Zoram, the servant of Laban, and the brother of Amalickiah, whom he succeeded on the Lamanite throne (66 B.C.). He was slain by Teancum, the Nephite general, in the city of Moroni and was succeeded by his son Tubaloth (61 B.C.).

Ammoron is not mentioned until the death of his brother; then we are told he left the Land of Zarahemla, repaired to the Land of Nephi, informed the widowed queen of her loss and gathered a vast host of men to continue the war, especially on the western border. He determined to carry on hostilities with unabated vigor, for a time taking personal command in the west; but he does not appear to have possessed the military skill and genius of his brother, for during his reign the Nephites reconquered nearly all the territory and recaptured nearly all the cities that had been wrested from them by Amalickiah. Later on in the war, when the Lamanite invaders on the east coast had all been driven to the Land of Moroni, Ammoron was with them, and it was in the city of that name that he was slain with a javelin by Teancum. Ammoron is brought most prominently before the reader of the Book of Mormon through the insertion of the correspondence that passed between him and Moroni regarding an exchange of prisoners of war. In this correspondence his character is very clearly shown (Alma, chapter 54).

PAHORAN, THE ELDER

The third Chief Judge of the Nephite Republic. He succeeded his father, Nephihah, on the judgment seat 68 B.C. and held that exalted position until his death in 53 B.C. when he was succeeded by his son, Pahoran. The days that Pahoran judged the people were full of tumult and war. No sooner was he placed on the Judgment Seat than great contentions arose between the royalists and republicans. There were quite a number of the people who desired to restore the monarchy but they were not so numerous as those who desired to maintain the existing form of government. Being outvoted, the King Men refused to take up arms against the hosts of the Lamanites under Amalickiah who were then invading the lands of the Nephites. Full power being given to Moroni, the Nephite general, to deal with these rebels he marched against them with his forces and in the conflict that followed 4,000 of the royalists were slain, while many of their leaders were captured and cast into prison. The remainder submitted, joined their countrymen in opposing the Lamanite hosts and gave full allegiance to the republican government. In the meantime the Nephites having been weakened by their internal dissensions Amalickiah marched triumphantly northward capturing city after city along the Atlantic seaboard while his brother Ammoron conducted a victorious campaign in the southwest. The calamities brought on by this royalist defection lasted many years for the war was not ended until 61 B.C. and for many years afterwards its evil effects, in the condition of the people, were widely manifest. Even while the war continued, a second royalist uprising occurred. Pachus, the leader, drove Pahoran from the Judgment Seat and obtained control in Zarahemla. The chief judge retired to Gideon. Shortly afterwards (62 B.C.) Moroni came to the assistance of Pahoran and their united forces gave battle to the rebels in which encounter Pachus was slain and his followers defeated. This ended the second attempt to re-establish the kingly form of government during Pahoran's judgeship. After the termination of the war with the Lamanites every effort was put forth to counteract the demoralization which the long-continued struggle had induced. Helaman and other leaders in the priesthood went forth among the people preaching the word and organizing the churches, while Pahoran and his associates gave their attention to restoring civil order. A few years later (55 B.C.) the colonization of the northern continent began which was continued with increasing numbers of emigrants during the succeeding years. In 53 B.C. dissension again had place among the Nephites, numbers went over to the Lamanites and stirred up strife. An invasion followed which was easily repulsed by the forces of Moronihah, the son of Moroni. The character of Pahoran is best shown in his epistle to Moroni ( Alma 61 ). He was evidently a wise judge, a faithful servant of God and a loyal citizen of the Republic. He also seems to have possessed the characteristics of patience, mildness and forgiveness to a marked degree but was not lacking in courage, zeal or determination.
