Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 51

Verses 1-6

There began to be a contention concerning the Chief Judge. Mormon, in preparing his abridgment of the records which had been kept by the Nephites from the very first, or from the beginning of their history, was compelled to be extremely brief in whatsoever he considered important enough to include in his own work. Contemplating the Reign of the Judges, he gave a year-by-year account of their proceedings, though often he made but a mere mention of the peace and prosperity that abounded among them. Thus, the Twenty-second and the Twenty-third year, he said, "Ended in peace." ( Alma 50:24 ) However, Mormon never failed to attribute this condition to their righteousness, thereby reminding the reader of God's promise to Lehi, "Blessed art thou and thy children; and they shall be blessed, inasmuch as they shall keep My commandments they shall prosper in the land. But remember, inasmuch as they will not keep the commandments they shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord." ( Alma 50:20 )

Pahoran was elevated to the office of Chief Judge in the Twenty-fourth year of the Judges, during which year peace was established between the peoples of Morianton and Lehi. The general outlook for a continued era of prosperity and tranquility among the Nephites was almost assured, and in this blessed hope they began to cultivate the soil and otherwise consolidate their relations one with another. The Twenty-fifth year of the Judges started out under these fraternal conditions.

This heavenly state of peace did not last but a short time. As it frequently happened during the days of the Judges some of the Nephites, in their periodical spasms of apostasy and wickedness, clamored that changes be made in their just and wise laws, in a manner to better suit their degraded habits and course of life. They even demanded that Pahoran resign.

So it was in this case. A part of the people over whom Pahoran presided as Chief Judge "desired that a few particular points of law should be altered." The Chief Judge refused to do so, whereupon a portion of the people, or those who desired that the law should be changed, became all the more determined "that he should no longer be Chief Judge over the land." There being no other legal way to accomplish their purpose they at first petitioned him, and he directed that an election be held, or rather that the voice of the whole nation be appealed to. This was done, and the result proved that the majority of the citizens of the Republic objected to the changes proposed.

From the light of the Nephite Nation's previous history, men rose up in rebellion to established laws as the case now in point. Men then, if successful in their uprising, would administer the law for the benefit of the rich and the strong, and to the injury of those in whose bosoms burned one lingering spark of righteousness. The history of the Nephites, from beginning to end, fully justifies the saying of the wise men: "Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people."

From the death of King Mosiah II (91 B.C.), the governmental authority was vested in a Chief Judge and other subordinate judges and officers, all of whom were elected by the voice of the people, to judge according to the laws which had been given to and accepted by the people. Their authority was defined by the Law (the Code of Mosiah), but within the bounds therein prescribed they appear to have held unrestricted power. This was so especially in the case of the Chief Judge. No civil council or parliament divided with the chief executive the authority to make war or to conclude peace, to decide the terms of treaties, or frame enactments for the regulation of public affairs. No direct statement is made of the length of the term that a judge remained in office, but from the historical narrative we gather the idea that he was elected for life or during good conduct. We have instances of judges resigning, but none of their removal by the people because their term had expired. Each city or land appears to have had its Chief Judge or Ruler as well as its inferior magistrates, all of whom were responsible to the Chief Judge of the whole nation, whose seat of government was located in the Nephite Capitol, Zarahemla, when it was not in the hands of Lamanites or traitors.

The manner of conducting elections is not clearly defined. The result is always spoken of as the voice of the people. The mode of procedure was uniform, that is, it was the same throughout the land. In the election of the first Chief Judge, Alma the younger, the people assembled in bodies throughout all the land to cast their voices, which conveys the impression that they declared their choice viva voce, or by acclamation rather than by lot or ballot. It is quite possible that the methods at that time were entirely dissimilar to any known at modern elections. This, however, is but conjecture. When the sentiments of the people were greatly divided and party feeling ran high, the opposing factions assembled in separate bodies throughout the Republic to cast in their voices as in the attempt to make Amlici king. The decisions of the people in these assemblies or mass meetings were laid before the judges who proclaimed the result. In cases where a petition was made for any particular object, or for a change in the law, the judge directed that a special election (if we may so term it) be held, and the results were proclaimed according to the voice of the people as a whole, or if they were divided, according to the voice of the majority. When the majority of the people were on the side of righteousness, stability and honor prevailed, but when wickedness abounded, the corrupt majority carried their points.

The record of the Nephite's history shows that in the Sixty-second year of the Judges (30 B.C.) they had altered and had trampled under foot the Laws of Mosiah, or that which the Lord had commanded him to give unto the people; and that their laws had become corrupted, and that they had grown wicked like unto the Lamanites.

Such a condition of affairs, in the course of time, wrought national disintegration, and would have brought about that result much sooner than it did, had it not been that, influenced by the mighty preaching of the inspired servants of God, the Nephites (or portions of them) had now and again returned to the service of Heaven.

The portion of the Nephites who desired that Pahoran be deposed, and that a monarchy with its evils and favoritism be again established as their form of government, called themselves by the unmistakable name, King-Men. Those who preferred that the Republic be continued in like manner as in the Twenty-five years of the Judges' rule, were known as Free-Men.

Verses 7-8

This matter of their contention was settled by the voice of the people. The Free-Men were in the majority, thus sealing by the peoples' voices the "rights and privileges of their religion by a free government." Pahoran was sustained in his office as Chief Judge, and under his administration to its very end, he served the cause of righteousness, judging justly, and meeting out to both the just and the unjust their several equitable rewards. Pahoran's retention as their highest political officer and their governor, was a great cause for the Nephite brethren to rejoice as also it was to many others who desired that liberty and freedom survive the onslaught of the wicked.

Selfish motives were the starting points from which those who desired to have a king began their conspiracies to wreck the Republic. They saw in the triumph of their selfish cause the satisfaction of their dreams of avarice and their wanton ideals of "power and authority over the people."

Verses 9-12

This was a critical time for contentions among the Nephites. Amalickiah, the King of the Lamanites who also was a bitter Nephite apostate, had not forgotten his ambitious dreams of subjecting the entire people of Nephi to his ungodly notions, and thereby make slaves of them. He had not relinquished any of his evil designs made when defeat by the Nephite armies scattered his forces, and rendered his own soldiers impotent to silence the inspiriting and inspiring battlecry of Moroni's men.

Neither had Amalickiah forgotten his boast that he would "drink the blood of Moroni," nor did he leave a thing undone that would bring about that end. The Sacred Record states that "this was a critical time" for the Nephites to be torn by political strife, and that the contentions among them regarding the Chief Judge deprived them of a united effort in combating the serious menace always posed by the Lamanites. For Amalickiah, in furtherance of his plans to bring the Nephites under his yoke of power and domination, or in other words, to subdue them, rallied his nondescript troops into a well-organized army, equipped them with what then was modern implements of warfare, and commenced his devastating invasion of the Atlantic provinces of the Nephites. (67 B.C.)

Notwithstanding the many thousands of his men who were slain in his disastrous foray into Nephite territory so recently concluded, Amalickiah "gathered together a wonderfully great army." In fact his army was so great and apparently so powerful that it infused his captains with such confidence that they thought they could overwhelm Zarahemla, itself. But Amalickiah, and his henchmen, did not count upon the valor of the Nephites, nor did they evaluate properly the righteous cause the Nephites felt was theirs. A cause that later led the Nephites, and lifted them to such a high level of duty and loyalty that much was accomplished by them that otherwise might have been in vain. Nevertheless, and in spite of the many obstacles placed in his way that hampered his scheme of action, Amalickiah "prepared himself and his armies to come to battle against the Nephites."

Amalickiah, himself, was so confident of success and victory in this well-planned venture, that at the head of his advancing hosts, he paraded his jubilation and his self-reliance so as to impress his impregnability upon the Lamanite hordes who followed him.

Now Amalickiah's much-looked-for incursion into Nephite lands was all the more unfavorable to the Nephites because they were already engulfed in bitter dissensions between the Free-Men and the King-Men, and, the Sacred Record says: "it was at the same time that they had begun to settle the affairs of their contentions concerning the Chief Judge, Pahoran." (The Twenty-fifth year of the Reign of the Judges, or about 67 B.C.)

Verse 13

The King-Men refused to take up arms in defense of the Republic. When the King-Men heard that the Lamanites were coming down to battle the Nephites, they rejoiced because they saw in it a new ally in the attempt to crush the Republic. They let their disappointment and pride—for they considered themselves better than the poor, they having much of worldly goods—master them, and dull their desires for the better things of life. Because the Chief Judge refused to alter the Constitution of the Commonwealth so as to benefit them only, they were angry with him, and sought his destruction. "They would not take up arms to defend their country."

At this point it may be well to offer a mere statement in review of the Nephites' obligations under their laws. In the course of the centuries as the Nephites increased in numbers and spread far and wide over the land, they appear to have introduced local customs to suit their differing circumstances, or in some cases their whims and notions. Thus, until King Mosiah II, established uniformity by law nearly every generation and each section of the country had its own rules to govern its people. All this was done according to the minds and circumstances of those governed. This custom naturally caused confusion, annoyance, and distrust; so to obviate these and possibly greater evils, Mosiah consented to newly arrange the affairs of the people; and, if we may express it so, to codify the law. This code became the Constitution of the Nephite Nation under the rule of the Judges, which limited the powers of the officials, and guaranteed the rights of the people. This compilation was acknowledged by the people, whereupon the historian remarks: "Therefore they were obliged to abide by the laws which he had made." And from that time they became the supreme body of law throughout the land, or better for us to say, "Throughout the Nation." It is stated in another place that this change was made by the direct command of Jehovah.

Verses 14-16

Moroni was exceeding wroth with the King-Men. Moroni, the Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite armies, because of the refractory manner in which the King-Men objected to taking part in the defense of the Republic, grew increasingly angry at their defiance of duty. He, himself, had labored unceasingly to preserve the lives and liberty of all the Nephites, and now that a few of them had been denied privileges by the Chief Judge far beyond those allowed by the law, they were ready to scuttle all his work, and leave the end thereof to the mercy of an implacable foe. "His soul was filled with anger against them."

Moroni was confronted with a serious problem, he considered well the possible deleterious effect upon the whole of his people if a part of them defied successfully his authoritative command to take up arms in the defense of their liberties. He acted according to the law. He sent a petition to the Chief Judge which was backed by the voice of the people for power to compel the dissenters to help defend their country against the natural enemy, or give him the right to put them to death. Moroni's request was granted. This was, however, an extraordinary circumstance, and it appears to have required the all-powerful vox populi to give validity to the action of the Governor, who also was the Chief Judge.

We may wonder at it, but the history of the Nephites shows that their many disagreements and contentions were the cause of much of the destruction heaped upon them by their enemies. Dissension weakened them, and rival factions among them tore apart what should have been unity of purpose, thereby allowing the Lamanites, their constant enemy, to come upon a divided people. Moroni saw in the actions of the King-Men a situation that must be done away with even by using stern measures.

Verses 17-20

Moroni commanded that his army go against the King-Men. Notwithstanding Moroni's principles upon which he conducted his military operations, and in spite of his abhorrence of bloodshed, he commanded that his army should resort to that end if the King-Men still refused to obey his commands. He was determined to preserve the Republic at any cost, even internecine strife. To put the haughty and proud into their proper place in relation to their fellowmen when it came to defending their own homes, their lives and liberty, was an obligation he assumed as Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite forces which Moroni, himself, refused to abdicate. Moroni gave the King-Men the choice of loyalty to the common cause, or be put to death.

Many of the King-Men still refused to obey Moroni's command; the scene presented a threatening phase of Nephite life. Not to assert the power given him, and for which Moroni asked, would have indicated weakness on his part. He could not meet the enemy with confidence and not have the full support of those at home. The hour of settling the controversy had come; it was not, however, a judicial determination of the question involved, but a firm appeal to force. The regular troops of the Republic, under Moroni's leadership, "did march forth against them," and took away from them much of their disdainful, or contemptuous pride. The King-Men were first to resort to the use of arms, but in this they were mistaken, for then, and not 'til then, Moroni's men cut them down and "leveled them to the earth."

Altogether 4000 dissenters were slain by Moroni's soldiers in the battle that ensued, and their leaders, those who were not slain, were cast into prison to await trial "for there was no time for their trials at this period." Those of the dissenters who were not slain, or put in jail, yielded themselves to the cause of their country, joined with their fellows in putting down the revolt, and hastily took up arms in defense of the Commonwealth.

Verse 21

And thus Moroni put an end to those King-Men. Moroni so thoroughly put an end to any idea of a monarchy that the name, King-Men, applied no longer to any person, or group. All were one in the support of the Republic, and thereafter all fought valiantly "for their freedom from bondage," to which Amalickiah had sworn to subject them.

Verses 22-27

The Lamanites came into the Land of Moroni. In the same year, or in the year which followed, Amalickiah commenced, as we have pointed out, his devastating invasion of the Atlantic provinces of the Nephites. Moroni was still struggling with the contentions arising among his own people, and there establishing peace between the warring factions. However, Moroni found time, but not sufficient, to prepare for the fast-approaching war with the Lamanites. This lamentable condition, while fully appreciated by Moroni, nevertheless redounded to his good for it caused Amalickiah and his sub-lieutenants to thinly spread their manpower over too great an area. Commencing at the City of Moroni which had not been strongly fortified for such an assault, Amalickiah found his victim easy to subdue. He slew many of the cities' inhabitants, and caused the others to flee. Amalickiah then took possession of the city and garrisoned it to suit a long campaign, using the fortifications Moroni had caused to be prepared for his own purposes. The City of Moroni was situated on the extreme southeast portion of the Nephite Land.

Gradually advancing northward, Amalickiah captured and garrisoned all the Nephite cities along the coast, until toward the end of the year he reached the borders of the Land Bountiful, driving the forces of the Republic before him. At this point he was met by Teancum and a corps of veterans renowned for their courage, skill, and discipline. The Lamanite leader endeavored to force his way to the narrow Neck of Land which divided the lands to the north and to the south, we call it, the Isthmus. His evident intention was to occupy the northern lands. In this he was foiled, for the trained valor of Teancum's men was too much for the half-savage hordes of Amalickiah. All day the fight lasted, and at night the worn out soldiers of the two armies camped close together, the Lamanites on the sea-beach, and the Nephites on the borders of the Land Bountiful.

It was the last night of the old year, according to Nephite reckoning. The great heat and the terrible efforts of the day had overcome both men and their commanders. The murmur of the Atlantic's waves sounded a soft lullaby in the ears of Amalickiah and his hosts, who, for the first time during the campaign, had suffered a check in their triumphal march. Even Amalickiah slept; but not so with Teancum. He was brooding over the wrongs and perils of his beloved country, as well as his own sufferings, both of which were the deadly fruit of one man's unholy ambition. As he pondered, he grew angry, and at last he determined by one desperate stroke to put an end to the war, or, if not that, at least to slay the cause of it. Taking one servant with him, he secretly stole out of his own camp into that of the enemy. A deathlike silence reigned in both. Cautiously and unobserved he searched out the royal tent. There lay the foe, there lay his guards, all overcome with resistless fatigue. To draw his javelin, thrust it into the king's heart and then flee, was but the work of a moment, and so adroitly did Teancum fulfill his purpose that Amalickiah died without a struggle, or a cry, and it was not until morning that his guards discovered that the hosts of Laman were without a head.

When Teancum returned to his own warriors, he awoke them from their slumbers and rehearsed to them all that he had done. It is not difficult to imagine their enthusiasm, which, for fear they should arouse the enemy, they were compelled to restrain. They, however, kept a strong guard on the alert lest when the Lamanites awoke and discovered that their king was dead, they should, in their anger make a sudden onslaught on the Nephite lines. This thought, however, was not realized. When the Lamanites found that Amalickiah was slain, they hastily retreated to the fortified City of Mulek.

KING-MEN

The name given by the Nephites to those who, in the days of the Republic, desired to re-establish the Monarchy. The first royalist outbreak was led by one, Amlici, in the fifth year of the Commonwealth and cost much blood and sorrow. Amalickiah was another prominent leader of those who wished to overturn the government, but being defeated by Moroni, he fled to the Lamanites and by treason and murder worked himself onto the throne of that people. His followers who remained within the borders of the Nephites were compelled to enter into a covenant to support the Republic, or "the cause of freedom," otherwise be put to death. But few refused to make this covenant. (73 B.C.) When Nephihah died (68 B.C.) great contentions arose between the King-Men and the Free-Men. The former thought this an opportune time to re-establish the royal power. They desired the new Chief Judge, Pahoran, the elder to amend the laws, so that this end might be accomplished. Pahoran declined, considering he had no authority to so change the national Constitution. At the demand of the royalists the question was put to the popular vote or "to the voice of the people." The majority voted in favor of the continuance of the existing form of government. The King-Men, greatly angered at the result, broke out in open rebellion.

At this critical juncture Amalickiah invaded the Nephite territory. The monarchists refused to assist in the defense of the Fatherland. At his own request full power was given to Moroni, the Nephite Commander-in-Chief, to deal with them. He was made, for the time being, military dictator; he occupied a position nearly analogous to the Pendragon of the ancient Britons. Moroni attacked the malcontents in their cities and forts, slew about 4,000 of them and cast into prison those who would not take up arms in defense of their country. This outbreak, which was led by those claiming to be of noble birth, resulted disastrously for the Nephites for while Moroni was engaged in putting it down the Lamanites made rapid advances northward, capturing many cities on their route. (67 B.C.) Four years later another royalist uprising took place. As usual, it commenced at the Capital and for a time was quite successful. Pahoran was driven from the Judgment Seat and fled to the Land of Gideon while a man named Pachus was made King. He opened a treasonable correspondence with the Lamanites, in which he made a treaty with them and agreed to hold the City of Zarahemla in their mutual interest, which he supposed would so weaken the Nephites as to enable the Lamanites to conquer the remainder of the land. This being accomplished he would be made King of the Nephites. The success of the royalist cause was of short duration. Moroni and Pahoran united their forces and being joined by thousands of volunteers, they attacked the City of Zarahemla and defeated the revolutionists. In this battle Pachus was slain and his followers, who were captured, were speedily tried for treason, as were also the King-Men of the previous abortive revolt, who, for about five years, had been lying in prison awaiting trial. Those of both periods, who would not take up arms in defense of their country but would fight against it, were executed according to law. (62 B.C.)

In later years the Gadianton Robbers, when it suited their purpose to obtain power and plunder, declared in favor of a kingly form of government but they had to satisfy themselves by electing to, or otherwise placing on the Judgment Seat men of their own order, which amounted to much the same thing as it placed the reigns of government in their hands. In A.D. 30 the final attempt to restore the monarchy was made. As usual petty-place men and those claiming to be of higher birth were the instigators and leaders of this disastrous uprising. The chief spirit of the revolution was a demagogue named Jacob. He was the one they chose for king. The outbreak resulted in the assassination of the last Chief Judge, Lachoneus the younger, and the breaking up of the nation. A kingdom was not established but the people separated into numerous tribes, each with its independent ruler or chief. Disorganization, degradation, and partial anarchy followed; crime and sin abounded, and bloody and wide-extended wars would doubtless have followed had not the greater portion of the more wicked been slain in the convulsions that attended the Crucifixion of the Redeemer. King Jacob finding his plots had miscarried, hurried his followers to the far north, where they built a city called Jacobugath. During its short existence it became a head center of depravity and cruel licentiousness, and was destroyed with its sister cities in the general upheaval at Christ's death.

THE LAND BOUNTIFUL

The Land Bountiful was the most northerly Nephite division of the South American Continent. It extended in the north to the Isthmus of Panama, where it was bounded by the Land Desolation. Its other boundaries are indefinite and undoubtedly varied greatly at different eras of Nephite history, diminishing in extent as the wilderness was settled, cities were founded, and the neighboring regions made tributary to them. Jershon appears to have been south and east of it. Its chief city bore the same name, and on its north-west corner Hagoth built his celebrated ship yards. (55 B.C.)

Before the Land Bountiful was settled by the Nephites, it was a wilderness filled with wild animals of every kind, some of which had come from the land northward for food. ( Alma 22:31 ) But the Nephites, to prevent the Lamanites creeping up through the wilderness along the coast, east and west, and in this way getting a foothold in the land northward, at an early date as possible inhabited the Land which they called Bountiful from the east to the west sea ( Alma 22:33 ), thus retaining possession of the whole of the northern continent.

In this land (68 B.C.) a severe battle took place between the Nephite army, commanded by Teancum, and the people of Morianton, in which the latter were defeated and their leader slain.

The next year (67 B.C.) the victorious Lamanites, under Amalickiah, reached the borders of Bountiful from the southeast, driving the Nephites before them, but their advance northward was checked by the forces of Teancum, by whom their leader Amalickiah, was slain.

In 66 B.C., Teancum, under instructions from Moroni, greatly strengthened the fortifications in the Land Bountiful, giving special attention to making the Isthmus secure from capture.

In the year 64 B.C., a sanguinary battle was fought in the district between the Cities of Bountiful and Mulek, which resulted in Mulek being recaptured from the Lamanites. In this battle, the Nephites were commanded by Moroni, Lehi, and Teancum, and the Lamanites by Jacob, who was slain. The Lamanite prisoners were so numerous that, as a precautionary measure, they were set to work at intrenching and fortifying the Land and City of Bountiful.

In the year 51 B.C., the Lamanites invaded Zarahemla, captured the Capital City and advanced northward towards Bountiful, but their triumphal march was arrested by an army commanded by Lehi, and the Lamanites were eventually driven back to their own lands.

The Lamanites again invaded the territories of the Nephites in 35 B.C., and later the Nephites, owing to their dissensions and wickedness, were everywhere driven before them, until in 34 B.C., the Lamanites had overrun and taken possession of all the Nephite lands and cities, as far as the Land Bountiful. The Nephites under Moronihah, then threw up a line of fortifications entirely across the Isthmus of Panama, by which means they protected the northern continent from invasion. In 32 B.C., Moronihah re-conquered the most northern portions of South America.

In A.D. 16, Lachoneus, the Chief Judge, by reason of the perilous condition of the people from the constant attacks of the Gadianton Robbers, decided to mass the Nephites in one region and chose Bountiful and Zarahemla for that purpose. This bold movement he carried out and held the people there until after the destruction of the many robbers who infested the land. In A.D. 26 the people were permitted to return to their homes throughout the two continents.

It was in the Land Bountiful that the Risen Lord appeared and ministered to the Nephites.
