Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 52

Verses 1-3

Thus King Ammoron, the brother of King Amalickiah, was appointed to reign in his stead. We have read in the last chapter of the death of Amalickiah which took place at the end of the Twenty-fifth year of the Reign of the Judges. Amalickiah's death should have put a stop to the fearful struggle which was going on, but it did not. His ambitious dreams of conquest were inherited by his brother, Ammoron, who with unrelenting fury carried on the sanguinary war, until at last he, like his brother, Amalickiah, was slain by Teancum. (61 B.C.)

On the next morning after Teancum's exploit, which was the first day of the new year, the Lamanites awoke to find their King and their war-leader dead in his own tent, with a javelin through his heart. They also saw that the Nephite Army was ready to give them battle. This, the Sacred Record notes, filled them with a great fright. Confusion reigned among them. The Lamanites abandoned their plans to further invade the land northward, "and retreated with all their army into the City of Mulek." Mulek had been fortified by Moroni's men, and offered its conquerors much protection "in their fortifications."

In the Lamanite crisis that followed, Ammoron, who, as we have stated, was King Amalickiah's brother, and in him the title of King was vested.

Verse 4

Ammoron commanded that his people maintain those cities, which had been taken by the shedding of blood. Not to be in any way deprived of the fruits of their victory, Ammoron ordered the captains serving under him to keep possession of all the cities they had captured during the bloody battles through which they had suffered so great hardships. For the Nephites had fought the Lamanites with great fury, and had inflicted severe punishment upon them.

Verses 5-7

Teancum saw that the Lamanites were determined to maintain those cities which they had taken. Teancum was the Nephite commander of the military forces which faced the enemy-captured City of Mulek, and at once recognized the Lamanite decision not to surrender it to its former possessors. The Lamanites, instead of planning a campaign of action, relied for victory upon their superior numbers. They sat down behind their fortifications and there awaited an inglorious end to the conflict. This nettled Teancum's impetuosity; he wanted to force action now, and not wait for time and lack of needy provisions to make a decision. He concluded that to attack the Lamanites now that they were ensconced behind the forts of the city and who greatly outnumbered him, was folly and to battle them upon their own ground was foolishness. In doing so, he would render his own troops subject to a dejecting defeat.

However anxious for battle Teancum was, he knew that patience was to him a virtue. Daily he maneuvered his soldiers about on the ramparts of the city, thereby not only making the Lamanites conscious of his presence, but at the same time "preparing to defend himself against them." In this manner he kept his men in fine fettle for the oncoming battle when Moroni would have sent him more men to augment his combat strength.

Verses 8-11

Moroni sent Teancum orders concerning prisoners, fortifying the Land Bountiful, and also instructions concerning future operations. The Nephites had lost many men taken as prisoners of war by the Lamanites, therefore Moroni ordered Teancum to keep control of all the Lamanite prisoners that should fall into his hands. The cost of feeding a large number of prisoners, clothing them, and otherwise caring for them, was an added burden upon the struggling Nephites, but no doubt Teancum put them to work building places of resort for his troops, as also defense walls to protect them in case of need. But Moroni had a different end in view; prisoners on both sides were ready ransoms for each other, and Moroni saw in this a reason to put a retainer on them. He could thus redeem many men, and return them to their homes.

Another of Moroni's great concerns was the Narrow Pass "which led into the land northward." If the Lamanites should capture that strategic area they would not only control emigration into the land northward, but could then weary the Nephites by repeated attacks from every side. Moroni therefore sent specific instructions to Teancum to fortify the Land Bountiful which itself controlled the Isthmus of Panama.

Teancum was also admonished by Moroni to use all diligence in holding intact that quarter of the Nephite Commonwealth that was now in their hands. He saw in the not far distant future the much-looked-for opportunity to scourge the Lamanites, and by stratagem or "some other way regain" those cities that had fallen into Lamanitish hands.

Moroni, in his message sent to Teancum, promised him that if conditions permitted "I would come unto you," but now such a move is impossible because the Lamanites have come upon us in the regions bordering the west sea, and "I go against them, therefore I cannot come unto you."

Verses 12-15

King Ammoron with a large number of men marched forth against the Nephites on the borders of the west sea. A move by King Ammoron if it was successful at all may well have meant defeat to all the Nephite armies, had Moroni not met and delivered it a decisive blow. After Ammoron had notified the Queen of the death of King Amalickiah, his brother, he recruited a large number of men in the Land of Nephi—he having left the Land of Zarahemla where the war was in progress—and marched forth to battle the Nephites who were "on the borders by the west sea."

Ammoron's plan was to draw away to this new area of combat a large portion of Nephite troops that were then committed elsewhere, thus weakening the forces that were fighting the Lamanites in the cities and lands by the east sea. But his strategy did not succeed, for Moroni had established well equipped armies to protect the "south and west borders of the land." All this happened during the Twenty-sixth year of the Judges, but in the Twenty-seventh year a change in the affairs of the Nephites began to appear for the better.

Verses 16-17

In the Twenty-seventh year Moroni began his march towards the Land Bountiful, that he might assist Teancum. The military affairs of the Nephites in the southwest near the borders of the west sea were evidently satisfactory to the commanders who led them, therefore Moroni took an army of veterans and commenced his march towards the Land Bountiful where Teancum with larger forces awaited him. Teancum had waited for his coming for a full year, and was in readiness for the attempt to defeat the Lamanites which their combined armies presaged.

But in the meantime Teancum had received orders from Moroni to "make an attack upon the City of Mulek, and retake it if it were possible."

Teancum did as he was commanded. He prepared for the attack, and "marched forth with his army" to fulfill the order. But conditions were against its success; the Lamanites were greater than he was in numbers, and besides they were protected by the fortifications of the city. Teancum, being a realist in spite of his daring exploits, abandoned the order which had compelled him to try and do his best, and returned with his soldiers to Bountiful to further await Moroni's coming.

Verses 18-19

Moroni did arrive with his army at the Land Bountiful. After a long period of waiting, Moroni arrived at the Land Bountiful in the latter part of the Twenty-seventh year of the Judges. We may imagine the gladsome prospects of Moroni's and Teancum's meeting. Undoubtedly their hopes soared to heights of which they never before dreamed. With the help of the Lord, for they were indeed His servants, they promised each other that even to the cost of their lives they would defend the cause of liberty, and wrest from the savage grasp of the Lamanites, the possessions of the Saints which had fallen into their unconsecrated hands.

Early in the Twenty-eighth year a council of war was held in which Moroni, Teancum, and many of the captains of the Nephite army took part. The question that concerned them most was the manner in which they could best induce the Lamanites "to come out against them to battle." Many suggestions were offered, but none of them seemed practical to the military genius of Moroni or Teancum. How then, they pondered, can we lure them out of the fortifications behind which they felt safe. The surest way appeared just to invite the Lamanite commander to come out to battle.

Verses 20-40

His name was Jacob. The general who commanded the Lamanite forces at Mulek was named Jacob. He was a Nephite apostate, who had accepted the errors of the Zoramites. His appointment was one characteristic of the prevailing policy of Amalickiah and his successor, Ammoron. It was to give the command of the Lamanite armies to men, who, like themselves, were traitors to their own government; for, in such cases, to military knowledge was added intense religious hatred, which neither asked nor gave clemency or quarter on the battlefield, but fought to the last extremity with unconquerable fury.

Such a one was Jacob. He had entrenched himself in the strongly fortified City of Mulek, the most northerly of the Nephite cities that had fallen into the enemy's hands. It was the key to the surrounding country. While it remained in Lamanite possession, it was very little use for Moroni to attempt to recover the cities that lay yet farther south along the shore of the east sea. The Nephite generals did not consider themselves justified in making an attempt to carry the place by assault. Such an effort would have cost too many noble lives, and probably have proven unsuccessful. Moroni had with him at this time, two of his most trusted lieutenants, Lehi and Teancum, both of whom were little inferior to the Commander-in-Chief in wisdom and valor. At a council of war it was determined to attempt the capture of Mulek by strategy. They had already sent embassies to Jacob desiring him to bring his armies into the open plains to meet the Nephites in battle. But the Lamanite commanders were too well acquainted with the discipline and courage of the Nephite forces to take such a risk. There was, therefore, but one plan left, other than to patiently sit down before the city and reduce it by a regular siege, and that was to decoy a portion of its defenders beyond the protection of its walls, and when it was thus weakened to carry it by storm. Moroni determined on this course.

By command of Moroni, the gallant Teancum, with a small force, marched along the seashore to the neighborhood of Mulek, while Moroni, with the main body of the army, unperceived by the enemy, made a forced march by night into the wilderness which lay to the west of the City of Mulek. There he rested. Lehi, with a third corps, remained in the City of Bountiful.

On the morrow Teancum's detachment was discovered by the Lamanite outposts, and from the smallness of its numbers they judged it would fall an easy prey. Jacob, at the head of his soldiers sallied forth to attack the presumptuous Nephites. On the approach of the Lamanites Teancum cautiously retreated along the seashore towards the City of Bountiful. Jacob followed in vigorous pursuit. Moroni, in the meantime, divided his army into two corps, one of which he dispatched to capture the city, and the other he closed in between Jacob's army and Mulek. The first corps accomplished its work without much difficulty, for Jacob had left but a small force behind him, and all who would not surrender to Moroni's men were slain.

The Lamanites crowded after Teancum in hot pursuit until they came nigh unto Bountiful, when they were met by Lehi and the small force under his command. At his appearance the Lamanite captains fled in confusion lest they should be out-generaled and cut off from their fortifications. Jacob's warriors were weary by reason of their long and hasty advance, while Lehi's soldiers were fresh and unfatigued. But Lehi refrained from pressing too vigorously upon his retreating foes, as his object was not to exhaust his men before the hour of battle had come, and he was anxious to avoid a conflict till he and Moroni could at the same moment attack in front and in the rear.

When Jacob drew near the city he found himself confronted by the soldiers of Moroni, who closed in around his warriors and barred their further progress southward; while Lehi, putting forth his pent-up energies, fell with great fury on their rear. Weary and worn though his troops were, Jacob would not surrender. Whatever his faults may have been, and they were doubtless many, he had a resolute, unconquerable spirit that would fight to the last. He determined, if possible, to cut his way through to Mulek. With this intent he made a desperate, though ineffectual, charge on Moroni's lines. The Nephites, being fresh and unwearied, never wavered, but received the shock firm as a rock upon which the waves of the ocean break in vain. The battle here raged with indescribable fierceness, and with heavy losses to both sides. The wild Lamanites, in the frenzy of desperation, dashed with all their strength and prowess against the well-ordered ranks of the Nephites in the one absorbing endeavor to force their way through; while the Nephites, in the heroic courage which religion and patriotism inspire, stood cool and undismayed, breaking the force of the shock of each charge, then to receive the next onslaught. In this desperate encounter Moroni was wounded, and Jacob was slain.

While Jacob was thus impetuously charging on Moroni's corps, Lehi with his "strong men" was furiously driving in the Lamanite rear. At last the soldiers of Jacob in that part of the field surrendered. Their leader being slain, the remainder of his troops hesitated between throwing down their arms, or continue the hopeless strife. Moroni, with his intense hatred of unnecessary bloodshed, when he noticed that they wavered, cried out that if they would lay down their weapons and deliver themselves up he would spare their lives. His offer was accepted. The chief captains, who remained alive, came forward and placed their weapons at his feet and commanded their men to do the same. Most of the warriors obeyed, yet numbers would not. They preferred death to surrender, and force had to be used to wrest their weapons from them. The Lamanite prisoners were then sent to the City of Bountiful under a military escort, and when counted were found to exceed in numbers the slain on both sides in the late battle. Thus fell Mulek, and thus died its defender, Jacob, the Zoramite.

JACOB

A Nephite apostate of the Zoramite sect. He joined the Lamanites in the war inaugurated by Amalickiah and was placed in command of the City of Mulek, the most northern of the Nephite cities on the Atlantic coast captured by the Lamanites. It was a key to the surrounding country. While it remained in Lamanite possession it was very little use for Moroni, the Nephite Commander-in-Chief, to attempt to carry the place by assault. Such an effort was not even made to recover the cities along the east sea, yet farther south. The Nephite generals did not consider themselves justified in making any endeavors to force their surrender. Such an effort would have cost too many noble lives and probably have proved unsuccessful. Moroni had with him at this time two of his most trusted lieutenants, Lehi and Teancum, both of whom were little inferior to the chief captain in wisdom and valor. At a council of war it was determined to attempt the capture of Mulek by stratagem. They had already sent embassies to Jacob desiring him to bring his armies into the open plain to meet the Nephites in battle but the Lamanite commanders were too well acquainted with the discipline and courage of the Nephite forces to take such a risk. There was, therefore, but one plan left, other than to patiently sit down before the city and reduce it by a regular siege and that was to decoy a portion of its defenders beyond the protection of its walls and when it was thus weakened, to carry it by storm. Moroni determined on this course. (64 B.C.)

By command of Moroni, the gallant Teancum with a small force marched along the sea shore to the neighborhood of Mulek; while Moroni, with the main body of the army, unperceived by the enemy made a forced march by night into the wilderness which lay on the west of the city. There he rested. Lehi, with a third corps, remained in the City of Bountiful.

On the morrow, Teancum's small division was discovered by the Lamanite outposts and from the fewness of its numbers they judged it would fall an easy prey. Jacob at once sallied forth at the head of his warriors to attack the presumptuous Nephites. On their approach Teancum cautiously retreated along the seashore towards the City of Bountiful. Jacob followed in vigorous pursuit. Moroni, in the meantime, divided his army into two corps, one of which he dispatched to capture the city and with the other he closed in between Jacob's army and Mulek. The first corps accomplished its work without difficulty, for Jacob had left but a small force behind him and all who would not surrender were slain.

The Lamanites crowded after Teancum in hot pursuit until they came nigh unto Bountiful when they were met by Lehi and the small force under his command. At his appearance the Lamanite captains fled in confusion, lest they should be out-generaled and cut off from their fortifications. Jacob's warriors were weary by reason of their long and hasty advance while Lehi's soldiers were fresh and unfatigued. But Lehi refrained from pressing too vigorously on his retreating foes, as his object was not to exhaust his men until the hour of battle came and he was anxious to avoid a conflict till he and Moroni could, at the same moment, attack the Lamanites in front and rear.

When Jacob drew near the city he found himself confronted by the soldiers of Moroni who closed in around his warriors and barred their further progress southward; while Lehi, putting forth his pentup energies, fell with fury on their rear. Weary and worn though his troops were Jacob would not surrender. He determined, if possible, to cut his way through to Mulek. With this intent he made a desperate, though ineffectual charge on Moroni's lines. The Nephites being fresh and unwearied, never wavered. The battle here raged with indescribable fierceness and with heavy losses on both sides. The wild Lamanites, in the frenzy of desperation, dashed with all their strength and prowess against the well-ordered ranks of the Nephites in the one-absorbing endeavor to force their way through. While the Nephites, in the heroic courage which religion and patriotism inspire, stood cool and undismayed. In this desperate encounter Moroni was wounded and Jacob slain.

While Jacob was thus impetuously charging on Moroni's corps, Lehi with his "strong men" was as furiously driving in the Lamanite rear. At last the soldiers of Jacob in that part of the field surrendered. Their leader being slain, the remainder of the troops hesitated between throwing down their arms and continuing the hopeless strife. Moroni, with his intense hatred of unnecessary bloodshed, when he noticed that they wavered, cried out that if they would lay down their weapons and deliver themselves up he would spare their lives. His offer was accepted. The chief captains, who remained, came forward and placed their weapons at his feet and commanded their men to do the same. Most of the warriors obeyed, yet numbers would not. They preferred death to surrender and force had to be used to wrest their weapons from them. The Lamanite prisoners were then sent under an escort to the City of Bountiful and when counted were found to exceed in numbers the slain on both sides in the late battle.

CITY OF MULEK

A city of the Nephites on the east borders by the seashore, about a day's journey south of the City Bountiful and therefore in the northernmost part of South America. It was captured by the Lamanites under Amalickiah (67 B.C.) who placed a Zoramite named Jacob, in command. By stratagem, Moroni, Lehi and Teancum recaptured it (64 B.C.) when Moroni made it Lehi's headquarters. It again fell into the hands of the Lamanites when (34-33 B.C.) they drove the Nephites from all their possessions in the southern continent but it was one of the first cities retaken by Moronihah when the tide of victory turned. (32 B.C.) It is then mentioned as being one of the cities to which Lehi and Nephi, the sons of Helaman, went forth calling the people to repentance, in that great mission which they commenced in the Land of Bountiful and continued to the Land of Lehi-Nephi 30 B.C.

AMMORON

Ammoron was a Nephite traitor and apostate. He was a descendant of Zoram, the servant of Laban, and the brother of Amalickiah, whom he succeeded on the Lamanite throne. (66 B.C.) He was slain by Teancum, the Nephite general in the City of Moroni and was himself succeeded by his son, Tubaloth. (61 B.C.)

Ammoron is not mentioned in the Sacred Record until the death of his brother; then we are told he left the Land of Zarahemla, repaired to the Land of Nephi, informed the widowed queen of the loss of Amalickiah, and gathered a vast host of men to continue the war especially on the western border. He determined to carry on hostilities with unabated vigor, for a time taking personal command in the west. He does not appear to have possessed the military skill and genius of his brother, for during his reign the Nephites reconquered nearly all the territory and recaptured nearly all the cities that had been wrested from them by Amalickiah. Later on in the war, when the Lamanite invaders on the east coast had all been driven to the Land of Moroni, Ammoron was with them, and it was in the city of that same name that he was slain with a javelin by Teancum. Ammoron is brought most prominently before the reader of the Book of Mormon through the insertion of the correspondence that passed between him and Moroni regarding an exchange of war prisoners. In this correspondence his character is very clearly shown.
