Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 53

Verses 1-7

Moroni did set guards over the Lamanite prisoners. We learned in the last chapter (52) that although the dead on both sides were many, the number of Lamanite prisoners taken by the Nephites was more than the combined dead of both the Nephites and Lamanites.

The task of burying their dead, also the dead of the Nephites, was put upon the Lamanite prisoners by Moroni who placed guards over them to see that they did the work and not loiter in so doing.

In consolidating the great victory the soldiers of Moroni had won, he visited the various areas where the battles had been fought. One of his first considerations was Mulek where he went, taking along Lehi, one of his most trusted and efficient lieutenants. It was the same Lehi who was with him at the Battle of Riplah, and also he whom Moroni had made Chief Captain of the Nephite forces at the City of Noah. Of Lehi at that time the historian notes: "And now behold it came to pass, that when the Lamanites had found that Lehi commanded the city they were again disappointed, for they feared Lehi exceedingly . . ." ( Alma 49:17 ) Moroni took command of the City of Mulek, and there in turn gave it unto Lehi, for both commanders were to each other as counterparts, each having the same hopes and sentiments. Again the sacred historian makes this comment: Lehi "was a man like unto Moroni, and they rejoiced in each other's safety; yea, they were beloved by each other, and also beloved by all the people of Nephi." In fact, we may say that their love for the Lord was expressed in the greatest degree by the service they rendered to their fellow men. They loved liberty, the land in which they lived and their wives and children.

After burying the dead on both sides of the struggle just ended, the Lamanite prisoners of the Nephites were marched back to the City of Bountiful where by Moroni's command they were put to work fortifying that city. Teancum, another of the trusted generals under Moroni had charge of that work. A great ditch was constructed around about the city by them which was the basis of its strength. Timbers were installed on the inner bank of the ditch, and then when properly secured the ditch was widened and deepened and the dirt therefrom cast up against the wooden breastwork so an almost impregnable wall of timber and dirt was available to the city's defenders. We might add that this wall encircled the entire city to "an exceeding height." It is recorded that the City of Bountiful "became an exceeding stronghold ever after."

After completing the city's defenses the Lamanite prisoners were still obliged to labor. They were compelled to prepare their own quarters, insomuch that they built a high wall within the city wherein they were guarded by Nephite soldiers that were there for that purpose. Moroni and Teancum had at least two reasons for assigning the prisoners to labor. It not only caused that they build the extensive fortifications, making Bountiful a citadel on which the Nephites relied, but busy hands are the least meddlesome, and therefore busy prisoners were more easily guarded. This left Moroni's troops more intact, so that without tearing his groups apart he could have on short notice the main body of his soldiery unimpaired.

In this manner, meaning strategy and not force, the chronicler of these times notes in the Sacred Record that Moroni "gained a victory over one of the greatest of the armies of the Lamanites." And in doing so obtained possession of the City of Mulek, which was exceeding strongly fortified; it being the key which kept closed the door to any deliverance of the Nephite cities to the south which had been captured by the Lamanites. While in Lamanite hands Mulek was considered to be one of the "strongest holds of the Lamanites" in the whole southern continent. Moroni also built a safe place to keep the Lamanite prisoners of war, and in addition thereto caused that they do part of the strenuous, manual duties involved in maintaining an army.

During the remainder of the Twenty-eighth year Moroni caused that his men should spend their time, instead of fighting the Lamanites, in preparing for future encounter with them, in building more forts and places of resort. But preparing for war was not the only objective of Moroni's; he devoted much time and energy to saving their women and children from want and affliction which always seems to follow warfare even in the way of victory. It was also necessary to store up food and other supplies for future use in case the army needed them.

Verses 8-9

Because of iniquity amongst themselves the Nephites in the southwest were placed in danger. Because the Nephites in the southwest, in Moroni's absence, had begun to quarrel amongst themselves and otherwise weaken their united front by dissension and by plotting in secret to accomplish by intrigue what Moroni and the military leaders had already prayerfully planned, they had brought upon themselves "the most dangerous circumstances." They had lost to the Lamanites several of their important cities which bordered on the west sea. We can see in the history of the Nephites that when they contended one with the other, and where strife and angry passions took the lead, that iniquity was the cause of it all. And we remember God's gracious promise to them, often repeated by their leaders and teachers, that if they refrained therefrom and kept His commandments, they would be prospered in the land. But if wickedness abounded they would be cut off from His presence. In all the comings and goings of the Nephites let us recognize His Hand. In this as in other of their doings.

Verses 10-23

They entered into a covenant to fight for the liberty of the Nephites. The war had been raging for about two years, and was working disastrously to the Nephites, when the People of Ammon, feeling that they were a burden rather than a help to their benefactors, desired to be released from their oath and covenant never again to take up arms or deadly weapons against their fellows. They desired in this hour of extreme peril to take up arms in defense of the liberties of their adopted people. From this rash step Helaman and his brethren dissuaded them, lest by so doing they should imperil their eternal Salvation. But they had sons who had grown far towards manhood who had not entered into this covenant, and consequently were not shut off from participating in the dangers and glories of the war. So with their father's and mother's consent, faith, and prayers, also words of encouragement, two thousand of these youths were mustered into the Nephite army. (66 B.C.) These striplings, meaning immature men, were notwithstanding men of truth, faith, soberness, and integrity. They later proved conspicuous for their courage, strength, and activity. Being organized, they desired that Helaman, for whom they had great love and respect, should be their leader. He consented, and at their head marched to the relief of the forces of the Republic that were struggling against considerable odds on the southern borders of the Nephite dominions, from the shores of the Pacific eastward.

This ended the Twenty-eighth year of the Judges, or about 64 years before Christ.
