Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 54

Verses 1-3

Ammoron sent to Moroni desiring that he would exchange prisoners. In the Twenty-ninth year of the Judges, King Ammoron sent a request to Moroni that both sides of the impending conflict exchange the prisoners that each had taken.

Ammoron's suggestion which was conveyed by a Lamanite messenger caused Moroni to rejoice, for in it he saw the amelioration of a burden that had become extremely heavy for his people to bear. We have already noted that to feed and clothe, and otherwise care for a large number of prisoners was a task which in itself called for an almost unlimited supply of provisions. Large stocks of food which the Nephites were compelled to maintain for their benefit, together with quantities of clothing and other needful things for the prisoners' upkeep, could, if Ammoron's offer was acceptable, be channeled for the well-being of his own people. Not only that, but men released under such a proposed setup such as Ammoron's plan could then be used as needed replacements in the Nephite army.

One thing that caused Moroni considerable concern was that while the Nephites had not taken any women and children as prisoners, the Lamanites had made doing so a custom. Therefore he devolved a plan of his own whereby the Nephites would gain the greater number of releases. Moroni's plan we will hereafter discuss.

Verses 4-14

Moroni wrote an epistle to Ammoron. While the messenger from Ammoron waited for a reply to his master's request, Moroni, undoubtedly with his advisor's counsel, wrote and later dispatched by this same courier his answer to Ammoron. Moroni's answer was a call for Ammoron to repent, and cease his murderous purposes in which his brother first and then he, himself, waged bitter warfare against the Nephite people.

Moroni called upon Ammoron to withdraw his armies from all Nephite territory, and thereafter return to the Land of Nephi which was by mutual understanding the Land of Lamanite possessions. That Ammoron and his soldiers were in the Land of Zarahemla only as invaders and murderers of Nephite men, women and children was Moroni's denouncement of Ammoron's evil plot; and for them to remain there as such would bring upon them the wrath of an outraged God. In His justice, Mormon insisted to Ammoron, the sword of God's vengeance would fall, not sparing him, or any of his army of murderers.

Even in his anger, Moroni realized that his words written in the blood of the Saints fell upon one who had crowded all thoughts of God from his heart. He knew that in Ammoron there was no understanding, and that it was fruitless to tell him of the justice of God, the awful hell that awaited to "receive such murderers as thou and thy brother have been, except you repent and withdraw your murderous purposes, and return with your armies to your own lands." Thus Moroni, despaired of winning a point with Ammoron by argument, cast aside all pretense of forebearance, and resigned himself to that awful conclusion: "Ye have rejected these things, and have fought against the people of the Lord, even so I may expect you will do it again."

Moroni, not fearing the strength of the Lamanite armies, was forthright in telling Ammoron that the Nephite armies were ready to accept battle with them; and that if it again comes to open warfare, we imagine him saying, then "With the help of God in whose service we cannot fail, we will harass you and seek reprisal of you until you are visited with death." Furthermore, Moroni warned Ammoron that in the event of the war's resumption: "I will come against you, and I will follow you even into your own land, which is the Land of our First Inheritance; yea, and it shall be blood for blood, yea, life for life; and I will give you battle even until you are destroyed from off the face of the earth.'

Verses 13-14

Ye have sought to murder us, and we have only sought to defend ourselves. In spite of the fact, we conceive of Moroni saying, that we have only sought to defend ourselves against your wanton desire to slay us, and notwithstanding that so far the battles of this war have been fought solely around our own homes and firesides, you, Moroni again warned Ammoron, need not think that we are weak, or that our wives and children are not precious unto us, and that liberty to worship God as freemen is not worth its price. The cost of these things, O King, may be all we hold dear, but we are willing to pay it, but remember, "if ye seek to destroy us more we will seek to destroy you; yea, and we will seek our land, the Land of our First Inheritance."

Verses 15-24

I am Ammoron, the King of the Lamanites. Ammoron's character is clearly set forth in the angry reply that he sent to Moroni upon receiving the one from him. He ignored facts that even to him were known, and substituted falsehoods therefor. He resorted to the base calumnies of other apostates who beforetime had used them to stir up the hatreds and angry passions of past generations of Lamanites.

In disappointed pride Ammoron accused Moroni of his brother's death, and swore vengeance upon him. He said: "I am the brother of Amalickiah whom ye have murdered. Behold, I will avenge his blood upon you, yea, "I will come upon you with my armies for I fear not your threatenings."

Verse 17

Your fathers did wrong their brethren. Ammoron repeated the old canard that had been held true in the traditions of the Lamanites, that the government of the people, upon the death of Lehi, the noble sire of both races, had been wrested by Nephi from Laman and Lemuel whose right it was to rule. He imagined that to argue thus he made a reasonable case against the descendants of those who, he said, usurped that prerogative in the first place. Nephi robbed Laman and Lemuel "of their right to the government when it rightly belonged unto them." He, Ammoron, offered that pretext to Moroni to excuse himself for making war against the Nephites. He, we conclude, wanted it to appear that he was only trying to right a wrong that had been long in its correction, and therefore had good reason to combat therewith Moroni's assertion that he, himself, (that is Ammoron) sought to wrongfully seize dominion over the Nephites, and to reign over them as his brother, Amalickiah had dreamed.

Verses 18-20

If ye will . . . subject yourselves to be governed by those to whom the government doth rightly belong. . . . Again Ammoron showed his perfidy by suggesting to Moroni that the Nephites lay down their arms, and subject themselves to be ruled by their foes. This amounted to unconditional surrender by Moroni, and would have meant the abrogation by the Nephites of all the rights and privileges of freemen to worship God, to develop under a democratic form of government, and to serve one another to the good of all, and to the glory of God. As a lure to attract the unwary to his scheme, Ammoron offered that in case of compliance he would cause his people to do similarly, and they, he said, "shall be at war no more." But, as future history points out, the Nephites rejected his offer, they preferred death to bondage.

Ammoron did not take Moroni's warnings as grave concerning things that really mattered. He called them threats, and solemnly declared in them he had no fear. He, however, accepted Moroni's plan for the release of prisoners of war, giving as his reason therefor that "I may preserve my food for my men of war." This was, the Sacred Record notes, one of the reasons that Moroni was favorable to the principles of the plan of exchange. Nevertheless, the hard-hearted Ammoron, urged on by his unquenchable ambition, declared that war, now commenced and going favorably for him, would be continued until the Nephites accepted Lamanite authority, or until their last enemy was subdued.

Verses 21-22

Concerning that God whom ye say we have rejected. In words that portended failure for his cause, Ammoron defied God, and set at naught His power to destroy him. Not only did he deny His existence, but also did he decry any knowledge Moroni had of Him. Ammoron, in a stupor caused by ignorance, self-righteousness, and infatuation, failed to see the power of the Nephites that by God was increasing, nor the diminishing strength of the Lamanites that had been upheld by one man's ambition.

Of hell Ammoron confessed little concern, but if perchance there is a devil and a hell, will not, he argued, that same God whom you profess, consign you there to dwell with my brother whom "ye have hinted that he hath gone to such a place." These things Ammoron said mattereth not, but only the war which with us shall be eternal, "either subjecting the Nephites to our authority or to their eternal extinction."

Verses 23-24

I am Ammoron. To give their epistles legal or rightful power, both Moroni and King Ammoron signed what we consider was authoritative documents delineating the stand each side had taken in the conflict then proceeding, but then not pressed.

Ammoron could not miss a chance to impress upon Moroni the implied purpose of the war, which was nothing but an apology for his pretentious demand for authority.
