Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 55

Verses 1-2

Moroni knew that Ammoron had a perfect knowledge of his fraud. Moroni became more incensed at Ammoron's perfidy when he received the King's latest epistle. He knew that no man, however depraved he was, or how diseased his heart, especially one who had been a Nephite, could resort to such accusations as did Ammoron without knowing them to be false. What seemed to rouse Moroni's wrath to the highest pitch was the assertion Ammoron made that the war was for a just cause, and that it would continue until its purpose was accomplished.

These positive averments of Ammoron, together with their shameless presentation, kindled a raging fire of resentment in Moroni's breast. The vehemence of his indignation was immediately apparent in his decision not to exchange prisoners unless Ammoron should "withdraw his purpose, as I have stated in my epistle." To exchange prisoners with him would only add power to his already strong soldiery, and release him from an obligation which he, himself deplored, Moroni insisted.

Verses 3-15

I know the place where the Lamanites guard my people whom they have taken prisoners. Release of the Nephite prisoners of war held by the Lamanites, and a safe return of them to their own people, was an objective of prime importance to Moroni. For him to make an exchange with the Lamanites of Lamanitish prisoners he had taken, for Nephite prisoners, man for man, was not a practical thing to do as it would abound only to Ammoron's welfare. It would give him more power for his war-machine than, Moroni opined, he already had, therefore, I will not exchange "save he withdraw his purpose." But Moroni, ever on the alert to better the conditions of his people, nevertheless did not remain inactive as to the end that they be delivered. As Ammoron, he said, "would not grant unto me mine epistle, behold, I will give him according to my words; yea, I will seek death among them until they shall sue for peace."

Moroni then sought to gain the release of the Nephite prisoners by a stratagem. Ammoron's violation of truth burned deeply into Moroni's heart. He saw at once the character of the man with whom he was dealing, and that in him there was no honor. Moroni, himself, contrived a scheme that in its success was the solution of the problems in the matter then confronting them.

His stratagem was this: to ply the guards of the Nephite prisoners with wine until they became unable to do their work; then when they fell to sleep in a drunken stupor, effect the delivery hoped for. A man was necessary for the accomplishment of Moroni's plan who was a descendant of Laman. One who had all the appearances of a Lamanite. To find such a person as Moroni had in mind, all the men in the army of the southwest were searched out that perchance might be found one who answered the requirements At length one whose name was Laman was found. Formerly he was a servant of the king of the Lamanites whom Amalickiah had caused to be slain. (Alam 47:21-24) As Moroni's plan developed, he sent Laman with a small number of men to contact the guards who were stationed in the City of Gid where the prisoners were located. Here, in the shades of oncoming night, Laman advanced towards the unsuspecting guards. However, they saluted him, thereby challenging him, but Laman knowing the armies' comings and goings, answered thus to stifle any suspicions: "Fear not; behold, I am a Lamanite. Behold, we have escaped from the Nephites, and they sleep; and behold we have taken of their wine and brought it with us."

The Lamanite guards upon hearing Laman's words rejoiced because they said that they were weary, and a portion of wine would restore their tired frames, weary and worn with the toils of everyday life. Laman, however, whetted their craving for a little liquor by suggesting that they wait for it until "we go against the Nephites to battle." The sacred historian informs us: "But this saying only made them more desirous to drink of the wine." After a little more argument in which Laman urged them to drink, though they knew it not, he condescended to their wishes. "And Laman said unto them: You may do according to your desires."

The guards drank of the wine freely, and finding that it was good and pleasant to their taste, drank more and more. Too, it was a strong wine, having been prepared for strength. Soon all were merry, and fell into a deep sleep "for they were drunken."

Laman and his co-conspirators seeing all that had happened, rushed back to Moroni with a tale of success in their venture. They "told him of all the things that had happened."

Laman's story pleased Moroni because it turned out as he had planned. His stratagem was quick to unfold. While Laman and the few men who went to the City of Gid were preparing the way for the liberation of the Nephites held in custody by the Lamanites, Moroni was arming his men with suitable weapons that they, at a moment's notice, might effect the prisoners' delivery. And also while the Lamanitish guards were still in a drunken sleep he caused his men to "cast in weapons of war unto the prisoners, insomuch that they were all armed." Not only did he arm the men who were strong as the Lamanites, man for man, but also he cast in the necessary things of combat that even the women and children "as many as were able to use a weapon of war," were armed. All these things were done under the cover of darkness, and "in a profound silence." However, if the guards had awakened they still were drunken, and in that condition could not have defended themselves. And the Nephites could at Moroni's order have slain them.

But it was not the delight, nor the desire of Moroni or his soldiers to let blood. The Nephites always thought of the Lamanites as brothers; they would rather save them than slay them. Moroni's heart and all his purposes were to save "his people from destruction." In spite of the Lamanite's reckless lust for the blood of the Nephites, Moroni, hating the injustice of such a thing, would not consent to murder them in their stupefied condition.

Moroni had caused, without bloodshed, the Nephite prisoners within the walls of the city to arm themselves so as to master those who were once their masters, and to force them to surrender the strongholds of the city that the Lamanites thought were impregnable. The Nephites within the city's walls took command of the Lamanites therein, and so as to guard against any unprovoked incident from without Moroni ordered his men to withdraw a stone's throw from the prison compound, and surround the Lamanite army.

As we have stated this all happened during the nighttime, and when the Lamanites awoke in the morning they saw that they were surrounded by the Nephites ready to do battle. To their amazement they also realized that their supposed Nephite prisoners were armed. The Nephites, both without and within, were prepared to meet them. In this the Lamanites saw a well-laid plan, and that Moroni with inferior numbers of troops had accomplished with strategy what force could not do. At the command of the Nephite captains the Lamanites brought and laid at the Nephites' feet their weapons of war; the Sacred Record says: "pleading for mercy."

Verses 24-25

Moroni took possession of the City of Gid. Moroni's objective in taking the City of Gid was fulfilled, and his greater aim in doing so without bloodshed was tantamount to several victories in the field. In doing so he lost no men, but gained the release of the Nephite prisoners many of whom joined his forces, and, also, he took numerous Lamanite prisoners himself.

The Lamanites whom Moroni took prisoners were many, and he caused "that they should commence a labor in strengthening the fortifications round about the City Gid."

Verses 26-32

After they had fortified Gid, Moroni took his prisoners to the City Bountiful. Now when Moroni had fortified the city as he saw fit to prepare it for any onslaught which the Lamanites might make in future campaigns, he gathered his prisoners together and marched them to the City Bountiful. One of Moroni's responsibilities as Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite armies was to guard the passage into the north country. Bountiful was the key to its defense, and the city called by the same name was the base of all Nephite supplies wherein that obligation was to be accomplished. Moroni therefore "guarded that city with an exceeding strong force."

The Lamanites whom Moroni had captured were continually on the alert to regain their lost advantage, and were quick to attempt their escape from Nephite duress. The Nephites, on the other hand, were equally awake to the possibility that any pretext might be used by the Lamanite prisoners to effect their release. Therefore all the moves made by the Nephites were guarded, and a watchful care was taken that no Lamanite surprises would disrupt the orderly plan which Moroni had resolved. The Nephites by a constant vigilance were able to thwart any and all schemes of the Lamanites to regain the advantage they had lost to Moroni's men.

From this time forth during Moroni's campaign to restore to the Nephites their "rights and privileges" lost in previous battles, also their homes and lands, they "began again to be victorious."

During the following campaigns the Lamanites sought to destroy the Nephites by administering to them wine that had been poisoned; thus imitating the Nephites that in the guise of friendship they divided their liquor with them. But the Nephites remembering the total lapse of consciousness experienced by the Lamanite soldiers at Gid, refused their offers unless the Lamanites partook of it first.

Also the Lamanites sought to encircle the Nephite armies during the darkness of night. On several occasions this they attempted to do, but only failure rewarded them, besides "they did lose many prisoners."

However, the sacred historian informs us that the Nephites "were not slow to remember their God in this their time of affliction." They were delivered from all the snares which the Lamanites laid for them, and so far as they kept the Lord's commandments, they were benefitted and blessed.

Verses 33-35

Moroni made plans to attack the City Morianton. The Lamanites, notwithstanding their losses in other fields of warfare, were continually strengthening the City Morianton, which was on the east seashore. New supplies backed by added forces from other fields of conflict were making the city an exceedingly strong refuge into which the Lamanites might gather. Whether or not Moroni, despite his plans, attacked the city, we do not know. The Sacred Record makes no mention of it, and surmise is the only solution of the mystery.

Mormon notes that "thus ended the Twenty and ninth year of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi."

GID

A Nephite city, situated on the east borders by the seashore, that is, on the Atlantic coast; apparently not far from the cities of Mulek and Bountiful. In Amalickiah's great raid, in 67 B.C., through the eastern portions of the Nephite possessions he captured, garrisoned and fortified Gid. He also made it the depot for the detention of the Nephite prisoners of war. In 63 B.C., Moroni, by stratagem, placed arms in the hands of these prisoners, women and larger children as well as men and they, in connection with the Nephite forces without, overpowered the Lamanites and took possession of the city. The Lamanite prisoners were used by Moroni in increasing the strength of the fortifications at Gid, which being done, they were removed, for like service, to the City of Bountiful. The only other time that Gid is mentioned is in connection with the missionary labors of Nephi and Lehi, the sons of Helaman. They first ministered in Bountiful and from there proceeded to Gid. (31 B.C.)

CITY OF BOUNTIFUL

The chief city of the Nephites, in the Land Bountiful, situated, apparently, not far from the shore of the great eastern sea and but a short distance sought of the Isthmus of Panama. It was the key to the northern continent and previous to the birth of the Savior none of the invading armies of the Lamanites appear to have been able to pass by it. It was strongly fortified by Moroni and his associate commanders and successors; the Lamanite prisoners of war being used by him on at least one occasion in this work (64 B.C.), until the city was encircled with a deep ditch and a high wall of earth and timbers. "And it became an exceeding strong place ever afterward." The Lamanite prisoners were held within an enclosure the walls of which they were, themselves, compelled to build; their numbers were constantly added to as the fortunes of war went against them. When the City of Gid was retaken (63 B.C.), a large number of Lamanite prisoners captured therein were sent to Bountiful.

In the great mission performed by Nephi and Lehi, the sons of Helaman, they commenced their labors at the city Bountiful and thence continued southward. (31 B.C.)

It seems probable that, in the great convulsions that attended the crucifixion of the Redeemer, Bountiful did not suffer as severely as did many other cities; for Jesus appeared to the Nephites who were assembled near the temple that stood in that land; apparently it had not been destroyed though possibly it was greatly damaged.

LAMAN

Originally a servant of the king of the Lamanites, who was slain by the cunning and deceit of Amalickiah (73 B.C.). When the royal cortege issued from the City of Nephi to welcome the supposedly victorious general and his army, Laman accompanied his master. When that master was treacherously slain and the cry was adroitly raised that his own retainers had committed the atrocious deed, Laman with the rest of the servants fled. We next find him (63 B.C.) in the service of the Nephites and engaged in the army of Moroni, most probably as an inferior officer. At the time that Moroni determined to release the Nephite prisoners held by the Lamanites in the City of Gid, Laman, on account of his nationality was chosen to carry out the details of the stratagem by which Moroni hoped to deliver his fellow countrymen. He was placed in command of a small body of troops, loaded with wine, and sent out at evening towards the place where the Nephites were held captive. When the guards over the prisoners saw him approaching, they hailed him. He told them that he was a Lamanite and that he and his companions had just escaped from the Nephites but luckily they had been able to secrete some wine and bring it with them. The Lamanites at once became exceedingly anxious to get hold of the booty and enthusiastically welcomed Laman. He, very cunningly, pretended that he wished to preserve the wine until the day of battle but the more he protested the more anxious the soldiers became to drink it. This was exactly what he wished and at last, with well-feigned reluctance, he handed over the coveted liquor. It had been purposely made very strong and sweet and when the Lamanites found it was so palatable they drank copiously. Deep sleep followed. Now was the hour of action. Laman returned to Moroni and reported his success. The Nephite general had everything prepared; while the guards were yet in their deep drunken stupor he hastened to the city. As noiselessly as possible he conveyed over its walls sufficient weapons to arm all the prisoners even to the women and children who were old enough to use them. When the guards awoke from their drunken sleep they found themselves surrounded by the armies of Moroni without and the prisoners armed and marshaled within. Deeming discretion the better part of valor their officers surrendered and the new prisoners were set to work increasing the strength of the fortifications of Gid, while the released Nephite warriors joined the forces of Moroni, to whom they were a great help.
