Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 56

Verse 1

Moroni received an epistle from Helaman. In the beginning of the next year, or the Thirtieth year of the Judges, Moroni received a written account of the war in the southwest from Helaman, the son of Alma. Helaman's greeting to Moroni dispels the idea that there may have been dissension among the Nephites themselves. That Moroni was a spiritual as well as a military leader is evidenced in Helaman's salutation: "My Dearly Beloved Brother, Moroni, as well in the Lord as in the tribulations of our warfare."

Verses 3-57

2000 of the young Ammonites have come forth to defend our country. As the story of the young Ammonites told in Chapter 53 is repeated in this chapter (56), we also repeat what we said in commenting upon that same chapter: The war had been raging about a couple of years, and was working disastrously to the Nephites, when the People of Ammon, feeling that they were a burden rather than a help to their benefactors, desired to be released from their oath and covenant never again to take up deadly weapons against their fellows. They desired at this hour of extreme peril to take up arms in defense of the liberties of their adopted country. From this rash step Helaman and his brethren dissuaded them, lest by so doing they should imperil their eternal Salvation. But they had sons who had grown up far towards manhood who had not entered into this covenant, and consequently were not shut off from participating in the dangers and glories of the war. So with their father's and mother's consent, faith, prayers, and words of encouragement, two thousand of these youths were mustered into the Nephite Army (66 B.C.). These striplings were all men of truth, faith, soberness, and integrity, and were conspicuous for their courage, strength, and activity. Upon them being organized they desired Helaman be their leader. He consented, and at their head marched to the relief of the forces of the Republic that were struggling against considerable odds on the southern borders of the Nephite dominions, from the shores of the Pacific Ocean, eastward.

Helaman found the Nephite forces, numbering about six thousand warriors, in a somewhat deplorable condition. The Lamanites, in the strength of greatly superior numbers had captured the Cities of Manti, Cumeni, Zeezrom, and Antiparah, and held possession of the country round about. These cities had not been taken without much bloodshed on both sides. The Nephites, especially had lost large numbers in prisoners, who were generally put to death by their captors, except their officers, who were sent to the Land of Nephi. Antipus, the Nephite commander, was locked up in the City of Judea, where, dispirited and weakened by excessive toil and fighting, his troops were making a desperate and painful effort to fortify the city.

The arrival of Helaman and his corps of young men brought hope and joy again to their hearts, and renewed vigor to their endeavors.

King Ammoron, learning that reinforcements had reached the defenders of Judea, ordered all active operations to be suspended for a season. This cessation of all beligerency was most providential for the soldiers of Antipus, as it gave them time to finish the work of fortifying the beleagured city, and also to recruit their health and energies. By the commencement of the following year the works of defense were completed, and the Nephites became anxious for the expected onslaught they had so greatly dreaded a few months previous. But they were disappointed. The Lamanites did not feel sufficiently strong to renew aggressive movements. They contented themselves with occupying the Nephite cities that they had already captured. In the second month of the year 65 B.C., a convoy of provisions and two thousand additional warriors arrived from Zarahemla. The Nephites in the City of Judea were now ten thousand strong and had abundant provisions for a long campaign, and they were anxious for a forward movement in order, if possible, to retake some of the cities now in the hands of the enemy.

Antipus and Helaman resolved on a ruse to entice the Lamanites from behind their fortifications. It was decided that Helaman and his command should march out of Judea with the apparent intention of carrying supplies to one of the cities in the hands of the Nephites, that was built near the seashore. In executing this order or maneuver, they purposely passed at no great distance from the City of Antiparah, in which was stationed the most numerous of the Lamanite soldiery, in the hope that the Lamanites would notice that their numbers were few, and thus be led to attack them. The stratagem proved successful. The garrison of Antiparah issued forth in pursuit of Helaman, who, with all haste, retreated into the wilderness northward, his intent being to draw his pursuers as far as possible from Antiparah. When the Lamanites had started in pursuit of Helaman, Antipus with a considerable portion of his army, marched out of the City of Judea and fell in the Lamanites' rear. The retreat soon became a race. The Lamanites crowded forward with all expedition in the endeavor to reach Helaman before Antipus caught up to them. Helaman, on the other hand, used his utmost energy to keep out of their clutches. Neither of the three bodies of soldiers turned to the right or to the left, but kept straight on in the effort to out-march their foes. Night came and went, and on the morrow the double pursuit was still kept up. Another night fell, but neither dare turn from its course.

On the third morning the race for life and victory was again renewed, but before long the Lamanites, concluding that they could not overtake Helaman, suddenly stopped, and awaited the coming of Antipus and his weary soldiers, whom they unexpectedly attacked with great fury, slew Antipus and several of his captains, threw the Nephite troops into great confusion and forced them to begin a retreat.

In the meantime, Helaman discovered that he was no longer pursued, and not knowing the reason, was in doubt what course to take. He called a hasty council of war, at which it was determined to return at once, and risk the chances of being caught in a trap by the crafty Lamanites.

The statement which Helaman makes regarding the conduct of his young soldiers at this council is very interesting. After he had explained the situation to them, he inquired, "What say ye, my sons, will ye go against them in battle?" Without hesitancy they answered in the affirmative, saying: "Father, behold our God is with us, and He will not suffer that we shall fall; then let us go forth; we would not slay our brethren if they would let us alone; therefore let us go lest they should overpower the army of Antipus." Here Helaman remarks: "Now they never had fought, yet they did not fear death; and they did think more of the liberty of their fathers than they did upon their lives; yea, they had been taught by their mothers that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them. And they rehearsed to me the words of their mothers, saying, "We do not doubt our mothers knew it."

Helaman and his sons arrived none too soon on the field of battle. The soldiers of Antipus were already fleeing before their more numerous foes, but the valor and impetuosity of the youthful Ammonites was irresistible. They fell on the Lamanite rear with a daring and miraculous strength possessed only by men who put their whole trust in God. Thus attacked in the rear, the Lamanites immediately halted, changed front, and threw their whole force against the Ammonites. The surviving officers of Antipus' army, finding that Helaman had come to their rescue, stopped the retreat, reorganized their scattered bands, and renewed with fresh hope, the attack. The Lamanites were compelled to succumb; they could not resist the desperate courage of the Nephites that was driving them in at both front and rear. Their legions all surrendered, and, by Helaman's orders, were sent to Zarahemla as prisoners of war.

And, now, what about the young warriors of Ammon? So great was their faith, so potent its workings, that when, after the battle, Helaman called the roll of his youthful heroes, not one of them was missing. The faith sown by their mother's words had borne fruit—they were all preserved. To their undaunted prowess, for they fought as if with the strength of God, the Nephites unhesitatingly accorded the glory of the day.

At the close of battle, when a calmness like unto the eventide settled over Helaman's youthful warriors, he took those who remained of the army of Antipus—for Antipus had been slain—joined "them to my stripling Ammonites, and took our march back to the City of Judea."

CUMENI

A Nephite city in the southwest of their possessions, or near the Pacific coast. When first mentioned it was in the possession of the Lamanites (66 B.C.). In 63 B. C. the Nephites under Helaman lay siege to it, captured the trains of provisions sent to its relief and eventually compelled it to capitulate. A desperate but ineffectual attempt was soon after made by the Lamanites to recapture it, in which both sides suffered much loss. This victory of the Nephites was largely due to the intrepid valor of the 2,000 young Ammonites under the command of Helaman. Cumeni is only mentioned in connection with this war.

MANTI

The chief city of the Land of Manti. It was situated near the headwaters of the Sidon and was the most southerly city of importance in that region. Being an outlying settlement of the Nephites, though strongly fortified, it suffered greatly by the invasions of the Lamanites. In the great war, inaugurated by Amalickiah, it was captured by the Lamanites (some time before 66 B.C.) and by them converted into an important base for their operations against the Nephites, both east and west. In 63 B.C. Gid and Teomner, two Nephite generals, recaptured it by stratagem and Helaman took his Ammonite and other troops there and made it his headquarters. It was not again captured by the Lamanites during that long and disastrous war. In later Lamanite invasions it undoubtedly fell, more than once, into their hands as it was in the direct line of the course they generally took when entering the Nephite territory.

JUDEA

A city of the Nephites, situated in the southwestern portion of their dominions, somewhere between the Pacific Ocean and the Land of Manti. It is only mentioned in Helaman's letter to Moroni, giving an account of the military operations in that region (66 to 63 B.C.). In the first-named year it was garrisoned by a Nephite force of about 6,000 men under Antipus, who, by reason of their reverses and the severe labors of the campaign, were depressed in mind and body. At this time they were strengthened by the arrival of Helaman with 2,000 young Ammonites who found the soldiers of Antipus working night and day in the effort to strengthen the fortifications of the city. Unitedly they accomplished this purpose. In the second month of the next year (65 B.C.) 2,000 more men arrived from Zarahemla and a supply of provisions from the fathers of the young Ammonites. In this year the campaigns occurred in which Antipus was slain and the young Ammonites showed such exceeding great valor. After this campaign the troops which took part in it returned to Judea and Helaman appears to have taken the chief command. In 63 B.C. reinforcements to the number of 6,000 men arrived with provisions and the Nephites felt strong enough to carry on offensive operations. They apparently still made Judea their headquarters and the point from which they made their attacks. After this war Judea is not again mentioned in the Book of Mormon.

ZEEZROM

A Nephite city on their southwest frontier probably a short distance west of Manti. In the great war between the Nephite commonwealth and Amalickiah, Zeezrom fell into the hands of the Lamanites. It was in their possession when Helaman arrived in that region with his army of young Ammonites (66 B.C.). This is the only time that this city is mentioned by name but it doubtless was captured by the Lamanites more than once in their successful invasions of Zarahemla in later years.

ANTIPARAH

A Nephite city on the southwest border not far from the Pacific Ocean which fell into the hands of the Lamanites in the long war inaugurated by Amalickiah. They stationed a powerful garrison there but afterwards evacuated it to strengthen other Nephite cities which they had captured (64 B.C.). In after years it undoubtedly again fell into the hands of the Lamanites as at the time of their invasion of the Land of Zarahemla. (35 B.C.)
