Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 57

Verses 1-5

I received an epistle from Ammoron, King of the Lamanites. In the epistle Helaman received from Ammoron, the King of the Lamanites expressed a willingness to surrender to the Nephites the City of Antiparah provided they, in turn, would deliver up to him "those prisoners of war whom we have taken." This offer of the King found no favorable response in the figures compiled by the officers and leaders of the Nephites, for they reasoned that they were sufficiently strong to take the City so offered by the force of arms. In making such an exchange as Ammoron suggested would strengthen the Lamanite army without bettering the condition of the Nephites in like manner. An exchange of prisoners, man for man, was agreeable to Helaman provided it was done without rant or rancor.

Ammoron refused to exchange prisoners as was suggested by Helaman in his answer to the King, "Therefore," the Nephite commander noted, "we began to make preparations to go against the City of Antiparah."

The Lamanites who were garrisoned in the City of Antiparah, seeing the increase of strength brought about by the addition of men and supplies to the Nephite army, fled to the other cities which they had captured from the Nephites, leaving Antiparah almost without inhabitants. Antiparah, now almost abandoned by captor and captives, fell into Nephite hands without a bloody struggle.

Verses 6-12

And thus we had accomplished our designs in obtaining the City of Cumeni. Notwithstanding the fact that the Lamanites had been defeated by a resurgent Nephite army, the hotly contested war continued. Six thousand men, with a much-needed supply of provisions, reached Helaman from Zarahemla and the regions round about (63 B.C.), besides sixty more young Ammonites who had grown sufficiently vigorous to assume the hardships of military life. Helaman now rejoiced to Moroni that at last "we were strong, and we had also a plenty of provisions brought unto us."

With confidence in their renewed strength, and that the Lord, the great Giver of all Good, would magnify it and give them courage and fortitude, they awaited anxiously "to wage a battle with the army which was placed to protect the City Cumeni."

The Lamanites in the City of Cumeni expected that a supply of provisions would reach them shortly from the Land of Nephi, and in this hope they took courage. But evidently spies from the Nephite camp learned of it, and a little before its arrival they surrounded the city with a portion of their newly-acquired army. For many days the Nephites waited, still encamped around its walls, sleeping upon their weapons of war so as not to be surprised by the Lamanites and thereupon slain which the Lamanites tried almost daily to do.

At last, when the Nephites with mounting strength, had caused the Lamanites within the city great discomfort by cutting off all reinforcements both of men and provisions, the supply of needed food and clothing arrived for the expectant people of Cumeni. But as the supply train attempted to enter the city by night, it was met by Nephites, not Lamanites, who took captive the men in charge thereof, and added to their own, the supplies intended for the Lamanites.

The Lamanites, unmindful of their weakening bodies, and notwithstanding the certainty of defeat unless their impoverished store of supplies was replenished, "were still determined to maintain the city." They made many attempts to recover the lost provisions, and release the prisoners that the Nephites had taken in their bold adventure. The continual sorties made by the Lamanites in their efforts to regain what they had lost in needful supplies, made it advisable for Helaman to order that the captured provisions be sent to the City of Judea, and the prisoners to Zarahemla.

The Lamanites soon after their plans of replenishment had gone astray, became increasingly discouraged and it was not long until all hopes of succor were gone, and "they yielded up the City unto our hands; and thus we had accomplished our designs in obtaining the City Cumeni."

Verses 13-23

Our prisoners were so numerous . . . our provisions were not any more than sufficient for our own people. Helaman tells him in his epistle to Moroni that the number of Lamanite prisoners of war the Nephites had taken was so great that despite the greatness of his own number, he was forced by the warlike beligerency of the Lamanite prisoners to use the entire Nephite manpower to restrain them, or put them to death. They, he told Moroni, would break out in great numbers, and fight their guards with any kind of weapon they could lay their hands on—sticks, stones, clubs, or anything having a lethal potentiality. It was necessary for the guards put over them to slay upwards of two thousand of them to bring them to understand that they were the vanquished, not the victors in battle.

It was partially in view of the belicose attitude of the Lamanites who were under guard that the conclusion to send them down to Zarahemla was made. And also as we have pointed out, the question of sufficient provisions was of paramount importance. The provisions the Nephites received from Zarahemla, and also that which they had taken from the Lamanites, themselves, was, when put together, not ample for the Nephite soldiers alone.

To carry out the terms of their conclusion, a large number of men from the Nephite army were chosen to take charge of them, and with sword in hand compel them to march to Zarahemla.

The next day the guards that were sent to watch over the prisoners on their march to Zarahemla, returned without their wards. We, Helaman notes, did not inquire concerning the prisoners because the Lamanites were already upon us, and as usual, were seeking to destroy us. We had no time to seek reasons, why and wherefore, but the return to us of the soldiers sent to accompany the prisoners to Zarahemla was providential in that their return saved us from falling into the hands of the Lamanites to whom King Ammoron had sent much needed provisions and men. The return to Helaman's army of these men was indeed timely as for a matter of fact the Nephite army with its promise of victory was about to be overcome by the Lamanites.

Again the valor and the faith of Helaman's young Ammonites saved the day. It appears to us that they and the men of the escort taking the Lamanite prisoners to Zarahemla, their quick but unexpected return to take up the battle gauge with Ammoron's newly equipped army, was most opportunely timed. While the remainder of the Nephite army was about to despair, and give way before the Lamanites, the two thousand and sixty of these young and inexperienced men stood fixed to their place of duty, and undaunted in the resolution they had made to trust in the Lord for help. In the temporary success of the Lamanites they were undismayed; they obeyed every command of their officers with the exactitude of seasoned veterans, and "administered death unto all who opposed them." To them and to the unheralded return of the prisoners' guard, the credit for the great victory won by the Nephites these last few days was universally proclaimed. In this battle which was fought by the newly vested Nephite army of the City of Cumeni the Lamanites were scattered and were driven back to seek asylum in the City of Manti, however the losses sustained by the victors was indeed great.

Verses 24-27

After the Lamanites had fled, I . . . gave orders that the wounded should be cared for. By the time the Lamanites had fled, the field of battle was a scene of the dead and those who were wounded. Helaman gave orders that "those who had been wounded should be taken from among the dead, and caused that their wounds should be dressed."

In this desperate battle every one of the young Ammonites was wounded, but to the astonishment of every one, friends and foes alike, not one of them was slain. According to the promise made to them they were preserved by the marvelous power of God.

Helaman notes that after the wounded had been taken care of, and their wounds dressed; the dead on both sides of the conflict buried and wiping up operations had been concluded, "we did inquire of Gid concerning the prisoners whom he had started to go down to the Land of Zarahemla with." Gid was appointed Chief Captain over the men detailed to convey them there, but that on their way, he reported to Helaman, while passing near to an invading body of Lamanites, the prisoners made a desperate attempt to escape. A few succeeded in getting away, but the greater number were slain by their guards. Unable to again capture the fleeing prisoners, Gid and his men returned quickly to Cumeni as their spies had informed them that the "armies of the Lamanites are marching towards the City of Cumeni; and behold, they will fall upon them, yea, and will destroy our people." The last words of Gid's report were: "And behold, we did arrive in time that we might assist our brethren in preserving the City."

The delivery of the Nephites from certain death or perhaps what was worse, certain capture, was hailed by Helaman as a blessed gift from God. To Him he ascribed the honor and the glory "for He has done this great thing for us." Gid's report not only solved the mystery concerning his quick return to the Battle of Cumeni, but it caused Helaman to rejoice exceedingly because he saw in it all the providential care "of God in preserving us." Helaman now expressed his fervent prayer that those who had been slain "have entered into the rest of their God."

GID

During the campaign on the Pacific coast, in the year 63 B.C., Helaman, the son of Alma, commanded the armies of the Nephites and King Ammoron those of the Lamanites. After the recapture of the City of Cumeni, the number of prisoners of war in the hands of the Nephites was so great and so given were they to break out, assault their guards and attempt to escape, that their disposal became a matter of serious consideration with the Nephite commanders. It was finally decided to send a large number of them to Zarahemla under a strong escort, commanded by an officer named Gid.

On the second day of their march the Nephite scouts brought word to Gid that a large Lamanite force was approaching on their way to relieve Cumeni. The Lamanite prisoners heard of the proximity of their fellow countrymen, and in the hope which it inspired, they took courage and determined to make a desperate effort for liberty. They made a united break, rushing upon their guards and endeavoring by the greatness of their numbers to overthrow them. The attempt proved very disastrous, for most of the prisoners were slain while a few managed to escape to the armies of their countrymen. The prisoners having all escaped or been killed, there was no further reason for Gid and his company to continue their march to the Nephite capital, they therefore retraced their steps to the main body of the army.

Their return was most fortunate. For in their absence the Lamanites had been greatly strengthened, most probably by the same force that passed by near to the place where the prisoners held by Gid had revolted. Emboldened by this reinforcement the Lamanite commander made a sudden and furious attack upon Helaman, which he was ill prepared to resist. A portion of his troops were already wavering when Gid appeared. His arrival changed the fortunes of the day, the Nephites were victorious. They continued to hold possession of Cumeni but their loss was very great. This is one of the battles in which Helaman's youthful Ammonite warriors made themselves conspicuous by their unfaltering faith and unflinching courage.

Later in the year Gid commanded a small division of the Nephite army in the battle in which the city of Manti was recaptured. Helaman, being anxious to obtain possession of this city sat down before it with his army, which was but a small one. The Lamanites, fearing the presence of this force would cut off their line of communication, attempted to drive them away, and so confident were they that they did not take proper precautions to preserve the city. The main body of Helaman's army retreated before their rapid advance while two small divisions commanded by Gid and Teomner secreted themselves in the adjoining wilderness; when the impetuous Lamanite commander had led his troops the necessary distance they surprised the city, overpowered the guards and obtained permanent possession at a small cost of life. Gid is no more mentioned after this in the Book of Mormon.
