Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 58

Verses 1-17

Our next object was to obtain the City of Manti. After the battle of Cumeni, the Lamanites retreated eastward towards Manti, which was situated on the upper waters of the River Sidon. It was the most southerly city of any importance in that region. Being an outlying settlement of the Nephites, although it was strongly fortified, it suffered greatly by the repeated invasions of the Lamanites. It was captured by them some time before 66 B.C., during the war then in progress.

In the orderly campaign being conducted by Helaman, the City of Manti was the next object for his army to obtain. However, capturing it presented new and difficult problems which the Chief Captains of the Nephite army could not readily solve. There were several alternatives to consider. The Lamanites had a great number of troops stationed there, and the Nephites had many fewer to combat them. To decoy the Lamanites out from their defenses to engage in battle was footless to expect because they remembered the stratagem employed by Moroni in capturing the City of Mulek. On the other hand, the Lamanites being so much more numerous than were the Nephites, the latter, fearing that numbers meant strength, did not dare seek to ferret them out of their strongholds.

The strength of the Nephites was not sufficient to garrison and maintain their reconquered lands, and attack additional Lamanite strongholds at the same time. Therefore it became necessary to await more supplies and men from Zarahemla. To this end Helaman's army encamped for many months on the ramparts facing the city. In the meantime he sent an urgent appeal to the Governor of the Land, who was also Chief Judge, for the needful things. We may imagine Helaman's disappointment when they did not come, and day to day the Lamanites were receiving like supplies and many more men from the Land of Nephi. These circumstances continued for some time, with a growing difference in the ratio of manpower between them, the Lamanites getting stronger and the Nephites becoming weaker. Not only that, but Nephite supplies were dwindling to such an extent that they were "about to perish for the want of food."

At last when hope of succor for the Nephites had almost ebbed, and the tide of adversity had well-nigh overwhelmed them, reinforcements to the number of two thousand men arrived together with some food from Zarahemla.

Helaman notes that the two thousand was all the manpower he received to revive the embattled spirits of his men, and in the fear engendered within their hearts by this seeming neglect, they were about ready to despair.

In this strait Helaman and his fellow officers called upon the Lord in fervent prayer, which was not unanswered. They received assurances of deliverance and victory. These blessed certitudes coming from their Lord God inspired fresh faith, and infused renewed courage in the war-weary hearts of those not given to the love of carnage. Fired with the determination, by God's grace, to conquer, they entered on a campaign against the City of Manti, which, by strategy, they captured before the end of the year (63 B.C.).

The capture of the City of Manti came about this way. Confident that the Lord would bless them that in the end they would triumph, Helaman had his men pitch their tents before the city, on the wilderness side, which was close by. This was done under cover of darkness, for nightfall had set in, and on the morrow when light appeared it disclosed to the Lamanites the army of the Nephites nearby.

Taken by surprise, yet feeling prepared to meet such a formidable appearing foe, the Lamanites sent out spies to reconnoiter their strength and numbers. The appearance of the Nephites caused much apprehension among the Lamanites, for they feared a repetition of the incident when at Cumeni the Nephites captured the men and provisions moving into that city by darkness. ( Alma 57:10 )

When the spies of the Lamanites reported that the Nephites were not great in numbers, they concluded that with their innumerable hosts, they could easily destroy Helaman's army. To this end "they began to make preparations to come out against" the Nephites to battle.

Now the Nephites undoubtedly had their own plans of action to counteract any move the Lamanites might make. So they, seeing the increased activity of their foes, brought them into play.

Helaman caused that two companies of troops should take a position, the one on the left of the wilderness at their rear, and the other on the right, leaving an unguarded path between them. These battalions were placed under the command of Gid and Teomner, who were to secrete themselves in positions that could not easily be found out by the enemy. Helaman, with the greater part of his army remained in the place where they first encamped. Helaman envisaged a viselike movement on the part of his men when the Lamanites came out from behind their battlements to destroy his army.

Verses 18-30

The Lamanites did come out. The Lamanites poured forth from their fortifications in the city, expecting an easy victory. Helaman, seeing the rashness with which they entered the fray, retreated into the wilderness, and thereby drew the Lamanites' army farther and farther from their base. Unmindful of the city they had left almost unguarded, the Lamanites raced after the Nephites with great speed "For," Helaman told Moroni, "they were exceedingly desirous to overtake us that they might slay us." He further adds that their army did "pass by in the midst of Gid and Teomner, insomuch that they were not discovered by the Lamanites."

Now, when the Lamanite army had passed them by, Gid and Teomner came out of their hiding places, and with considerable dispatch did away with the spies which the Lamanites had left to cut off any possible Nephite menace to their rear. With all spies eliminated, Gid's and Teomner's men rushed them and overcame the guards which the Lamanites had also left to safeguard the city's well-being. In this manner they "did destroy them and did take possession of the city," its strongholds and supplies.

After long, tedious marches in the wilderness towards the Land of Zarahemla the Lamanites came to realize the course in which they were going. They became sore afraid, because they feared that a plan to destroy them had been laid, and that if they continued on in the course they then pursued, the Nephites in Zarahemla would surely destroy them. So they began a retreat following the same way "which they had come." When night came the Lamanites pitched their tents for the long marches had so wearied their bodies that great fatigue had almost incapacitated them. They thought that the Nephites were also weary, and would bivouac for the night. They had the idea that in addition to being overcome with weariness, the whole army of the Nephites was in front of them, trying to escape their wrath. In this they were mistaken; however, they gave no thought concerning the City of Manti.

The Nephite army, instead of encamping for the night as the Lamanites had expected them to do, continued their march in spite of the men being weary and worn by the previous day's forced hegira. Helaman, their Chief Captain, caused that his army of tired soldiers, should, nevertheless, not sleep, but "march forward by another way towards the Land of Manti." This bit of strategy brought the Nephites to the City of Manti before the Lamanites who lingered along the way. The Lamanites' return to their former refuge found the Nephites already there, and, who in the meantime, had invested the city and its fortifications with their own men.

The moral effect of this victory upon the Nephites was a great one, and as the Lord had assured them, it was complete. The Lamanites, on the other hand, were filled with fear at the sight thereof, and retreated into the wilderness, eventually going to the Land of Nephi, their own homes. The Lamanites notwithstanding their former conquests, now evacuated the whole of the Nephite territory on the west, but unfortunately taking with them, as prisoners, many women and children.

Verses 31-41

But behold, we trust in our God. Helaman, though tried by adversity and inured to grief, still trusted in the Lord, and saw scattered all about him the proofs of His providential care. He ascribed unto God the credit for the victory they had had over the Lamanites, the recovery of their lands, and their lives which had been preserved. It mattereth not, he said, the reason why we were left without proper supplies and manpower to maintain our recaptured lands, but if it be that some faction from within withholds the necessary strength, we do not know, or that with the available forces at your command, you have been unsuccessful in combating the foe in Zarahemla, and therefore have been forced to use all men in that quarter, we will not murmur; however, we trust God will deliver us out of the hands of our enemies no matter how weak may be our armies.

The war in the southwest was now over; all the lands of the Nephites in that region were now recovered from the Lamanites, and the Lamanites had fled to the Land of Nephi. Thus ended the Twenty and ninth year of the Judges, and peace, indeed a peace founded upon righteousness, and upheld by the people themselves, reigned over the Nephite lands as long as they remembered their God and kept His commandments.

Helaman could not refrain from praising the young Ammonites upon every occasion afforded him, nor should he; they breathed new hope and new courage into the soul of every Nephite soldier, and to them was due, by God's grace, to lead the men of Helaman's army on to victory. Although the battles that were fought were furious, and these Ammonites were amateurs in the art of warfare, not one of them was slain ( Alma 57:25 ), and to our astonishment "neither was there one soul among them who had not received many wounds," Helaman was quick to add.

Helaman closed his paean in praise to God for his mercy to his adopted sons who in spite of their many wounds received in battle still remained faithful, and who, too, stood "fast in the liberty wherewith God has made them free." In standing firm and steadfast, they were "strict to remember the Lord their God from day to day; yea, they do observe to keep His statutes, and His judgments, and His commandments continually; and their faith is strong in the prophecies concerning that which is to come." Such was Helaman's tribute to the young Ammonites who neither faltered, nor turned to the right or left in the performance of duty and loyalty. Helaman ended his epistle to Moroni with the signing of his name to it as the son of a great and distinguished servant of God, Alma, who was the son of another great servant of God, Alma, the elder, who led the Christian believers from the Land of Lehi-Nephi down to Zarahemla. However, Helaman did not bring his writing to a close without first pronouncing a benediction on Moroni, his brother in the Gospel of Christ; Helaman said in his song of praise and thanksgiving, "May the Lord our God, who has redeemed us and made us free, keep you continually in His presence; yea, and may He favor this people, even that ye may have success in obtaining the possession of all that the Lamanites have taken from us, which was for our support."

TEOMNER

A prominent Nephite military officer in the days of the Judges. In the war brought on by the treason and ambition of Amalickiah he served under Helaman in the army of the southwest. Teomner took a prominent part in the siege and recapture of the City of Manti 63 B.C., at which time he had command of one of the divisions of the Nephite army. When the Lamanites within the city, fearing that the besieging Nephite army would cut them off from their supplies, made a sortie and endeavored to drive them away, the main body of Helaman's troops retreated, while Gid and his men, and Teomner with his command, who were hid in the wilderness, fell in the Lamanite rear, cut off communication between the advancing army and the City and then unexpectedly fell on the small guard which the Lamanite commander had incautiously left to take care of Manti. The guard was easily overpowered and Gid and Teomner obtained and retained possession of the City; during which time the main body of the Lamanites were out-generaled by Helaman, who led them afar off into the wilderness and then by a rapid counter march during the night, reached Manti before them.
