Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 59

Verses 1-4

Moroni was exceedingly rejoiced because of the exceeding success which Helaman had had. Moroni received the epistle from Helaman in the early part of the Thirtieth year of the Judges, and upon him reading it he was filled with joy and thanksgiving for he knew that no man without the help of the Lord could accomplish the mighty things that Helaman had brought to an issue of full success.

Nor was Moroni alone in his rejoicing, but that all the Nephites in every part of the region round about could also be glad and give thanks to the Lord, he broadcast Helaman's words of triumph everywhere as seed in the hand in sowing.

Helaman's success in reconquering the Nephite lands from the Lamanites fired the spirits of Moroni and also of all his military officers. They wanted to do in the eastern theatre of war as Helaman had done in the west. Moroni immediately wrote to Pahoran, the Governor of the land, requesting that men and supplies be forthwith, or as soon as possible, sent to strengthen Helaman's army in order that he might maintain the "land which he had been so miraculously prospered in regaining."

Verses 5-8

The people of Nephihah were attacked by the Lamanites. Inspired and inspirited by Helaman's success in regaining from the Lamanites the lands and cities of the Nephites situated in the southwestern sector of greater Zarahemla, Moroni, after sending his epistle to Pahoran, began to map out the strategy in which he saw the fulfillment of his desires for the conquered cities along the Atlantic seaboard. Moroni's plan to recover out of the hands of the Lamanites all Nephite territory in the east was rapidly being perfected, when, to his utter astonishment, the Lamanites suddenly attacked the City of Nephihah.

That city had become the gathering place for refugees who had fled from the barbarities of the Lamanites in former campaigns, and who now were huddled together for self-defense. There were many "from the City of Moroni and the City of Lehi and the City of Morianton," all met together to protect the liberty which God had given them, and each one seeking to maintain the safety of their wives and children. (See Alma 51:24 )

While this huge throng was assembled in Nephihah, the Lamanites, at Ammoron's command, came forth against them. Utterly disregarding whosoever were women and children, they sought the extermination of all. Relieved of the task of maintaining an army in the west, many of the Lamanites who formerly were attached to a fighting unit there, aligned themselves with their compatriots in the east. Thus, day to day, although numerous in the beginning, they added strength upon strength, and resource upon resource, until at length they overpowered the city's defenses. By sheer weight of numbers the Lamanites soon overwhelmed every obstacle placed in their way, and the City of Nephihah fell to brutal strength and savage glee.

Verses 9-13

When Moroni saw that the City of Nephihah was lost he was exceeding sorrowful. Amid all his cares and preparations for the struggle before him, Moroni was forced to rely on those in governmental positions to lessen his task by fulfilling their allotted requirements. He had been assured, or at least led to think, that troops to the proper number would be sent to bolster the defenses of Nephihah. But when he learned that none had arrived there, and that because of inadequate manpower the city was lost before help could come, he was "exceeding sorrowful, and began to doubt, because of the wickedness of the people" gathered there. He wondered in his heart whether or not they were reaping the just reward for their transgressions, and if the Lord was allowing them to be destroyed because of them. This sudden failure on their part to maintain possession of their city also troubled the minds of Moroni's commanders, who saw in it the surrender of good to evil. For, they reasoned, undoubtedly, that if the inhabitants of the city had kept the Lord's commandments, He would not have allowed their destruction, but would have saved them as He had many others in the past.

Moroni, not knowing the actual conditions of the Government in Zarahemla, could see no reason why it failed to protect the freedom of the Commonwealth. He saw only indifference to its welfare, and the cause thereof he was left to surmise.

Verses 1
