Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 60

Moroni wrote again to the Governor of the Land, who was Pahoran. Moroni's righteous wrath because of the Government's non-cooperation in furthering the successful ending of the war, knew no bounds. His anger, kindled almost to a blaze by what he considered unworthy or unjust treatment towards him, was undoubtedly magnified by the distance lying between them; the miles separating them together with what was perhaps an unfamiliar terrain, precluded him from having any first-hand information concerning the difficulties confronting the Governor of the Land, who was Pahoran, the Chief Judge. In consequence thereof, Moroni dispatched a second epistle to Pahoran; it was also addressed to all those "who have been chosen by this people to govern and manage the affairs of this war." Moroni was both abrupt and bold.

Verses 2-18

I have something to say unto them by the way of condemnation. He reminded Pahoran and his aides—although later it was found by him to have been unnecessary—of the important obligations they had assumed when first they were appointed, and then when they accepted the responsibilities of recruiting and arming an adequate force of men to stem and repel the advances of the Lamanites in any part of the land which they might invade.

Although, not in these words, but Moroni's meaning is clear, he told Pahoran that failure on his part and also that of his adjutants to perform their allotted tasks, was answerable as the primary cause of the miserable showing his armies had made in the campaign both in the east and in the west. In spite of all manner of afflictions, they suffering hunger, thirst, and fatigue, he said that his men had carried on with little or no complaint. On the field of battle, Pahoran knew that affliction was expected and endured, but when suffering was multiplied by negligence at home, the expression of resentment cannot be too forcefully presented.

Because of your neglect of our needs, Moroni said, "Great has been the slaughter among our people; yea, thousands have fallen by the sword, while it might otherwise have been if ye had rendered unto our armies sufficient strength and succor for them. Yea, great has been your neglect towards us."

The promised men and provisions had not arrived as Moroni expected them to; the reason, Why?, was an enigma which no one in Moroni's camp could explain. The answer to it was inscrutable. Because of their lack many Nephite soldiers were dying by the sword, and others were laid low by fever and famine. Certainly, there must be a reason for all this neglect by the Government. Moroni wanted to know that reason. So did his men. "Yea, we desire to know the cause of your thoughtless state."

The rebuke that Moroni administered to Pahoran, as Governor, was almost cruel. It scorned his position and derided his person. Not the position of Governor, for that office was created by the laws, but the way he was filling it; not the body of Pahoran, the Chief Judge, but the manner of his being, suggesting indifference. Moroni queried, "Can you think to sit upon your thrones in a state of thoughtless stupor, [^1] while your enemies are spreading the work of death around you? Yea, while they are murdering thousands of your brethren. Yea, even they who have looked up to you for protection, yea, have placed you in a situation that ye might have succored them, yea, ye might have sent armies unto them, to have strengthened them, and have saved thousands of them from falling by the sword."

Not only was this neglect confined to manpower, but needed provisions were withheld from the troops Moroni already had when in fact an abundance filled the storehouses in Zarahemla. But, notwithstanding their scarcity of food, and their need for other supplies, Moroni sought to impress upon Pahoran the loyalty of his soldiers by telling him that sooner than betray the welfare of their country and its freedom, and abandon it to the whims of the enemy, they suffered their life's blood to be shed, and fought the battle of the Lord which was the conflict between good and evil. "And this have they done," said Moroni, "when they were about to perish with hunger, because of your exceeding great neglect towards them."

Verses 10-12

Because of the exceeding goodness of God could ye suppose ye could do nothing, and He would deliver you? Although Moroni was a military leader possessing all the qualifications of a good soldier, he was, nevertheless, a man of peace, dedicated to the cause of his Commander-in-Chief, the Prince of Peace. Like Him, Moroni was long-suffering and devoid of hatred. While his understanding was great, he, however, could not fathom the neglect of the Governor of the Land to send him the needed supplies for the army of the Republic; yet, in spite of the tribulation it caused, he gratefully acknowledged Pahoran and his helpers as My beloved Brethren, and concluded deep in his heart that Pahoran was not trifling with the duties of his high office.

However, the fact of the matter was that owing to the lack of food and other supplies, many of Moroni's men had fought and bled out their lives in defense of God and their country; and not only that, but the battle-weary troops under his command, despite hunger and fatigue were steadfast and true, and were ready at all times to do battle with the enemy.

They, Moroni declared, seeking to lay bare his misgivings about those at home, are united in all things even unto death, that they might preserve the liberty in the which God hath made them free. If you are guilty of thinking that God, in His exceeding goodness, will deliver you from your troubles without you doing first for yourselves that which lay in your power to do, you have made a serious mistake in thinking so. Your actions are more powerful in prayer than are words. Therefore, "Ye have supposed in vain," and as a reward for your indolence and your neglect of them, "the blood of thousands shall come upon your heads for vengeance; for known unto God were all their cries, and all their sufferings."

And too, Moroni continued, if you imagine that because they were wicked so many of your brethren have been slain, the imagination of which you foolishly indulge, I say unto you that it is not so. "There are many who have fallen by the sword," and their blood appeals to Heaven, "and behold it is to your condemnation." Do not think that the righteous who are slain are lost because their dead bodies lie strewn on the field of battle, for, "behold, they do enter into the rest of the Lord their God, Who suffereth the righteous to be slain that His justice and judgment may come upon the wicked." It is an anxious fear that almost overwhelms me, that, by the slothfulness we herewith have endured, the Judgments of God in answer to the cries of our brethren who have been slain, will be visited upon our Government because of its slothful conduct towards them.

These, and many other things to dread harassed Moroni as he remembered that in the beginning when some of the Nephites first attacked their own Government, it was at the head thereof that the first signs of rebellion and apostasy from God appeared. If, Moroni boldly informed the beleagured Pahoran, if all of us had been faithful to God and our country "we could have withstood our enemies that they could have gained no power over us."

Verse 16

The war which broke out among ourselves. The Nephites, very often, were the victims of ambitious men who sought only personal office, or places of power, caring little or nothing for God and His children. In Alma 51:13 , we read the account of another rebellion which was the cause of Moroni's fears at this time: "And it came to pass that when the men who were called King-Men had heard that the Lamanites were coming down to battle against them, they were glad in their hearts; and they refused to take up arms, for they were so wroth with the Chief Judge, and also with the people of liberty that they would not take up arms to defend their country."

Amalickiah was the leader of the King-Men at that time, and in the ensuing battle was defeated by Moroni. Amalickiah then fled to the Lamanites, where by treason and by murder, he worked himself onto their throne. His followers who remained within the borders of the Nephites were compelled to enter a covenant to support the Government of the Republic and the cause of freedom, or be put to death. But few refused to make this covenant, however, great loss of life resulted therefrom much of which being murderings induced by angry passions which were let loose. In his scathing rebuke to Pahoran, Moroni maintained that, beforetime, when peril threatened them as now, contending portions of the people united their strength and supplies, and went against and defeated the common enemy. But, evidently, not so now. The haughty desires of the King-Men had not ceased, and had divided into opposing factions, what should have been a united body politic. They forgot that in unity there is strength.

Verses 17-21

But behold, now the Lamanites are coming upon us. If, as Moroni contended, unity was desirable in times past, he let Pahoran know it is equally so now. As when Amalickiah led his savage hordes against the inhabitants of Zarahemla, the success of the Lamanite invasion was due to internal strife among the people of Nephi. Now, Moroni, almost desperate because the promised men and supplies did not come from the Government, implored Pahoran to send help immediately: "The Lamanites are coming upon us," he said, and as in the past, "they are taking possession of our lands and they are murdering our people by the sword, yea, our women and children, and also carrying them away captive, causing them that they should suffer all manner of afflictions." And all this they do because of the selfishness and the wickedness of those King-Men.

But why should I continue to beg for that which is already mine?, or words to that effect, was Moroni's appeal, as if to shame Pahoran for his silence. Perhaps, you, yourselves, seek for authority, he said, and therein would wrest from them, as other traitors have sought to, the liberty in which our people rejoice, and under which God has founded our greatness. "We know not but what ye are also traitors to your country."

Moroni, still seeking a reason for the Government's lassitude and neglect of him that would dispel the darkness surrounding its motive, opined it may be that our problems are not your problems. You, he said, safely ensconced in the center of plenty, surrounded on all sides by security, are unmindful that here it is different. Here we have no stores of grain, no abundance of other provisions to draw from, and no available manpower equal to the task confronting us; but we do remember the goodness of the Lord to our fathers; how He delivered them out of the hands of our enemies. We may discern in Moroni's otherwise plaintive appeal a note of gladness as he shored up his faith in Him Who is the Helper of the helpless, and of them that have no other Helper but the Lord. He, with all the assurance of righteous endeavor, said, We believe that He will yet deliver us if we "use the means which He has already provided for us."

Verses 22-24

Will ye sit in idleness? Moroni wondered at what he believed was self-complacency as he contemplated the inaction of Pahoran and of his lieutenants. The very thought that they were satisfied with things as they were, enraged him. While many of their brethren were "falling by the sword, yea, wounded and bleeding," tens of thousands of able-bodied men in and about Zarahemla were idling away their time, seeking for pleasure and for that which would satisfy their greed, or in other words, for their own happiness. To Moroni, the very idea was preposterous; they sought for happiness in doing iniquity ( Hel. 13:38 ), but, said the Lord's servant, "Wickedness never was happiness." ( Alma 41:10 ) And to seek happiness in idleness is wickedness. "Thou shalt not idle away thy time," is a commandment of the Lord, and it follows that idleness is a sin. Moroni could no longer bear the restraint of moderation. He became vehement. "Do ye suppose that God will look upon you as guiltless while ye sit still and behold these things?" Moroni again lashed out at Pahoran. There is no question in the minds of the authors hereof that Moroni remembered the words of Isaiah: "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord,"—meaning, no doubt, uncontaminated by the world; in scriptural language vessels are persons into whom something has been poured; infused; servants of the Lord. The heads of the Government at Zarahemla were supposed to be His servants; His vessels. But sin had unquestionably entered their souls, and filthiness had become their portion.

To cleanse from sin, the vessel, itself, must be scoured and scrubbed, not with the unclean waters of iniquity, but by purging everything within them of evil import.

Moroni was unrelenting in applying his criticism of Pahoran. He did not mean to censure an innocent man, but his patience was now exhausted, and the evils that had accumulated along with the growing strength of the Lamanites, so frustrated his well-thought-out plans that, at last, nothing save unity at home could bar his determination to weed out the unfaithful and the untrue. "Except ye do repent of that which ye have done, and begin to be up and doing, and send forth food and men unto us, and also unto Helaman... behold it will be expedient that we contend no more with the Lamanites until we have first cleansed our inward vessel, yea, even the great head of our government."

Verses 25-29

It is my God Whom I fear. Aroused to keen or bitter anger because his soldiers in the field, fighting the Lamanites, were continually being neglected by those who had been appointed to send them food and other supplies to maintain an army. Moroni resolved to take into his own hands the matter of needed provisions. That decision was not easy to make, but he saw no other way out of the dilemma. He thought that to warn the Governor of the Land what he intended to do was the best for all, and he in turn could warn those concerned. No more delay was his aim, and his method to achieve it was both bold and brooked no interference.

This was his plan: That unless the Government at Zarahemla granted, without hesitation, the terms outlined in his epistle, thereby strengthening and fortifying the armies under his command, Moroni, himself, would lead the greater part of his soldiers against those in authority in Zarahemla and take by force that which was needed for the support of the armies in the field. The remainder of his troops which he called Freemen he said that he would leave, with the blessings of God upon them, to maintain this part of the land. In the strength of the Lord and sustained by His blessings, Moroni testified "that none other power can operate against them." And this, he said, is "because of their exceeding faith, and their patience in their tribulations."

Moroni's threat to come in vengeance among the dissident in Zarahemla was bolstered by his conviction that all the inhabitants of that great city were not traitors, and that there still remained "a spark of freedom" which he could fan into a conflagration which would consume all the rebellious "until those who have desires to usurp power and authority shall become extinct."

Now, Moroni insisted, is the time to bestir yourselves in the defence of your country and your little ones, meaning the time is at hand to rouse yourselves to vigorous action in their protection, or await your destruction which will surely come.

Verses 30-31

I come unto you and smite you with the sword. Notwithstanding the appearance of evil in their midst, and the idleness of which Moroni accused Pahoran and his aides, Moroni's epistle was, in the opinion of the authors hereof, rather severe. It would have been more concordant to the manner of justice if Moroni had tempered his allegations with sorrow or pity aroused by the distress or misfortune of the Governor. Moroni knew Pahoran; they had labored together for many years, yet, in spite of the integrity Pahoran had exhibited in the past, Moroni was ready, and herewith announced his determination to force, even with the sword, his demands which were based upon his ignorance. We say, ignorance, because Moroni was without firsthand knowledge concerning the real conditions in Zarahemla. On the other hand, if Moroni had used the language of equivocation, he might have deceived Pahoran, and then the very purpose for which he was struggling would have been defeated by his own ambiguity. Moroni was not given to double talk; he said to Pahoran: "Behold, I come unto you, even in the Land of Zarahemla, and smite you with the sword, insomuch that ye can have no more power to impede the progress of this people in the cause of our freedom. For behold, the Lord will not suffer that you shall live and wax strong in your iniquities to destroy His righteous people."

Verses 32-36

Behold, I am Moroni, your Chief Captain. It is not according to the justice of God to save you from the troubles you bring upon yourselves, or to deliver you in your iniquity, while at the same time deny unto the Lamanites His mercy, when their hatred towards us is caused by their traditions, and too, when "it has been redoubled by those who have dissented from us." The Lamanites, Moroni observed, hated all righteousness because that was the manner of their teachings, while you observe to do wickedly because "of your love for glory and the vain things of the world."

Moroni, [^2] who was always strict in himself keeping the Lord's commandments, could not bear but that his brethren should do likewise. When they did not, he was quick to rebuke. He could not understand why the Lord continued His lovingkindness to those who knew Him, yet who let pride and worldly things crowd all thoughts of Him from their hearts. Nor could he comprehend why God should surround with His righteousness those who were not steadfast in spirit, or upright in heart. "Ye know that ye do transgress the laws of God," he said to Pahoran, so why should He be your protector? Why should He be an ever present Helper in time of trouble? The Lord will not deliver His people in their sins, but, "Behold the Lord saith unto me: If those whom ye have appointed your governors do not repent of their sins and iniquities, ye shall go up to battle against them."

Moroni felt impelled to obey the voice of the Lord, and keep unwavering His commandments, otherwise the covenant he had made when he was a child and thereafter renewed many times, would be as an empty vessel, meaningless, insofar as he was, himself, concerned. Only as a final gesture which the long-suffering of the Lord would favor, Moroni called Pahoran to repentance and thereby cause that bloodshed should no longer be the only recourse of the faithful to the cause of freedom. "Therefore I would that ye should adhere to the word of God, and send speedily unto me of your provisions and of your men, and also to Helaman."

Moroni now put the decision of what to do, squarely up to the Governor of the Land. He told Pahoran: "If ye will not do this I come unto you speedily." He gave Pahoran to understand that his (Moroni's) soldiers would not be alone in fighting for their country, for their God and the liberty in which He had made them free, but that with the help of the Lord, Moroni said, their united strength would be as the strength of men who are drilled and marshalled into an army whose leader is the Mighty Jehovah, the Prince of Peace, and no other. We, with Him at our head, he further said, will march against you for He will not suffer "that we should perish with hunger," but "will give us of your food, even if it must be by the sword."

Moroni now closed his epistle with a firm avowal of faith in Him Whose glory he alone sought, and the welfare of my country, which together will bring happiness to all the inhabitants of the land. God and Country, united in the service of both is what I seek, and in them find not the honor and power of the world which honor and power I despise.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Condition in which sense or feeling is suspended, or greatly diminished. Marked unresponsiveness to stimuli; extreme mental or moral insensitiveness; lethargy. Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.
[^2] Moroni is a Semitic word, which at the beginning of our era had found its way into the Syriac spoken in Palestine. It means Our Lord. We also have, in the Book of Mormon, a longer form of the same word, Moronihah, which we take to mean, Jehovah is my Lord, which gives a meaning almost identical with that of the name, E-li-jah, Jehovah is my God.
