Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 61

Verses 1-2

Moroni received an epistle from Pahoran. Developments now took place rapidly. Correspondence between the Military Commander and the Governor of the State, Moroni and Pahoran, soon solved the difficulties confronting them. It was clear to Moroni that Pahoran was the victim of treachery, and there had been a great violation of allegiance to the Republic when unity and loyalty were most to be desired.

Pahoran, unlike any action he would have taken if he was a traitor to the established form of government as Moroni suspected him of being, addressed a letter to Moroni, not as an unfaithful public servant, but as the Governor of the State to the Commander of all its military operations. Pahoran thus recognized the unity that should exist between them and the responsibilities centered upon the highest political and military authorities in the land. This relationship was cemented by Pahoran by him first expressing to Moroni his heartfelt sorrow because of Moroni's afflictions and for his own inability to send Moroni the needed men and supplies to bolster and strengthen the field army which was under Moroni's personal command. Pahoran told Moroni in his much-delayed epistle that I do not joy in your afflictions, yea, it grieves my soul.

Verses 3-6

There are those who do joy in your afflictions. Pahoran went into quite some detail in explaining to Moroni the difficulties with which he was faced and the vicissitudes through which he had passed since Moroni took his army of recruits out of Zarahemla to battle the Lamanites in the northeast. Rebellion had shaken the government of the Republic until it tottered. Pahoran was beset by foes from within and without. As Chief Judge his judgments were ridiculed, and as Governor of the Land his orders were ignored. Not only did his foes rebel against his rule, but they delighted in doing whatsoever might impede or harass his efforts to unite the opposing factions that threatened by bloodshed to destroy the Republic's solidarity. We may imagine Pahoran's sore distress when he saw that many of his former supporters had joined the rebels, and that numerous of those who were once called Freemen, now were ruthless in opposing the standards set up by the constitutional form of their government. The insubordinate part of Zarahemla's citizenry even drove Pahoran from the Judgment Seat, and substituted one of their own kind in his place. Pahoran took refuge in the Land of Gideon, whence he issued a proclamation calling all ablebodied men to the defense of the Republic. In his epistle to Moroni he noted that "they are flocking to us daily," and in so many numbers that the rebels dare not come out against us to battle.

Verse 8

They have got possession of the City of Zarahemla. The rebels, unmindful of anything except their own personal advantages, drove, as we have noted, the rightful administrative body of the government into asylum at Gideon. There Pahoran, the Chief Governor of the whole land, found inviolable sanctuary, and under the protection afforded by that retreat carried on a campaign of righteousness aimed at preserving the integrity of the Nephite Commonwealth.

The effrontery, or shameless boldness, of the disaffected knew no bounds. They sought to turn the Republic into a kingdom, and went so far as to appoint a king over them. They selected an ambitious leader of the insurgent forces, a man named Pachus (Chapter 62:6) to be their king. Cruel, relentless, and hardhearted, he developed a plan of personal victory which in itself was a devilish conspiracy. He wrote to the King of the Lamanites seeking his help in its success. The bribe Pachus offered him was a downright surrender to the Nephite's traditional enemy. The king's acceptance of the terms of this evil alliance would enable him to overcome the Nephite forces wherever they resisted his approach into Nephite territory. Pachus advanced only one condition upon which success or failure of this diabolic scheme hung. He proposed that his men should maintain Zarahemla. Unhindered by the prospect that in Zarahemla the Nephite's greatest strength lay, and that the Lamanites need not fear an unheralded assault from that source, their king accepted. By keeping possession of Zarahemla and not allowing any consideration for a Nephite counterattack, Pachus dreamed that from then on he would be permanently installed as the King of all the Nephites wherever they be. This dream of Pachus was similar to the dream of Amalickiah's ( Alma 48:2 ).

Verse 9

I, Pahoran, do not seek for power. Pahoran was not hasty to take umbrage at Moroni's criticism of his personal conduct. He knew that if half of what Moroni believed was true, then he had a justifiable cause for censure. However, Pahoran, the Chief Judge, a just man himself, prompt in his actions and thoughts, resolved in his own conscience—that court of righteous and holy decisions—that Moroni was blameless of evil intent, and that his hostile condemnation of Pahoran's seeming inaction was impelled by a desire to see that justice was done his men that they in turn, might successfully defend their homes, their liberty, their God and their religion, and their country. He assured Moroni that he was not angry because of the acrimony the words of Moroni evinced in writing to him, It mattereth not, Pahoran said, but I do rejoice in the greatness of your heart. I, Pahoran, do not seek for power, was the pledge he offered Moroni in explaining, if any were needed, of his integrity to the cause they both held dear; he was not interested in, or influenced by regard for his own welfare save only, he noted, to retain my Judgment-Seat that I may preserve the rights and the liberty of my people.

Verses 10-14

We will resist evil even unto bloodshed. Here, again, is manifested the spirit of the Gospel of Christ in Pahoran's words wherein he expresses forbearance for them that transgress God's Laws. But wickedness, itself, he informs us he will not endure. We will resist wickedness even unto bloodshed, was his counsel. And here again Pahoran offers no apologies or pretexts for his determination to stamp out rebellion against God and man even unto the death of those who carry on. As for the Lamanites, he said that we will not invade their lands, we seek only for peace, but, on the other hand, if they leave their own territory and violate ours, we will, in our defense, shed their blood.

And our brethren, the Nephites who take up the sword against us who are rightfully installed in places of governmental responsibility and authority, we must suppress them even by bloodshed, and acclaim anew the liberty in the which God has made us free. If, Pahoran said, the Lord required that we submit ourselves to the yoke of bondage and give ourselves up to our enemies, we will gladly keep His commandments, in order to hasten the end He has in view for them. But behold He doth not command us that we shall subject ourselves to our enemies, but that we should put our trust in Him, and He will deliver us. Therefore, my beloved brother, Moroni, let us resist evil, first with our words seek to pursuade the ungodly to repentance, then if that fails, with the sword, that we may retain our freedom, that we may rejoice in the great privilege of our Church, and in the cause of our Redeemer and our God.

Verses 15-18

Therefore, come unto me speedily with a few of your men. Pahoran, after explaining to Moroni the sore strait of affairs into which the government of the Republic at Zarahemla had been plunged by the rebellion of Pachus and his men, and also after expressing to him the mutual confidence each had in the purposes of the Lord, called upon Moroni for military assistance in combatting the evil of a divided people—that is, of one being pitted against the other.

Come unto my help with a few men, admonished the Chief Judge, and the remainder of your corps leave in charge of Lehi and Teancum that they, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, which is the Spirit of Freedom, may carry on the war in that part of the land.

We may conceive that Pahoran sent his request to Moroni for aid not without a prayer to Him Whose servant he was, which prayer was not unlike the prayer offered by the Jews today: Almighty God, in all our trials we turn unto Thee, Who art our ever-present help in time of trouble. Forsake us not nor abandon us. Make us feel that Thou art near unto all who call upon Thee, who call upon Thee in truth. Guide us by Thy counsel and lead us in Thy love. And we imagine that he added the hallowed thought, May we find favor in Thy sight. (Union Prayer Book)

Pahoran did not ask for help without giving his plans considerable thought. He had them already mapped out, probably inspired and in righteousness formulated. To stave off hunger and its resultant evils, Pahoran had caused that a few provisions be sent Moroni's troops which should last them until he arrived with help to put Pahoran's plans in operation. Together, they could regain possession of Zarahemla. From its well-stocked supplies they then would send Lehi and Teancum adequate food; Yea, Pahoran confidently noted to Moroni in speaking of the rebels, We will go forth against them in the strength of the Lord, and we will put an end to this great iniquity.

Verses 19-21

I was somewhat worried concerning what we should do. The mistake is sometimes made, and it was made in Pahoran's anxiety to be just, that our brethren always means brothers. We, no matter the color of our skins, are brothers having one and the same father—Adam. But, brethren may signify, not only the plural of brother, it may mean fellow believers in the same objects of the mind existing in thought, or a formulated opinion. In religion brethren are those with whom one associates, and with whom there is no divergence. In the Christian Religion, brethren are believers in the divinity of Christ. In the Book of Mormon, the Lamanites are called brethren by the Nephites, meaning they sprang from the same source. But many times, Lamanites became Nephites by joining their Church which was the Church of God. Thus they became brethren in more than that they came from the same parentage. We learn in IV Nephi that after Christ's visit to the people of this continent there were no Lamanites—all believed in Christ. (See, IV Nephi)

So when Pahoran expressed a wonder that it may not be just for the faithful to God and their country to slay their apostate and rebellious brethren, he undoubtedly meant brethren in the flesh, and not those who were believers in Christ, whether so-called Lamanites of Nephites, for these were not in rebellion. Moroni's epistle to Pahoran settled all doubts on this matter for he had been commanded of God to go against them.

Pahoran closed his answer to Moroni's epistle by invoking God's blessings upon those whom Moroni should leave in the field, especially Lehi and Teancum; tell them to fear not, for God will deliver them, yea, all those who stand fast in that liberty wherewith God hath made them free.
