Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 63

Verses 1-2

Shiblon took possession of the sacred things. Near the beginning of the next year after the death of Helaman, which was in the year Thirty and five of the Judges, Shiblon, Helaman's brother, who was also the son of Alma, took custody of the Plates of Nephi and the other sacred things which their father had entrusted into the hands of Helaman.

Mormon, the abridger of Alma's record says of Shiblon that he was a just man, and he did walk uprightly before God; and did observe to do good continually, to keep the commandments of the Lord his God. This same encomium was pronounced by the sacred historian upon Helaman.

Verse 3

Moroni died also in the same year. The next year, which was 56 B.C., the valiant Moroni, one of the greatest and most virtuous of God's sons, passed away from this state of mortality to the glories of eternity, at the early age of forty-three years. Some time before his death he had given the chief command of the armies of the Nephites to his son, Moronihah, who from the history of later years, we judge him to have been a worthy son of so illustrious a sire.

Verses 4-9

Hagoth . . . went forth and built an exceedingly large ship. The four years that Shiblon held the Plates are principally noteworthy for that time saw the commencement of Nephite emigration to the Northern Continent.

It was in the 37th year of the Judges, or 35 B.C.,—about 5400 men with their families left Zarahemla for the land northward. After this large company had emigrated, Hagoth, an exceedingly expert mechanic, established shipbuilding yards on the Pacific Ocean, near the Lands Bountiful and Desolation. Many Nephites accompanied this bold adventurer in his exploits which at first were successful. He built a large ship on which, as we have stated, many Nephites, their wives and children together with "much provisions," embarked. They sailed northward.

These ships of Hagoth's carried many colonies to the land northward; it was their custom to take one load of emigrants and when they had disembarked, return for another. Some of these vessels were eventually lost; that is, the ships and their passengers never reached their destination. It is supposed by many that a part of them were carried out to mid-ocean by storms, and probably wrecked; and that the survivors found safety and shelter on some of the islands of the Pacific Ocean. In this way, it is suggested, the Hawaiian, Samoan, and other islands there were first peopled.

An Indian Legend. [^1] The coast people in northern California have a story about a mysterious people, the Hohgates, which reminds one of Hagoth. They are supposed to have erected the immense bed of mussel shells and bones on the table land near Crescent City, California. The Hohgates are said to have come in a boat, to have built houses, etc., as far back as the time the first natives came down from the north. They were hunters and fishers. They sailed to certain rocks and filled their boats with mussels. They had plenty of food, and the shells and bones thereof rapidly became a great shell mound.

One day, the Hohgates being out to sea struck a huge sea lion with their harpoon, and, unwilling to cut their line, were dragged toward a great whirlpool far toward the northwest. That was the place where souls go, where in darkness and cold, the spirits shiver forever. But just as their boat reached the edge of that fearful place, the rope attached to it broke and the sea monster was swept down into the whirlpool, while the Hohgates were caught up into the air. Swinging round and around their boat floated up into the heavens. Nevermore were they seen on earth, but there were seven stars in the skies that all men know of, and these stars are seven Hohgates that once lived where the shell mound now is.

This is the legend of the Indians. It is not easy to escape the conclusion that the Indians have preserved in legend the Book of Mormon story which is recorded without the slightest touch of the poetic color of a myth.

If anyone should think the Indian idea of the Hohgates being stars in the sky, is childish, let him consider that the Bible has the same figure of speech. Let him read in Daniel, one of the greatest prophets of the Old Testament, "And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever." ( Dan. 12:3 )

It is a beautiful thought, whether in Old Testament prophecy, or in Indian legend!

Verses 10-13

Shiblon, before his death, conferred the sacred things upon Helaman, who was the son of Helaman. Corianton, Shiblon's brother, had gone to the land northward with a shipload of supplies, for those who had emigrated there, and was therefore not available, as was his heritage, to be made custodian of the Plates and other sacred things which their father had conferred upon his brother, Helaman, the elder. Corianton's youthful life was marred by excesses and other transgressions which made him a special care of his father, but the tenor of his after life reminds us that he sincerely repented of his youthful follies and unbelief. We find that during his father's lifetime he accompanied him on many of his missionary travels, and after Alma's death, he labored under the direction of his brother, Helaman. Corianton survived both of his elder brothers, and at the time of Shiblon's death (53 B.C.) he was in North America whither, as we have noted, he had gone in a ship to carry provisions to the settlers there.

We infer from the manner in which the statement is made, that if Corianton had been in Zarahemla at the time of Shiblon's death, the latter would have transferred the records and the other sacred things of the Nephites in to his care instead of to their nephew, Helaman. If this be so, it is evident that by his later life he had proved himself worthy of such a high honor.

A marvelous thing occurred during the time that Helaman was keeper of the Plates, as also he was the historian of those times. Copies of the engravings which were upon the many plates in his possession were made and sent "forth among the children of men throughout all the land." These copies that were made, however, did not include "those parts which had been commanded by Alma should not go forth." (See Alma 37:27 )

Verses 14-15

The Lamanites were again beaten. There were always some Nephites who being dissatisfied with local conditions seceded and went over and became Lamanites. Ambition and the longing for dominion over their fellows prompted many of them to seek supreme authority. By stirring up the Lamanites to resentfulness for supposed wrongs committed by the Nephites, the Lamanites sought revenge. The brutal and angry passions which lay dormant in the savage breasts of the Lamanites, were fanned like coals into a blaze, and it was not difficult to recruit an army of considerable size to go against the Nephites. In the same year that Helaman was made historian and keeper of the Plates of Nephi, just such a thing happened. A numerous army of Lamanites, excited to the point of murder, made a savage attack upon the army of Moronihah, but were beaten and driven back to their own land with great loss.

Verses 16-17

Thus ended the account of Alma. The sacred historian notes that in this manner the Thirty-ninth year of the Reign of the Judges ended, as did also the account of Alma and his two sons, Helaman and Shiblon.

HAGOTH

A Nephite ship-builder and promoter of emigration. He was a very ingenious mechanic and in the thirty-seventh year of the Judges (B.C. 55) he settled on the Pacific side of the Isthmus of Panama, where the lands Desolation and Bountiful ran parallel. There he built an exceedingly large ship and launched it on the Pacific Ocean. This ship he filled with men, women and children, after which it set sail northward; and having delivered its living freight it returned the next year, again to start northward loaded with passengers and provisions. He also built other ships which engaged in the same trade. Some of these never reached their destination; they were either lost in the depths of the sea or were carried by storms and adverse winds to some of the many groups of islands that dot the Pacific Ocean. In this manner it is more than probable the Hawaiian Islands were peopled with the ancestors of the present inhabitants. The loss of these vessels did not stop the outflow by sea northward. The voyage obviated the tedious land journey through the regions now known as Central America and Mexico. At what point these emigrants disembarked is solely a matter of conjecture and it is highly probable that the configuration of the western coast, northward from the Isthmus, was very different, previous to the immense convulsions and upheavals that occurred at the death of Christ, to what it is today. From this time the Nephites paid considerable attention to ship-building, and the sea became the highway between the two western continents.

MORONIHAH

A great Nephite general and prophet, of the days of the Republic. He succeeded his father, Moroni, in the command of the Nephite armies 60 B.C. and the fact of his father resigning in his favor is the first mention made of him in the Book of Mormon. He must have been, at that time, still a very young man as his father was only about 39 years old but he had undoubtedly been trained from his boyhood in military affairs in the great war of seven years' duration against Amalickiah and Ammoron which had only been brought to an end the year previous. It was not until 53 B.C. that his armies were called upon to take the field. In that year the Lamanites, urged by the Nephite apostates within their borders, invaded the land of Zarahemla but Moronihah met and defeated them and they were driven back to their own dominions with great loss.

In 51 B.C. the Lamanites again invaded Zarahemla. They were led by an officer named Coriantumr. He adopted new tactics. Moronihah, believing that the Lamanites dared not push through the centre of the land but would, as was their custom first attack outlying cities, placed his strongest garrisons in those places. Coriantumr, however, made a dash directly towards the Nephite capital through the densest of the Nephite population and carried everything before him. The Nephites surprised and unprepared as they were, resisted him only in small bodies which were easily dispersed and he reached and captured the City of Zarahemla before Moronihah could concentrate his forces. The whole country fell into Coriantumr's hands as he pressed forward and after capturing Zarahemla he continued his march farther north, slaying great numbers of the Nephites as he advanced.

Coriantumr having thus thrown himself into the centre of the Nephite country and failed to properly keep up the communications in his rear was at the mercy of Moronihah as soon as the later could gather in his troops. Moronihah first sent Lehi, with an army, to intercept the Lamanites' progress northward before they could reach the land Bountiful. In this Lehi was successful. He gave them battle and compelled them to retreat towards Zarahemla. Before they could reach there Moronihah met them. A bloody battle ensued in which Coriantumr was slain and his troops utterly defeated. But the Lamanites were unable to retreat for they were surrounded on all sides by the Nephite armies, all they could do was to surrender. So Moronihah took possession of the City of Zarahemla again and permitted the defeated Lamanites to return to their own country.

It was not until 35 B.C. that war was again declared. The Lamanites, being much the more numerous, carried everything before them. In vain the Nephites struggled for their homes and their liberties. They were forced back by the hordes of the Lamanites from city to city, from land to land. Manti, Gideon, Cumeni, Moroni and even Zarahemla fell. Nor did the war end when the bloodthirsty Lamanites held high carnival in the midst of its towers and palaces. Onward swept the invading host, backward fled the defenders of the Commonwealth, backward they continued until every town and city, every tower and fort, from Melek to Moroni, from Manti to Bountiful was filled with the savage, half-disciplined, dark-skinned warriors of Laman and their apostate allies. Not a place could be found in the whole southern continent where the soldiers of Moronihah successfully held their ground. Zarahemla, with its hallowed associations, its glorious temples, where the daily sacrifice was unceasingly offered, its proud palaces, its luxurious homes, its courts of justice, where the chief judge sat in the magnificence of almost kingly authority to administer the law—this, their queen city, the seat of their government, the centre of their civilization, the home of their highest priesthood was in the hands of their merciless, vandal-like foes. Nor had the danger stopped; with hurried hands the Nephites built a line of defense across the Isthmus of Panama, from sea to sea, for the unnumbered hosts of their conquerors were still pushing forward. This line of fortifications was effectual, it stopped the roll of the barbaric tide northward and the Lamanite commanders rested with the possession of a continent.

In this war the Nephite dissenters took active part against their white brethren and to this fact, in part, may be attributed the sudden success that shone on the Lamanite arms. But little by little, in succeeding years, the half-repentant Nephites regained their lost ground, until (B.C. 31) the most northerly half of their possessions had again fallen into their hands; but because of their only partial repentance their leaders had not strength to lead them farther and the proud City of Zarahemla still remained in the hands of the warriors of Laman.

In the darkest hours of this war we read that Moronihah did preach many things unto the people because of their iniquity, . . . and did prophesy many things . . . and what should come upon them if they did not repent. We thus learn that he, like his father, was not only a great military commander but a zealous and faithful servant of God and a prophet. When this third war ceased he had been commander-in-chief of the Nephite forces for about thirty years and his name is not again mentioned in the sacred record.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hubert H. Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 3, p. 177.
