Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

THE BOOK OF HELAMAN

An account of the Nephites. Their wars and contentions, and their dissensions. And also the prophecies of many of the holy prophets, before the coming of Christ, according to the records of Helaman, who was the son of Helaman, and also according to the records of his sons, even down to the coming of Christ. And also many of the Lamanites are converted. An account of their conversion. An account of the righteousness of the Lamanites, and the wickedness and abominations of the Nephites, according to the record of Helaman and his sons, even down to the coming of Christ, which is called the Book of Helaman, etc.

CHAPTER 1

Pacumeni assented to the decision of his fellow citizens, but Paanchi attempted to raise a rebellion. For this crime he was arrested, tried by the law, and condemned to death. Still the more wicked part of the citizenry supported his unlawful claims. These determined to slay the one the law had elected. A loathsome creature named Kishkumen was selected by them to carry out their rash resolve. He it was who assassinated the Chief Judge while the head magistrate was sitting in the Judgment-Seat administering the law, but through the connivance of the murderer's associates in iniquity he escaped.

These lawless men bound themselves together by a secret oath and covenant that they would never divulge who was the murderer of Pahoran, and they swore by the most horrible oaths, one to another, to conceal each other's crimes, to aid and sustain each other in their villainies, and to carry out the designs and directions of their leaders.

The Seat of the Chief Judge, who also was the Governor of the Nephite people, was now vacant. To fill it Pacumeni, Pahoran's brother, was appointed in his stead. The voice of the people was again heard, and again the decision of the righteous prevailed. The Sacred Record says: And it was according to his right. Whether in the first place, when Pahoran, his brother, was appointed, Pacumeni was next in the choice of the people, or whether or not it was a matter of heritage we do not know. But many of the positions of responsibility among the Nephites were handed down from father to son. So far the incidents recorded in the first chapter of Helaman's record occurred in the Fortieth Year of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi.

Verses 14-17

The Lamanites came down again to do battle against the Nephites. In the Forty-first year of the Reign of the Judges, or 51 B.C., the Lamanites, who again yielded to the enticings of apostate Nephites, gathered together a vast host of warriors and equipped them with all manner of devices both for offensive and defensive warfare.

Thus laden with all the accoutrements of their trade which appears to have been the making of war upon the peaceful Nephites, this innumerable army of implacable foes suddenly came upon their intended victims.

The Lamanite armies were commanded by a Nephite dissenter named Coriantumr. He was a descendant of Zarahemla, therefore, presumably, of the tribe of Judah. His forefathers we think were the Mulekites whom Mosiah, the elder, Alma the first's father, discovered dwelling in their ancient Capital of Zarahemla which now was the capital of all the Nephite Lands.

Coriantumr was a large and fierce looking man who impressed Tubaloth, King of the Lamanites, with his prowess as a mighty warrior. The Lamanite King thought that even the very sight of Coriantumr would instill fright into the hearts of the Nephites, and "that by sending him forth he should gain power over" them.

Verses 18-21

Because of contention among themselves the Nephites had not kept sufficient guards in the Land of Zarahemla. Coriantumr determined on new and venturesome tactics, had caused his armies to divide the token defenses of the Nephites into undermanned bastions where their utmost strength was absolute weakness. This caused Coriantumr at the head of his soldiers to make what to the Nephites was an unexpected dash through their territory. The Nephites everywhere gave way before them. They marched through the center of its most populous and richest districts. Before the astonished Nephites could collect their armies the enemy had assaulted and captured their beautiful and ancient capital, and for the first time of which we have any record the soldiery of Laman held possession of the towers, temples, and palaces of Zarahemla. On this occasion the Chief Judge, Pacumeni, was slain. Intoxicated with his uninterrupted successes, the Lamanite General crowded yet farther north, neglecting to keep up his line of communication in the rear.

Coriantumr's hope was to obtain possession of the narrow Isthmus of Land which was the key to the holding of both continents.

Verses 22-27

Coriantumr's heart took courage . . . insomuch that he was about to go forth against the whole land. When Coriantumr saw and realized that he was in possession of the strongest part of the Nephites' homeland, and that no resistance was offered to his mighty thrust, he, unmindful of its dangers, marched at the head of his mighty army to conquer the northern portions of the Republic. The Land Bountiful was his goal, and supposing that the Nephites had centered their greatest forces in that region, was "determined to go forth and cut his way through with the sword."

The Sacred Record notes that "he did march forth," in quick movements and even faster advances in the attempt to frighten the peaceful Nephites, which thing he did, putting to death many who resisted his tactics, jailing others, and subjecting men, women, and children to the most savage tortures evil power could suggest. The Nephite Armies had, because of contention among the Nephites, become disintegrated and unable to offer any adequate defense and were scattered abroad and only able to assemble themselves "together in small bodies," which their bitter foes, the Lamanites, "did fall upon" and "cut them down to the earth."

Coriantumr suspecting that these small bodies of Nephite soldiers represented the strength of the opposing armies, grew careless, or rather heedless, of danger which lurked all about him. He was joyous in the thought that the ease with which he accomplished his exploits so far would continue throughout his campaign. But in this he was mistaken.

In spite of the fact that there were many Nephites who were slain in the semblance of defense they mounted in opposing Coriantumr's advance, yet his march into the center of their lands gave Moronihah, the Nephite Commander, a great advantage over the Lamanites. Now Moronihah thought that the Lamanites, as was a custom among them, would attack the outer settlements of the Nephites before going to battle the more strongly fortified cities and attempt their seizure. For this reason he had assembled nearly all his forces in the borders of the Nephite Lands. The Lamanites sensing that Moronihah had made an error in calculation continued their thrust northward making a shambles of the locale through which they passed.

Verses 28-34

When Moronihah saw this he immediately sent forth Lehi with an army to head them off from reaching the Land Bountiful. As we have noted, Coriantumr's hope was to obtain possession of the northern parts of the Nephite Commonwealth thereby giving the Lamanites control of both continents. In this he failed. The Nephite commander first checked Coriantumr's progress northward, and then cut off his retreat. In a fierce battle that followed he was killed, his armies surrendered, and its remnants hastened ingloriously home. Moronihah magnanimously permitting them to return unmolested.

The Book of Mormon closes this chapter of Helaman by noting that these events marked the end of the "forty and first year of the reign of the Judges."

TUBALOTH

Tubaloth was a king of the Lamanites who waged warfare against the Nephites in the days of the Judges. He was of Nephite extraction, being the son of Ammoron the brother of Amalickiah and a descendant of Zoram, the servant of Laban. His father was killed by the Nephite general Teancum (61 B.C.), and it is probable that he succeeded his father on the throne though he is not mentioned by name until ten years afterwards. (51 B.C.)

The death of Ammoron ended one of the most disastrous and long-continued wars that had ever devastated the lands of the Nephites and appears to have been terminated by the Lamanites from pure exhaustion. It was not until eight years afterwards that they again invaded the territory of their traditional enemies when they were then driven back to their own lands with great loss. Two years later Tubaloth gathered and equipped an immense army which he placed under the command of a general named Coriantumr, who disregarding the old tactics of the Lamanites in attacking the outer fringes of the territory of the Nephites before invading its principal cities, marched directly to the City of Zarahemla, which he surprised and captured. Coriantumr at the head of his army then continued his march northward towards the Land Bountiful. But he was outgeneraled and utterly defeated by the Nephites, he, himself, being slain; the remnants of his army were allowed by Moronihah to return to their own land.

So disastrous was this campaign that for sixteen years Nephite soil was free from the tread of the invader. We have no means to tell whether Tubaloth was still king when the Lamanites recommenced hostilities in 35 B.C.

CORIANTUMR

Coriantumr was a descendant of Zarahemla, and consequently was most likely of Judah. Originally he was a Nephite, but like many others during the days of the Judges, he dissented and went over to the Lamanites. He was a man of commanding presence, of more than ordinary stature and brilliant parts, with a reputation for wisdom which his later course scarcely appears to warrant. Tubaloth, the son of Ammoron, king of the Lamanites, gave him high office, and when (51 B.C.) the invasion of Zarahemla was determined upon, Coriantumr was placed in command of a vast host which was well armed and was raised particularly for that purpose.

At this time through internal dissensions the Nephites were weak and distracted. Their Chief Judge, Pahoran, had been slain the year previous by a hired assassin and his brother Pacumeni had just been elected to fill the vacancy. Apparently matters were still in an unsettled state when Coriantumr suddenly made a rapid dash down the banks of the River Sidon through the most thickly populated portions of the Nephite territory. Everywhere the people were unprepared to withstand his progress and so rapid was his advance that the Nephites had not time to gather their forces. He unexpectedly, through forced marches, reached the City of Zarahemla, cut down the weak guard at the entrance of the city and with his whole army entered the capital of the Nephites in triumph. The Chief Judge of the Republic, Pacumeni, attempted to escape, but was followed and captured at the city walls, where he was slain by Coriantumr, himself.

The Lamanite general appears to have acted with great severity, if not cruelty, towards the citizens of the conquered city. He slew many, others were cast into prison, and he, made himself undisputed master of all it contained.

This easy victory greatly emboldened Coriantumr. He determined to carry out the same maneuvers, and if possible, obtain command of the northern parts of the land. Therefore, leaving a portion of his forces to garrison Zarahemla, he marched rapidly northward at the head of a large army. The small bands of Nephite patriots who hastily gathered to oppose his progress were met in detail and overwhelmed. The number of their slain was very large.

Moronihah, the Nephite general, had anticipated that Coriantumr, following the usual custom of the Lamanite leaders, would first attack the most exposed and outlying cities and consequently had posted there his armies of defense. Coriantumr's maneuver was therefore a complete surprise to him and it took some little time before he could gather his troops to do effective service. In the meantime the Lamanites continued their victorious march northward, capturing many cities and slaying multitudes of men, women, and children. Coriantumr's success so intoxicated him that he became reckless and lost his reputed wisdom and prudence and he neglected to keep up the line of communication in his rear. As he neared the Land of Bountiful, he was met by the veteran soldier, Lehi, who gave him battle. His former fortune forsook him, and he was compelled to retire. While making his way as directly as he could to Zarahemla, Lehi followed in pursuit, Coriantumr was confronted by Moronihah, the Nephite Commander-in-Chief, when a bloody battle ensued and Coriantumr was slain. The Lamanites were now in a most perplexing position; they were defeated and that in the midst of the enemy's territory, and so completely surrounded by the Nephites that there was no road open for retreat. They could take but one course which was to surrender, which they did.

When Moronihah reoccupied the City of Zarahemla he released the Lamanite prisoners and permitted them to return to their own lands in peace. Thus ended a bloody and ineffectual campaign, and thus terminated the life of one of the most brilliant, if not the most successful, commanders that ever led the hosts of Laman.

PAHORAN, the YOUNGER

At the death of Pahoran, the first Chief Judge of that name who ruled the Nephites, a contention arose among three of his sons (Pahoran, Paanchi, and Pacumeni) as to which one of them should succeed him. As is usual in such cases, each son had his own followers, causing much dissension, trouble, and confusion among the Nephites. (52 B.C.) The question was decided by the votes of the citizens of the Republic, who chose Pahoran to be Chief Judge and Governor over the People of Nephi. In this decision Pacumeni acquiesced, but Paanchi raised the standard of revolt.

Pahoran retained the Judgment-Seat but a short time. He was foully assassinated when in the execution of his duty by one Kishkumen, a leader among the Gadianton Robbers and an adherent of the Paanchi faction. So speedy was the flight of the murderer and so well was he disguised that he was not captured.

These things all took place in the fortieth year of the Judges, and Pacumeni was appointed to fill the place rendered vacant by the murder of Pahoran.

The only noteworthy event that took place during his short rule was the commencement of the organization of that terrible band, the Gadianton Robbers.

PACUMENI

At the death of Pahoran the elder, who was the Nephite Chief Judge, three of his sons contended for the successorship. The people, whom their law gave the voice in choosing who should follow on the Judgment-Seat, named Pahoran, the younger. To this choice, Pacumeni assented, while the other brother, Paanchi, rose in rebellion. Shortly thereafter Pahoran was assassinated by Kishkumen, a follower of Paanchi, and thereupon Pacumeni was chosen to occupy the coveted Seat by the righteous who seemed to predominate the affairs of the Republic. All this occurred in the fortieth year of the Judges, or 52 B.C.

In the following year, the Lamanites gathered an innumerable army and invaded the Land of Zarahemla. Their commander was an apostate Nephite whose name was Coriantumr. He led his vast hosts directly towards the Nephite capital, which he surprised and captured, the Nephites still suffering from the effects of the late divisions and contentions that had so crippled their defense potential. This was the first time, so far as we have any record, that the City of Zarahemla fell into the hands of the Lamanites.

Pacumeni fled before Coriantumr when he found the city was surprised, the watch slain, and its streets filled with hostile troops, but he was overtaken before he could pass beyond its walls, and was smitten to death by the hands of Coriantumr "against the wall."

PAANCHI

Paanchi was a son of Pahoran, the elder, who upon the death of his father aspired to the vacant Judgment-Seat. When the choice of the Nephite people fell upon his brother Pahoran, the younger, Paanchi raised the standard of revolt in which he was sustained by the sympathies of a large body of the people. Before he could put his revolutionary intentions into action, he was arrested, tried, and condemned to death. (52 B.C.) This prompt action excited great anger among his followers, and they employed an assassin named Kishkumen, who was a prominent man among them, to murder the new Chief Judge. This he successfully accomplished without discovery. It was among the dissatisfied and turbulent followers of Paanchi that the Gadianton Robbers appear to have had their origin.

KISHKUMEN

Kishkumen was the assassin who murdered the Chief Judge, Pahoran, the younger. He was a leader among the Gadianton Robbers at the time of the organization of their marauding bands. In the year 52 B.C., Pahoran, the Chief Judge of the Nephite commonwealth, died, which event gave rise to serious contentions among the Nephite people. Three of his sons, Pahoran, Pacumeni, and Paanchi, were ambitious to fill the exalted position left vacant by their father's death. Each had his adherents and many friends, but according to the national law the matter was decided by the voice of the people and Pahoran was chosen.

Pacumeni assented to the decision of the citizens, but Paanchi attempted to stir up a rebellion for which crime he was arrested, tried, and condemned to death. Still, the more wicked part of the community supported his unlawful claims. These determined to kill Pahoran, which resolve they carried into effect and the Chief Judge was slain by Kishkumen. This foul murder was committed while the Chief Magistrate was sitting in the Judgment Seat administering the law, but through the connivance of the murderer's associates in iniquity he escaped. Pacumeni, Pahoran's brother, was next elected Chief Judge, but he was slain in war the following year.

In 50 B.C. Helaman, the son of Helaman, was chosen to fill the Judgment-Seat. Being a righteous man, his election was very distasteful to the Gadianton Robbers. They determined to slay him as they had slain Pahoran, and the same vile instrument was chosen to do the murderous work. As Kishkumen was on his way to fulfill his bloody errand a servant of Helaman, whose name is not recorded, met him and gave him one of the secret signs of the Gadiantons. This admitted him into the confidence of the would-be assassin who explained his purpose and asked to be conducted into the Judgment Hall where Helaman was then sitting in the performance of his duties. This was agreed upon; the two proceeded to where the murderer expected to find his victim. The strategy of the attendant disarmed Kishkumen's suspicions. At the opportune time the servant stabbed Kishkumen, and so adroitly did he perform his work that the assassin fell dead without a groan. The servant immediately ran to the Judgment Hall and informed Helaman of all that he had heard, seen, and done. Without delay orders were issued for the arrest of all the band, but its members, finding that Kishkumen did not return, fled precipitately into the wilderness beyond the reach of the officers sent to arrest them.
