Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 2

Verses 1-2

Helaman, who was the son of Helaman, was appointed to fill the Judgment-Seat. When Moronihah had successfully established peace between the warring factions of the Nephites and Lamanites, the Nephites saw, to their dismay, that no one among them occupied the Judgment-Seat. Pacumeni, who was Chief Judge when the Lamanites under Coriantumr suddenly invaded Zarahemla, was slain by Coriantumr at the beginning of that sanguinary conflict, and with the death of the Chief Judge, and no successor being named to succeed him, there was no civilian at the head of the Republic as the Chief Judge was also the Governor of the people.

This uncertain state of governmental affairs fomented a rapidly growing contention among the Nephites which soon was open revolt as to who should succeed to that lofty position. There were several who aspired to fill the Judgment-Seat, and each one had a following. The law provided the people, themselves, should make the choice. This they did, and Helaman, the son of Helaman and the grandson of Alma, the first Chief Judge, was appointed to fill the vacancy.

Verses 3-5

There was one Gadianton, who was very expert in the use of many words, and also in his craft of murder . . . The choice of Helaman to be Chief Judge was a great disappointment to the followers and sympathizers of Kishkumen who had murdered Pahoran, the younger, as he sat upon the Judgment-Seat administering the law. A cabal was formed, or a secret association of a few designing persons to force upon the masses their unhallowed will. Through trickery and guile they increased the number of those who promised to do their bidding. By deceitful cunning they made their intent seem plausible to many. They grew bold in their wickedness. The Sacred Record states "There was one Gadianton, who was exceeding expert in many words, and also in his craft, to carry on the secret work of murder and of robbery; therefore he became the leader of the band of Kishkumen." And again, "He did flatter them, and also Kishkumen, that if they would place him in the Judgment-Seat he would grant unto those who belonged to his band that they should be placed in power and authority among the people." To this end they resolved that Helaman should meet the same fate that befell Pahoran. They knew that their hopes and unrighteous desires for positions of "power and authority among the people" would not be realized as long as he was head of the government. Helaman was a God-fearing man, who was just to all and who judged righteous judgment. Therefore, the members of this band of robbers and despoilers, bound themselves together with the most vicious oaths and covenants that no one should know of their wickedness, and further that they would shield and aid each other in whatsoever sins and iniquities they might commit. "Therefore Kishkumen sought to destroy Helaman."

Verses 6-9

And it came to pass that as Kishkumen went forth . . . to destroy Helaman. . . . As Kishkumen was on his way to fulfill his bloody work, a servant of Helaman met him, possibly a detective commissioned in such cases to watch the movements of the dangerous classes, and who by disguise had become acquainted with the doings of the robber band, and of their intentions toward his master. This servant, whose name is not recorded, gave Kishkumen one of the band's secret signs. This admitted him into the confidence of the assassin, who explained his errand, and asked to be conducted privately into the Judgment Hall where Helaman was then sitting in the performance of his duties. This was agreed upon; the two proceeded to where the murderer expected to find his victim.

Now the servant of Helaman whose duty was to protect his master obtained from Kishkumen a full and complete explanation of his motives in going to the Judgment Hall. He learned in almost detail the purposes for which the robber band strove. That the object of their "secret plan, and their combination" was "to murder, and to rob, and to gain power." Having satisfied himself that Kishkumen was abroad seeking to bring to pass the designs of the wicked band of Gadianton's, invited Kishkumen: Let us go forth unto the Judgment Seat.

Kishkumen thereupon thought that he had an accomplice, or an associate in his guilt. He was pleased with the prospect that awaited his base deed. No doubt he hoped to utilize its pernicious effects to better his own lot, or to abet, encourage, and support, those of his band in the commission of offenses. This threw Kishkumen off his guard. The strategy of the servant disarmed his suspicions. As they were going to the Judgment Hall, at an opportune time, the servant drew a sharp dagger or knife and stabbed Kishkumen so adroitly in the heart that he died without a groan. The servant immediately ran to the Judgment Hall, and informed Helaman of all that he had heard, seen, and done.

Verses 10-11

Helaman did send forth to take this band of robbers. Without any delay, Helaman issued orders for the arrest of all the known members of the Gadianton Band, but they, finding that Kishkumen did not return from his nefarious, or heniously and impiously wicked errand, under the guidance of their leader, fled precipitately into the wilderness by a secret way, and, in the depths of its lonely expanse, hid in a place where they could not be found. (50 B.C.)

Verse 12

More of this Gadianton shall be spoken hereafter. (See Gadianton, at end of Chapter.)

Verses 13-14

You shall see that this Gadianton did prove the overthrow and destruction of the people of Nephi. The future history of both the Nephites and Lamanites is deeply tinged with the abuses of governmental authority imposed upon the people by this band of murderers and robbers. Except during the long reign of peace which followed the visit of Christ to the inhabitants of this land, when there were none but the righteous, and when all men dealt justly with their neighbors, this wicked combination foisted numerous unworthy schemes upon their compatriots which usually brought disaster to all. Even after the days of heavenly joy marked by Christ's personal appearance, the Gadianton Band again was instituted as a form of government, and to its baleful influence may be attributed many of the atrocities and abominations that disgraced the last wars between the Nephites and the Lamanites. (See Gadianton Robbers at end of Chapter.)

HELAMAN, the SECOND or the Son of Helaman

The life of this patriarch is not given with the same details in the inspired record as are those of his father and his illustrious son, Nephi. In the year 53 B.C. he was entrusted with the care of the sacred plates by his uncle Shiblon, and three years later he was elected by the Nephite People to be their Chief Judge, in which office he administered the law with justice and equity until the year 39 B.C. when he died.

Helaman had two sons, whom he named after the first fathers of his people—Nephi and Lehi. It was his older son, the righteous and faithful Nephi, who succeeded him on the Judgment-Seat and who also took care of the Sacred Plates and the other holy things that accompanied them.

The few years that preceded the elevation of Helaman to the Judgment-Seat were among the most important in Nephite history, for at that time arose that terrible and devilish organization, the Gadianton Robbers, who for so many years cursed the inhabitants of ancient America.

Helaman, being a God-fearing and just man, his election to be the Chief Magistrate was distasteful to the Gadianton band and its sympathizers. They resolved to slay him, as they had before slain the younger Pahoran and place Gadianton on the Judgment-Seat in his stead. To accomplish this, the same vile instrument was chosen—Kishkumen. But the protecting hand of the Great Jehovah was over and about Helaman and He preserved him from the assassin's knife. A servant of Helaman, by disguise became acquainted with the doings of the Robber Band and of their intentions toward his master. As Kishkumen was on his way to fulfill his bloody work, this servant, whose name is not recorded, met him and gave him one of their secret signs. This admitted him into the confidence of the assassin who explained his errand and asked to be conducted privately into the Judgment Hall where Helaman was then sitting in the performance of his duties. This was agreed upon; the two proceeded to where the murderer expected to find his victim. The strategy of the servant had disarmed suspicion—Kishkumen was off his guard. At the opportune moment the servant stabbed him, and so adroitly did he perform his work that the robber fell dead without a groan. The servant immediately ran to the Judgment Hall and informed Helaman all that he had heard, seen, and done. Without delay, orders were issued for the arrest of the band, but its members, finding that Kishkumen did not return, and fearing that he had miscarried in his unholy work, under the guidance of their leader, fled precipitately into the wilderness by a secret way and in the depth of its luxurient vegetation hid in a place where they could not be found.

The succeeding years were of peculiar prosperity, though not of great righteousness among the Nephite People. They spread out and colonized in every direction. Many thousands emigrated to the northern continent, among them great numbers of the Ammonites, who were originally Lamanites. Numerous new cities were built and the old ones repaired; ship-building was largely carried on and the arts and manufacturies encouraged. Temples, tabernacles and sanctuaries were erected in great numbers; in fact, the people spread out and covered both continents north and south, east and west. The historian of the Sacred Record states that he has not recorded onehundredth part of the doings of the people—their wickedness and righteousness, their wars and contentions, their peace and prosperity; but many records were kept upon which the history of those things were engraved, all of which will be brought to light in Heaven's own time.

The annals of the remainder of Helaman's rule are very short. In the years 45 and 44 B.C. there were many contentions in the land, but the latter portion of the succeeding year they measurably ceased and tens of thousands were baptized unto repentance. So great was the prosperity of the Church at this time that even those who held the Priesthood were surprised thereat, and at the multiplicity of the blessings that were poured out upon the people. This happy state of affairs continued after the death of Helaman, though they were somewhat marred by the increasing pride and vanity that long-continued prosperity had begotten in the hearts of many of the Church members.

GADIANTON

Gadianton was a Nephite apostate; the founder and first leader of the robber bands that bore his name. He is first mentioned in connection with the attempt by Kishkumen to assassinate Helaman, the Chief Judge, 50 B.C. At that time Gadianton had organized his band and bound its members together with the most horrible and blasphemous oaths and covenants to stand by and protect each other in all their treasons, villainies, and crimes. These oaths and secret compacts had not been searched out of the old records by Gadianton, but that same being who had revealed them to Cain, the first murderer, had whispered them to him. Gadianton was a crafty, capable man, full of strategy and cunning; a flatterer and an expert in the use of many words; and at this time he desired to be elected Chief Judge of the Nephite Commonwealth. To this ambition his followers gave full consent, as he promised them that when elected, they should fill the offices of honor and profit which would be at his disposal. It was decided in their secret meetings that Helaman should be slain to make way for Gadianton, and Kishkumen, one of his trusted lieutenants, was chosen to do the murderous work. Kishkumen made the attempt but failed, Kishkumen, himself, being slain. Finding their envoy did not return from his intended foray, and that the officers of the law were searching for them, the band, under Gadianton's direction, fled into the hills and the wilderness, which became their places of retreat ever afterwards when they were threatened by the more righteous part of the community—Nephite or Lamanite. Of Gadianton's private life we have no further record.

GADIANTON ROBBERS

Of all the factions that separated themselves from the Nephites none worked so much injury to the people as did the bands of the Gadianton Robbers. The very fact of their organization shows the deplorable condition of Nephite society; while their continuance and growth proclaims yet more loudly and emphatically how debased the community had become.

The Gadiantons were at first (52 B.C.), apparently, a band of robbers and murderers, bound together by the most horrible oaths of secrecy and satanic covenants, to aid and shield each other in whatever sins and iniquities they might commit.

These covenants did not originate with Gadianton or any of his crew. They were as old as the days of Cain, into whose ear the Son of Perdition whispered these bloodthirsty and infernal suggestions. These same secret societies flourished among the antediluvians and had place with the Jaredites and other peoples of antiquity. In the end they invariably wrought ruin and destruction wherever they found a foothold. To their abominations can be traced the fall and extinction of both the Jaredite and Nephite races.

As time went on the Gadiantons among the Nephites aspired to rule the Republic. When, by their combinations, they could not carry their point at the elections they would murder, or attempt to murder, any judge or other officer who was distasteful to them and place a more acceptable man in his seat. So fell more than one of the Nephite Chief Judges. But they frequently had no need to do this, for as the people increased in iniquity they could easily carry the majority or the voice of the people with them. In this way several of their numbers were elected to the Chief Judgeship.

After the time of the conversion of the Lamanites by Lehi and Nephi (30 B.C.) the Gadianton Robbers took their place in the history of ancient America. The divisions then became the righteous Nephites and Lamanites on one side and the Gadiantons on the other. And, strange as it may appear, these robber bands received greater encouragement and attained to greater power among the Nephites than among the Lamanites; but the fact is, that in that era the Lamanites were a growing race, while the Nephites were a decaying one. Many wars ensued between these two divisions, ending sometimes in the temporary suppression of the robbers, as in the year 17 B.C. But they soon reappeared as they did five years after the instance here mentioned (12 B.C.). The most momentous of all these wars was the one that was waged during the earthly life of our Savior. It virtually commenced in the second year of his mortal existence, and continued with slight intermissions until the twenty-first. So powerful and arrogant had the robbers grown in that age that Giddianhi, their leader, in 16 A.D. wrote an epistle to Lachoneus, the Chief Judge, calling upon the Nephites to submit themselves to the robbers and their ways, to accept their oaths and covenants, and in all things become like unto them. The presumption of the robber chief does not appear to have been without foundation, for so desperate had the condition of the people become that Lachoneus devised and carried out the stupendous movement of gathering them all, both Nephites and Lamanites, to one land, where they would be safe by consolidation and be able to wear out the robbers by masterly inactivity. In this he succeeded, and the robber bands were destroyed by privation, famine, and the sword.

After the days of Jesus, the Gadiantons again appeared when iniquity began to prevail; by the year A.D. 300 they had spread over all the land. To their baneful influence may be attributed many of the atrocities and abominations that disgraced the last wars between the Nephites and Lamanites.
