Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 3

Verses 1-3

In the year 46 B.C. an exceeding great number of Nephites departed out of the Land of Zarahemla. In the approximate four years that followed the attempt on the life of Helaman, the Chief Judge, peace, a strange peace, and a peculiar prosperity, though not one of great righteousness, gave shape and form to many Nephite traits which soon developed into fast-breaking movements, or migrations, which caused them to spread out and colonize in every direction.

This period of rest and submerged excitement was a time of great rejoicing among the Nephites. At the end of the Forty-third year of the Reign of the Judges, what little pride there was within the Church which brought "dissensions among the people" was settled between its members; a general contentment prevailed among them.

But the Nephites, like the Jews from whom their fathers came, could not remain for long in peace. They began to quarrel among themselves and with their neighbors. You will remember that the Jews were constantly at war, or were threatened with invasion by other ambitious nations. This trait of being subject to pride and uneasiness became quite evident in the Forty-sixth year of the Judges. Then, the Sacred Record says that "much contention and many dissensions" began to appear among the Nephites. There were thousands, who, to escape the wrath and bitterness of internecine strife, hurriedly "departed out of the Land of Zarahemla, and went forth unto the land northward to inherit the land."

Verses 4-6

And they did travel to an exceeding great distance. The immigrants, possibly remembering the discovery of a new land in the journey of King Limhi's men from the Land of Nephi to Zarahemla, or following the advanced pioneering of other intrepid adventurers, traveled a very great distance, and eventually came to a land of large bodies of water and of many rivers.

The account of the journey of King Limhi's men is recorded in the Eighth Chapter of the Book of Mosiah: "And the king said unto him: Being grieved for the afflictions of my people, I caused that forty and three of my people should take a journey into the wilderness, that thereby they might find the Land of Zarahemla, that we might appeal unto our brethren to deliver us out of bondage. And they were lost in the wilderness for the space of many days, yet they were diligent, and found not the Land of Zarahemla but returned to this land, having traveled in a land among many waters, having discovered a land which was covered with bones of men, and of beasts, and was also covered with ruins of buildings of every kind, having discovered a land which had been peopled with a people who were as numerous as the hosts of Israel."

This land which is characterized as a land of large bodies of water is referred to in Chapter Fifty, Book of Alma: "And it came to pass that when the people of Morianton, who were led by a man whose name was Morianton, found that the people of Lehi had fled to the camp of Moroni, they were exceedingly fearful lest the army of Moroni should come upon them and destroy them. Therefore, Morianton put it in their hearts that they should flee to the land northward, which was covered with large bodies of water, and take possession of the land which was northward."

The land covered by large bodies of water was a land called Desolation. Before the time of the Nephites it was thickly inhabited by the Jaredites. In the days of the latter people Bountiful formed its southern border. The two lands apparently joined at the Isthmus of Panama. It is generally supposed to have embraced within its borders the region known to moderns as Central America. Its capital was a city of the same name, probably built in later years, as it is never spoken of but by Mormon in the account of the long series of wars in which he took such a prominent part.

The word desolation connotes a place or country wasted or forsaken, destitute of inhabitants; deserted, laid waste; in a ruinous condition. But the inspired historian who wrote this account says that "no part of the land was desolate, save it were for timber; but because of the greatness of the destruction of the people who had before inhabited the land it was called desolate." In spite of the lack of timber which was so necessary to the civilization of the Nephites, they went forth and established communities, both large and small, in all parts of this newly found land which had not been rendered desolate, that part being without timber with which to build.

Verses 7-12

The people who went forth became exceeding expert in the working of cement. Notwithstanding the scarcity of timber with which to build their homes and other necessary buildings, the new inhabitants of this new land resorted to their ingenuity, or inventiveness, which is common to all pioneer bands in overcoming their difficulties. They began the use of cement in place of woodwork. Whether or not what is translated cement was the same then as the cement now used is not important, but it is important that they "became exceeding expert" in its use. We imagine that the use of cement was being constantly improved upon by them, also its manner of being made, its durability, and its resourcefulness.

This cement, whatever were its ingredients, brought a great change into the lives of the Nephite pioneers. It enabled them, as we have said, to "spread out and colonize in every direction." Many thousands emigrated to the northern continent, among them great numbers of Ammonites. Numerous new cities were built, and old ones repaired; shipbuilding was a large undertaking among them and the arts and manufactures encouraged. Temples, tabernacles, and sanctuaries, were erected in large numbers; in fact the people spread out and covered both continents, both north and south, east and west.

A thoughtful comment is made by Mormon in what is verse ten. He notes that many shiploads of timber were sent to the colonizers in the northern land by those who still dwelt in the land southward, or by those who were sent there for that purpose. Thus the Nephites still residing in the old homeland enabled the settlers of the land northward to continue their work of rehabilitation in a land that had been deforested by the pre-inhabitants thereof.

Verses 13-16

And now there are many records kept of the proceedings of this people. We may assume that as it is now, the people of God's Church were then great keepers of minute records. Mormon, the abridger of Helaman's record, notes that these records which were kept mostly by the Nephites "are particular and very large, concerning them." But, he also notes that even a hundreth part of these records cannot be contained in the abridgment of the records he is making. The wars and contentions, the wickedness and righteousness of the Nephites and Lamanites, their peace and prosperity, their preaching and their prophecies, etc., were too many to be condensed into one record the like of which he was commanded to make. However, we are assured by him that records of these things have been kept, and we may also be sure that when the time comes that they are needed for the welfare of Zion, they will be brought forth by Heaven's gracious command. (See Padre Gray's statement found in Foreword to Vol. I, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON.)

Verses 17-20

And now I return to mine account. Mormon, in choosing what to him were the most important subjects of Nephite history to include in the abridgment of the Larger Plates which he was making, took occasion to note therein that many other records had been kept by both the Nephites and Lamanites, a hundredth part of which could not "be contained" in his own record.

He also notes that in spite of the continuing strife among the Nephites during the Forty-sixth, seventh, and eighth years of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi, that Helaman "did fill the Judgment-Seat with justice and equity; yea, he did observe to keep the statutes, and the judgments, and the commandments of God; and he did walk after the ways of his father, insomuch that he did prosper in the land." So writes the inspired historian of Helaman. What more can be said of any man?

Verse 21

Helaman had two sons. Helaman had two sons to whom he gave the names of Nephi and Lehi. He reared them both in the nurture and fear of God, and named them thus to remind them, when they heard their own names called, of the faith and goodness of their great ancestors, who, by God's direction, led their fathers to the Promised Land. And thus they always had before them the integrity and the righteous principles of their worthy forebears. "And they began to grow up unto the Lord." (See Verses 5-12, Chapter 5, Book of Helaman.)

Verses 22-30

The wars and contentions among the Nephite People began to cease. In the years 45 and 44 B.C. there were many contentions in the land, but in the latter portion of the succeeding year they measurably ceased, and tens of thousands were baptized unto repentance. So great was the prosperity of the Church at this time that even those who held high and responsible positions in the Church were surprised thereat, and at the multiplicity of blessings that the Lord poured out upon the people. This happy state of affairs continued until the death of Helaman, though marred somewhat by the increasing pride and vanity that long-continued prosperity had begotten in the hearts of many.

During this period of unprecedented prosperity and material growth, there was a well-established peace felt throughout the Nephite Lands, save it were "the secret combinations which Gadianton, the robber, had established in the more settled parts of the" Commonwealth. So secret but thank heaven, so often abortive, was the cunning of these master-minds of evil, that their actions did not become known to the proper authorities until it was too late to destroy them "out of the land."

Notwithstanding the evil influence exerted by the followers of Gadianton in their secret and well-planned designs, the prosperity evinced in the growth of the Church was that thousands took upon themselves the Name of Christ by being "baptized unto repentance," and thus becoming members of God's Church.

The comment of Mormon in the twenty-seventh verse is worthy of our greatest consideration. It witnesseth anew that the Lord is merciful and long-suffering to all those who in the sincerity of their hearts "call upon His holy Name." For years the Nephites had been torn between the things of God and the things of the world; many preferring those of the world. Now, all was changed. The preaching of Helaman and his associate members of the Priesthood had implanted into their hearts a desire to dwell in peace and therein serve the Lord. That the Gate to the Kingdom of God is, he said, ever open to all those who "believe on the Name of Jesus Christ," and are baptized unto repentance as were those mentioned in verse 24. Mormon again testifies that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

In the repentance of the Nephite People, and their turning again to God, we can see that "whosoever will may lay hold upon the Word of God," and in doing so, can, and will find peace and rest, and too, may obtain needed protection from "the cunning and wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a straight and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the Kingdom of Heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out."

The gulf of misery above referred to by Mormon, is mentioned five other times in the Book of Mormon, the first time when Nephi, the son of Lehi, received a vision which was an interpretation of the prophetic dream his father saw. Nephi was guided in the journey of his vision by an angel from the presence of God. In Nephi's own words, translated of course by the Prophet Joseph Smith: And the angel said unto me: Look! And I looked, and beheld three generations pass away in righteousness; and their garments were white even like unto the Lamb of God, and the angel said unto me: These are made white in the blood of the Lamb, because of their faith in Him . . . And the mists of darkness are the temptations of the devil, which blindeth the eyes, and hardeneth the hearts of the children of men, and leadeth them away into broad roads, that they perish and are lost. . . . And a great and a terrible gulf divideth them ( 1 Ne. 12:18 ). Again, in explaining this dream of their father's to his brothers, Nephi further said: And I said unto them that it was an awful gulf which separated the wicked from the Tree of Life, and also from the Saints of God. ( 1 Ne. 15:28 ) The Prophet Lehi, just a short time prior to his death, admonished his wayward sons in this manner: O that ye would awake; awake from a deep sleep, yea, even from the sleep of hell, and shake off the awful chains by which ye are bound, which are the chains which bind the children of men, that they are carried away captive down to the eternal gulf of misery and woe. ( 2 Ne. 1-13 ) Ammon, one of the sons of King Mosiah, at the end of their wonderful mission to the Lamanites, rejoiced greatly in the goodness of the Lord to them. He reminded his brothers of the time when in the spirit of gaiety they went from city to city, from place to place, persecuting the Saints of God. How they were stopped in their wicked path by an angel from the presence of God; how they were rebuked, after all they had done, in sharpness but in kindness instead of being made subject to the just decree of Heaven's wrath. He then said: "Therefore, let us glory, yea, we will glory in the Lord; yea, we will rejoice, for our joy is full; yea, we will praise our God forever. Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who can say too much of His great power, and of His mercy, and of His long-suffering towards the children of men? Behold, I say unto you, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel." "Who could have supposed that our God would have been so merciful as to have snatched us from our awful, sinful, and polluted state? Behold, we went forth even in wrath, with mighty threatenings to destroy His Church. Oh then, why did He not consign us to an awful destruction, yea, why did He not let the sword of His justice fall upon us, and doom us to eternal despair? O, my soul, almost as it were, fleeth at the thought. Behold, He did not exercise His justice upon us, but in His great mercy hath brought us over that everlasting gulf of death and misery, even to the Salvation of our souls." ( Alma 26:16-20 )

Following a custom the Nephites had inherited from their Israelitic ancestors, Helaman, about 30 years Before Christ, feeling that his day's pilgrimage on Earth was nearly ended, called his sons to him and blessed and admonished them, The last recorded words of this High Priest and Chief Judge to Nephi and Lehi were: "And now, my sons, remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless woe, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." ( Hel. 5:12 )

Verses 31-36

Riches brings forth pride. For the remainder of the Forty-ninth year, Mormon notes that there was continual rejoicing in and throughout Zarahemla and all the lands of the Nephites. This condition of peaceful existence lasted three more years, the people of God's Church growing richer and richer as they did prosper day by day.

The same story of riches bringing forth pride was again related by many who in their zeal for more worldly goods, forgot that everything comes from Above. That, He who gives, can also take away. That with one glance of His piercing eye, He can humble even the mightiest. Notwithstanding all this, in the Fifty-first year of the Judge's Reign, pride began to enter into the hearts of some of the Church members. They began to persecute their poorer brethren, and in many ways showed their contempt for those who in humility and meekness served the Lord.

It is more than interesting to us to note Mormon's comment on this peculiar state of affairs within the Church, and it needs no comment by us as it is plain and expressive: "Nevertheless they [^1] did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God." (V. 35)

The Sacred Record informs us that this condition of peace and happiness continued throughout the Fifty-second year of the rule by the Judges, it being broken only by the pride of the people who constantly measured the goods of the world in preference of the things of God. The Lord had promised that "If you will keep My commandments you shall prosper in the land." His word could not be broken. In a large way, the Nephites of this period kept His commandments. Peace and prosperity go hand-in-hand. They both follow the keeping of divine law, and we may be assured that the prosperity of the Nephites was brought about because of their righteous behavior. However, we must remember the old saying, "Pride goeth before a fall," and in the case of the Nephites it was equally true. As their riches increased, so also did their pride. "It did grow on them from day to day," until, at last, pride being the beginning of iniquity, it caused their downfall, and near destruction.

The author of the Apocryphal book generally known as Ecclesiasticus, but also called, "The Wisdom of Jesus, the Son of Sirach," has something to say of both pride and humility: "Pride is hateful before God and man: and by both (hatred and pride) doth one commit iniquity." Again, "Why is earth and ashes proud? . . . And he that today is king, tomorrow shall die." Once more: "The beginning of pride is when one departeth from God, and his heart is turned away from his Maker. For pride is the beginning of sin, and he that hath is shall pour out abomination." ( Eccl. 10:7-13 )

Concerning humility it says: "My son, go on with thy business in meekness; so shalt thou be beloved of Him that is approved." "The greater thou art, the more humble thyself, and thou shalt find favor before the Lord." "Mysteries are revealed unto the meek." (Ibid. 3:17-19)

St. Paul cautions Timothy against appointing novices, that is, young converts, to responsible positions, "lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil." ( 1 Tim. 3:6 ) From which we infer that pride was the beginning of the fall of Lucifer.

"Th' infernal serpent, he it was whose guile . . . deceived The mother of mankind, what time his pride Has cast him out from heaven with all his host Of rebel angels: by whose aid aspiring To set himself in glory 'bove his peers He trusted to have equalled the Most High, If he opposed; and with ambitious aim Against the throne and monarchy of God, Raised impious war in Heaven, and battle proud, With vain attempt. Him th' Almighty Power Hurled headlong flaming from the eternal sky, With hideous ruin and combustion, down To bottomless perdition." —Milton, Paradise Lost

Verse 37

In the Fifty-third year . . . Helaman died, and his son, Nephi, did reign in his stead. Near the end of the Nephites' period of great prosperity, Helaman died, and his son, Nephi, began to fill the Judgment Seat. The statement of the sacred historian concerning Nephi's tenure in office as the Chief Judge and head of the government and Church is comment enough for this time: "And it came to pass that he did fill the Judgment-Seat with justice and equity; yea, he did keep the commandments of God, and did walk in the ways of his father."

LEHI, THE SON OF HELAMAN

Were we to attempt to sketch the life of Lehi we should simply have to repeat the most striking features of that of his elder brother, Nephi. In their labors, journeyings, ministrations, etc., they seem to have always been together. Like Samuel of old, in their childhood they "began to grow up unto the Lord" and in riper years they lived to His glory. In speaking of the exalted character of Nephi the historian adds, "And behold, Lehi, his brother, was not a whit behind him as to things pertaining to righteousness."

The date of Lehi's birth is not recorded. In the year 44 B.C. the fact that Helaman had two sons named Nephi and Lehi is mentioned but at that time they must have grown to manhood as their public labors began shortly after. Lehi accompanied his brother in his extended labors throughout the Land of the Nephites; he was with him in prison among the Lamanites in the City of Lehi-Nephi at the time of the great manifestation of God's power and the conversion of the greater part of that people to the service of the true God; he went with Nephi to the northern continent and labored there several years. Again we hear of them (13 B.C.) still laboring in the might of Jehovah and the powers of the Priesthood for the salvation of the souls of men. After this we lose sight of Lehi, the date, the place, or circumstances of his death are not stated.

NEPHI, THE SON OF HELAMAN

In Nephi we have one of the greatest prophets that ever trod the earth or to whom the God of our Salvation revealed His glorious will. He lived during the greater portion of the first century before Christ and disappeared from the knowledge of mankind but a short time before the advent of the Messiah in Bethlehem. He is first referred to in the Book of Mormon (44 B.C.) as the older of Helaman's two sons, Lehi being the younger. These two brothers appear to have been inseparable during their life; they are almost always mentioned as associated in the great and ofttimes perilous labors of the ministry undertaken for the Salvation of either Nephites or Lamanites. We have no information with regard to the time of Nephi's birth but when his father died, in the year 39 B.C., he succeeded him as Chief Judge, the duties of which office he filled with wisdom and justice for about nine years, when, owing to the wickedness of the people he resigned that office and Cezoram was chosen by the people in his stead (30 B.C.).

The years that Nephi judged his people are some of the darkest in Nephite history. Owing to their great pride and iniquity the Lord left them to themselves and they became weak like unto the Lamanites, man for man. When war was declared, the latter, being much the more numerous, carried everything before them. In vain the Nephites under Moronihah struggled for their homes and their liberties. They were forced back by the hordes of the Lamanites from city to city, from land to land. Not a place could be found in the whole southern continent where the soldiers of the Nephites successfully held their ground. With hurried hands they built a line of defense across the Isthmus of Panama, from sea to sea, for the hosts of their conquerors were still pushing northward. This line of fortifications stopped the roll of the barbaric tide northward and the Lamanite commanders rested with the conquest of a continent.

These richly deserved misfortunes brought the Nephites partly to their senses—they began to repent. Taking advantage of this change in the state of their feeling, Nephi, Lehi and their general, Moronihah, preached energetically and uttered many prophecies concerning what would most assuredly come upon them if they did not amend their ways. After a time Moronihah felt that they had sufficiently humbled themselves for the Lord to measurably be with them and he once more ventured to lead his warriors against the Lamanites. Step by step they regained their former possessions until all the most northern settlements had been reoccupied. Further than this Moronihah dared not venture, the conduct of the people was not sufficiently reformed, they had not repented in fullness of heart and purpose. So he waited in the hope of a better and brighter day when the people would have thoroughly turned from all their besetting sins and when he, in the strength of the God of Israel, could lead them on to victory. Thus Zarahemla still remained in the hands of the foe.

When Nephi retired from the Judgment Seat it was with the intention of devoting his entire time to the preaching of the Gospel. He associated his brother Lehi with him and commencing at the most northerly settlement on the southern continent—Bountiful—he journeyed and preached throughout all the land southward in the possession of the Nephites. From thence the two brothers passed onward to Zarahemla, where they found many Nephite dissenters, to whom they proclaimed the word of God in great power. Numbers of these confessed their sins, were baptized unto repentance and immediately returned to their brethren to repair, if possible, the wrongs they had done and make such restitution as lay in their power. Numbers of the Lamanites also received the truth gladly insomuch that eight thousand of them were baptized in Zarahemla and the regions round about.

From Zarahemla Nephi and Lehi proceeded south to the Land of Nephi where they were captured by an army of the Lamanites and thrust into the very same prison in which Ammon, Helem and Hem were beforetime confined. Here they were treated with great inhumanity by their savage captors. Food was denied them and it was decided to kill them. When the officers commissioned with the carrying out of this cruel decision arrived at the prison they found the two prophets encircled about as if by a pillar of fire. This sight filled them with awe, they dared not attempt to execute their orders, they held back from laying hands on the prisoners lest they should be burned but they also observed that the two brothers stood unhurt and unterrified in the midst of the ascending flames. Emboldened by the trepidation of the Lamanite officials Nephi and Lehi stood forth and explained to them that it was by the power of God that this marvelous thing had happened, that it had been manifested that they might learn that no one could harm them, that they were the servants of the Most High and His almighty arm shielded them. Nor was this all. A sudden earthquake shook the ground, the prison walls tottered to their foundations, a pall of thick darkness covered all whom curiosity or other motives had gathered to the prison. The quivering earth, the impenetrable cloud of blackness conspired to fill their hearts with solemn fear and awful dread. They realized the almighty power of God, they were filled with the sense of their own abject insignificance. A voice, the voice of One whom they knew not sounded in their affrighted ears, once and again, yea, a third time and each time that the voice came it was followed by the trembling of the earth and the shaking of the prison walls. All nature quivered at the presence of the Majesty on High while the heavy, palpable, impenetrable darkness still enshrouded them. From above the voice descended, it was outside the cloud, its tones came not to their quaking hearts with the roar of the pealing thunder, nor was it like the tumultuous flow of angry, raging waters but it was a "still voice of perfect mildness" almost a whisper that pierced to their inmost souls. That voice was the voice of the mighty God of Jacob and He called upon all those who heard Him to repent and to do His servants no ill and with the third repetition of this command were added marvelous words of Salvation that cannot be uttered by men. And because of the thick pall of darkness that enveloped them and the fearful dread that filled their hearts none dared move; fear, astonishment, apprehension of what was to come had riveted each to the spot on which he stood.

Now, among the crowd was a Nephite dissenter, an apostate from the true Church, named Aminadab. This man, happening to turn his face in the direction where the two prophets stood, beheld that their faces shone with a glorious light and that they were conversing with some one who appeared to be above them, for their eyes were turned Heavenward. Aminadab drew the attention of those who surrounded him to this glorious appearance and the spell that bound them was sufficiently removed to enable them to turn towards the prisoners and to become witnesses of the fact also. "What do all these things mean?" they anxiously inquired. "They do converse with the angels of God," answered Aminadab. "What shall we do that this cloud of darkness may be removed?" was their next question. "You must repent and cry unto the Voice, even until ye shall have faith in Christ," he replied. They did cry unto God with all the energy that their terrifying surroundings inspired and so continued to supplicate until the cloud was dispersed, when, to their great surprise, they discovered that they also were entombed in a pillar of Living Fire. Yet this fire did not hurt them, it did not singe their garments, it did not consume the prison walls. But their terror was swept away and they were filled with a joy that was unspeakable for the Holy Spirit of God filled their souls and they broke forth in marvelous words of praise and rejoicing. Again a pleasant, searching whisper reached their gladdened ears. It said unto them, "Peace, peace be unto you because of your faith in my well-beloved, who was from the foundation of the world." Now there were about 300 souls who heard and saw these things and they cast up their eyes unto Heaven which was opened to their vision and holy angels came down and ministered unto them.

The tidings of this glorious appearing were quickly spread near and far in the lands where the Lamanites dwelt, and so powerful was the testimony and so great were the evidences that the major portion of the people believed, repented and obeyed the Gospel. Then, like all true Saints, they manifested the sincerity of their repentance by works of restitution; they laid down their weapons of war, they cast aside their false traditions, their hatred gave place to love and they restored to the Nephites Zarahemla and the other lands they had taken from them (30 B.C.). So great was the reformation in their character, so radical was the change in their habits that they soon exceeded the Nephites in faith and works of righteousness. It is a lamentable fact that at this time many of the latter had become hardened, impenitent and grossly wicked. But there were those who still remained faithful to the truth, whose hearts greatly rejoiced at the conversion of their former foes. This joy was, the next year, greatly increased by the arrival of many missionaries from among the hitherto darkened and benighted people. The tables were turned, the two races had changed places; Laman was teaching Nephi the ways of holiness and the law of the Lord. And God was abundantly with them, they opened their mouths and he filled them with inspired words of truth. The Holy Spirit sealed their utterances and many of the Nephites believed. Nor were Nephi and Lehi idle. They were sounding the Gospel trump, long and loud, in lordly Zarahemla and its tributary districts and then with many of the Lamanite Priesthood they proceeded to the land northward.

Peace throughout the vast continent from north to south, from the Atlantic to the Pacific, followed this reformation. A Nephite could visit and do business in every part of the wide land and so could a Lamanite. This goodly peace brought stability, stability brought wealth, wealth engendered pride, pride gave birth to numerous sins, to be followed by contentions, dissensions and then wars. These evils begat sorrow, sorrow softened their hearts to repentance, repentance was followed by the blessing of God which again brought peace, prosperity and by-and-by riches. And at this era of Nephite national life, this is the one eternal round which their inspired historians are compelled to chronicle. Within four short years of the happy time of universal peace we have just referred to, the riches of the world had induced stubbornness and rebellion towards God, combined with the insane desire to rob, plunder and murder their fellow-men. If there ever were a people swift to do evil they were the Nephites of that generation. In the year 26 B.C. Cezoram, the Chief Judge, was murdered by an unknown hand as he sat on the Judgment Seat and his son, who succeeeded him, suffered in like manner within the year. The Gadianton Robbers grew in strength, numerically and morally and were actually fostered among the Nephites, while the more righteous Lamanites utterly destroyed all that they found within their borders. The one people dwindled in unbelief, the other grew in grace and in the power of God's divine Spirit.

Nephi tarried on the northern continent until the year 23 B.C. when his teachings and his prophecies having been rejected by its inhabitants, he returned in sorrow to Zarahemla but he found no comfort there. There Gadianton Robbers filled the Judgment Seat and perverted the law to their own avarice and lust. The life, the property, the liberty, the virtue of righteous men and women were counted as things of naught, the playthings of their spoil.

Nephi's house in Zarahemla was situated on one of the principal thoroughfares which led to the chief market-place. In his garden, near the highway, he built a tower whither it was his wont to repair for prayer. On one occasion, shortly after his return from the north, he became so deeply concerned because of the iniquities of the people, that in earnest supplication to the Lord he raised his voice so high that he was heard by the passersby in the street below. A listening crowd soon gathered and when the prophet had ended his devotions and became aware of their presence he commenced to teach them. His words were not sugar-coated to adapt them to the predelictions of his congregation. On the contrary he boldly rebuked their sins, their murders, their whoredoms, their secret iniquities, at the same time in the love of the Gospel entreating, beseeching and pleading with them to amend their lives and do better. He also warned them of the terrible impending judgments that would inevitably fall upon them if they repented not. His words caused a division among his hearers, some clamoring for his arrest and imprisonment as one who bore false testimony and reviled the law, while others maintained that he spoke the truth and was a prophet. To prove to their sindarkened minds that the prophetic gift was with him he told them to send to the Hall of Judgment and that they would find the Chief Judge murdered lying in his blood; yet more, that the murderer was the victim's brother. Five of the crowd hastened to prove his words. They hurried to the Judgment Hall, where they found the chief magistrate in the condition that Nephi declared. Other citizens, who knew nothing of Nephi's words, having entered the hall and finding the five men there with the dead body, concluded that they were the assassins and consigned them to prison. Some of the most hardened afterwards charged Nephi with being an accomplice before the act and that he had arranged the whole affair to obtain influence with the people so that they would believe and accept his doctrine. On this charge he was bound and imprisoned. By the wisdom that Heaven gave him so abundantly he was enabled to baffle this attempt on his life and through his instrumentality the murdered judge's brother having been brought to confess his crime, Nephi was delivered from his traducers and set at liberty. Some of the citizens now acknowledged that he was a prophet, others declared that he was a god, while many remained hardened in their sins. So violent became the contention that the people gathered in excited crowds upon the streets, wrangling and disputing about the events of the past two days. In their excitement they entirely forgot Nephi and left him standing alone in the street. With a sorrowful heart he wended his way homeward but before he reached there the voice of the Lord came to him with many words of comfort and commendation. As with others of his servants the Lord made a covenant with him, that whatsoever he bound on earth should be bound in Heaven and whatsoever he loosed on Earth should be loosed in Heaven; that he should have power over the elements to bless and to curse; to smite the earth with famine and pestilence and destruction and that none should have power to hurt him. The Almighty then directed him to return and again raise his cry of repentance in the cities of the Nephites. He obeyed and lifted up his voice in solemn warning; he went from multitude to multitude, from city to city, from land to land but without effect. Sometimes, when he thus warned his fellow-men they sought to imprison and otherwise maltreat him but the Spirit of God would bear him out of their midst to labor in some other place. In this manner three years passed away, contentions and wars, murders and violence filled the land.

At last, wearied with beholding so much misery and contention, Nephi prayed that the Lord would not suffer the people to be destroyed by the sword but rather let a famine desolate the land and peradventure, bring the people to an understanding of their awful condition and cause them to humble themselves and repent. God heard and answered his petition, the heavens became as brass over the land, the rains ceased, the earth dried up, the crops failed, the people perished for want of food.

Two years passed (19 and 20 B.C.) and the third came but still the refreshing rain was withheld. During this year the people, humbled by their sufferings, turned towards the Lord. They endeavored to root out iniquity from their midst. They destroyed the Gadianton Robber bands and established the Government on a more righteous foundation. Nephi, observing the change in their conduct and feelings, interceded with the Lord in their behalf. His prayers were answered, the welcome rain descended on the parched-up soil and a bounteous harvest once more crowned the labors of the husbandman. (16 B.C.)

The repentant people now regarded Nephi in his true light; they revered him as a great prophet and for a few short years they listened to his teachings. While they did so they prospered. But the leaven of unrighteousness had too thoroughly permeated the national life for their faithfulness to God to be of long duration. For two, three or perhaps half a dozen years they would maintain their integrity and then corruption would seethe, the vile would snatch the reigns of government, the good would be oppressed and contention and war, with all their horrors would again reign supreme. Thus it was after the three years of famine. For two years there was peace, in the third there began to be much strife (13 B.C.), in the next, the Gadianton Bands reappeared and carried havoc among their more peaceable fellow-countrymen. Going on, year by year, they grew in iniquity and ripened for destruction. For many years Nephi strove to stem the tide of vice. At times partial success rewarded his unceasing efforts and he had joy in the baptism of some honest souls. But the great bulk of the people had rejected the Gospel, they had no love for its holy principles and were unfit for its blessings.

Shortly before the birth of Christ, Nephi transferred the Plates of Brass and other records to his son Nephi, gave him charge concerning them and departed from the Land of Zarahemla. Whither he went or what became of him is hidden from the knowledge of mankind. That he did not return to the dwelling places of humanity is testified to by his son some ten years afterwards (9 A.D.).

Of Nephi's private life and circumstances we can learn but little from the Book of Mormon. It is evident that his public labors as a preacher of righteousness occupied almost his entire time. Two of his sons, Nephi and Timothy, are mentioned by name; these were both chosen by the risen Redeemer to be members of the Quorum of the Twelve Disciples who ministered among the Nephites. His character is the one that stands pre-eminent in his age; he was of a verity a friend of God, who so acknowledged him, blessed him with as high and glorious privileges as are ever conferred on man, made peculiar and special covenants with him and gave him revelations daily. His whole history gives evidence of his faith, patience, courage, integrity, humility and zeal. In his long life he saw much sorrow but God took him to himself at last.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The persecuted ones, or the poor.
