Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 4

Verses 1-5

The Lamanites succeeded in obtaining ... all the lands, even unto the land which was near the Land Bountiful. Nephi, the elder son of Helaman, reigned in the Judgment Seat only for one year, or until the Fifty-fourth year of the Reign of the Judges which was the thirty-eighth year B.C., when there appeared to be great contentions arise between members of the Church which rapidly turned into much dissension. Feelings became so bitter that killings were not uncommon. Governmental authorities were forced to intervene in the struggle that developed between the factions, and those that rebelled against the laws of the Republic were slain, or driven out of the land. There was always a place in which the dissenters could find haven, that was among the Lamanites. Thither went the dissatisfied, and to them must the horrors of war be imputed for with other dissenters who followed them into the camp of the Lamanites they succeeded in stirring them up to an almost unprecedented and bloody struggle for power and authority that lasted for over eight years.

These years were some of the darkest in Nephite history. Owing to their great pride and iniquity the Lord left the people to themselves, and they became weak like unto the Lamanites, man for man. When war was commenced, the latter being much the more numerous, carried everything before them. In vain the Nephites struggled for their homes and their liberties. They were forced back by the hordes of the Lamanites from city to city, from land to land. Manti, Gideon, Cumeni, Moroni, and even Zarahemla, fell. Nor did the war end when the blood-thirsty Lamanites held high carnival in the midst of the Nephites' traditional capital, its towers and palaces. Onward swept the invading hosts; backwards fled the defenders of the Commonwealth, and backward they continued until every town and city, every tower and fort, from Melek to Moroni, from Manti to Bountiful, were filled with the savage, half-disciplined, dark-skinned warriors of Laman. Not a place could be found in the whole southern continent where the soldiers of the Nephites successfully held their ground.

Verses 6-7

The Nephites driven into the Land Bountiful. Zarahemla, with its hallowed associations, its glorious temples, where the daily sacrifice was unceasingly offered, its proud palaces, its luxurious homes, its Courts of Justice, where the Chief Judge sat in the magnificence of almost kingly authority to administer the law-Zarahemla, their Queen City, the seat of their government, the center of their civilization, the home of the High Priesthood, was in the hands of their merciless, vandal-like foes. Nor had the danger stopped; with hurried hands the Nephites built a line of defense across the Isthmus of Panama from sea to sea, for the unnumbered hosts of their conquerors were still pushing forward. This line of fortifications was effectual; it stopped the roll of the barbaric tide northward, and the Lamanite commanders rested with the conquest of a continent.

Verses 8-10

Moronihah did succeed.... in obtaining many parts of the land. In this war the Nephite dissenters took active part against their white brethren, and to this fact, in part, may be attributed the sudden success that crowned the Lamanite arms. But little by little in succeeding years the half repentant Nephites regained their lost ground, until the year 31 B.C. the most northerly half of their possessions had again fallen into their hands; but because of their only partial repentance, their leaders had not the courage to lead them further, and Zarahemla still remained in the hands of the warriors of the Lamanites.

Verses 11-13

It was because of the hardness of their hearts that these things happened to them. The goodly reign of universal peace, to which we referred to in our last chapter, brought stability, stability developed wealth, wealth engendered pride, pride gave birth to numerous sins, which were followed by contentions, dissensions, and then wars. These evils begat sorrow, sorrow softened the hearts of the people to repentance, repentance was followed by the blessings of God, which again brought peace, prosperity, and by-and-by, riches.

At this era of Nephite national life, this is the one eternal round which their inspired historians were compelled to chronicle. Within four short years of the happy time of universal peace to which we have just referred, the riches of the world had induced stubbornness, and rebellion against God; this combined with the insane desire to rob, plunder and murder their fellow men, had so weakened them that their resistance to an outward foe was indeed pitiably wanting. If there ever were a people swift to do evil, it was the Nephites of this generation.

Because of this depraved mental and moral condition to which the majority of Nephites had then degraded themselves, and the great gulf of spiritual irresponsibility into which they had fallen, he who recorded the annals of these times, noted that were it not for "their wickedness and their abomination which was among them," the loss of their cities and lands "and the great slaughter which was among them," would not have occurred.

Verses 14-17

Moronihah ... and Nephi and Lehi, the sons of Helaman, did preach many things to the people. Throughout this period of Nephite iniquity and their disobedience to God's laws, Moronihah, their military commander, and Nephi, their High Priest and his brother Lehi, went tirelessly among them, admonishing them to righteousness, calling upon them to repent, and in every way giving courage and hope to them if only they would return unto God and do His bidding. This so melted their hard hearts that the Sacred Record says they did repent, and again "they did begin to prosper."

Now, when Moronihah saw that his preaching together with the preaching and prophesying of Nephi and his brother, Lehi, had had the effect of humbling the Nephites, and also that they had themselves resolved to better keep the Lord's commandments, he responded to their cries and led them forth to recoup the losses which they had sustained during their recent military disasters.

In that same year, which was the Sixty-first year of the Reign of the Judges, or the year 31 B.C., the strength of their minds and spirits which enabled them to encounter danger with firmness, and the faith they had in a righteous cause, so inspirited Moronihah's soldiers that with the help of the Lord they regained one-half of all the cities and lands they had lost to the Lamanites when their savage hordes swept almost uninterrupted through Nephite territory.

Verses 18-20

Moronihah could obtain no more possessions over the Lamanites. The next year, or the Sixty-second of the Reign of the Judges, saw another reversal in the fortunes of the Nephites. Instead of success in their ventures, they began again to see failure in their attempts to wrest their captured cities from the hands of the despots who held them. The Lamanites were more numerous than they, and their foes as we have pointed out were as strong as they, man for man. However, it makes no difference to save whether by many or by few, if the Lord is on your side, but the Nephites had again become "wicked as were the Lamanites," "therefore the Lord did cease to preserve them by His miraculous and matchless power."

It is no wonder then that the Nephites were left to themselves, without help from above, and when the dark clouds of adversity began to obscure the vision of total victory upon their banners, "the Nephites were in great fear, lest they should be overpowered, and trodden down, and slain, and destroyed."

In view of this sudden change in the affairs of the Nephites - "for so numerous were the Lamanites that it became impossible for the Nephites to obtain more power over them," - Moronihah determined it was wisdom and the better part of valor, to consolidate the positions he had already won "therefore Moronihah did employ all his armies in maintaining those parts which he had taken."

Verses 21-26

Yea, they began to remember the prophecies of Alma, and also the words of Mosiah. How totally unworthy of God's protecting care they were, and how not deserving of His promised peace and prosperity (See 2 Ne. 1:20 ; 4:4; Jarom 1:9 ; Mosiah 2:31 ; Alma 9:13 ; 36:1; 36:30; 37:13; 38:1), the Nephites began to see and realize their shortcomings. "They saw that they had been a stiffnecked people, and that they had set at naught the commandments of God." The Laws which God had given them through King Mosiah had been corrupted by changes made by them, insomuch so they lived according to their own desires. "And because of their iniquity the Church had begun to dwindle; and they began to disbelieve in the spirit of prophecy and the spirit of revelation; and the judgments of God did stare them in the face," for they "had fallen into a state of unbelief and awful wickedness." The Spirit of the Lord had withdrawn from them because, the Sacred Record says, "the Spirit of the Lord doth not dwell in unholy temples."

Remorse, because of their wickedness and pain for their suffering, began to rack their souls, and they remembered the words of warning which King Mosiah gave to their fathers of the previous generation: "And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you; yea, then is the time He will visit you with great destruction even as He has hitherto visited this land." ( Mosiah 29:27 ) They also thought of the prophecies voiced by Alma: "For behold ... ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked. And this I know, because the Lord hath said He dwelleth not in unholy temples, but in the hearts of the righteous doth He dwell; yea, and He has also said that the righteous shall sit down in His Kingdom, to go no more out...." ( Alma 34:35-36 ) These prophecies of Alma and Mosiah began to sting them unto repentance, but the Nephites, unmindful of God's presence in their lives, gave little heed to their warning. The majority of them preferred to do iniquity rather than right, and the future history of the people up to the coming of Christ is almost unbelievable in that the Lamanites became the people who served God, while the Nephites, those who had partaken so plentifully of His goodness and mercy, became His dissenters.
