Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 5

Verses 1-4

Nephi delivered up the Judgment-Seat to a man named Cezoram. Because, as we pointed out in our last chapter, the "Nephites had fallen into a state of unbelief and awful wickedness," the Lord no more preserved them; and as His Spirit does not dwell in unholy temples, they were left alone, to themselves, for He had withdrawn His Spirit from among them. Despite the many proofs of His providential care which were all about them, the Nephites dwindled in their reliance on Him, and refused to keep His commandments. Not only that, but the laws He had given them through King Mosiah had been changed by them into a debased set of rules that favored the rich at the expense of the poor.

Again, we say that we cannot understand the Nephites of this period; the righteous were upbraided because of their righteousness, and the evil ones held in repute. Where joy and thanksgiving once resounded throughout Nephite homes, there was contention where there should have been peace.

Nephi realized this condition among the Nephites, and also the state into which the Church had fallen. "They who chose evil," the Sacred Record says, "were more numerous than they who chose good," and their voice, which was the final arbiter of accepted standards, cried aloud that he resign the Judgment-Seat. Nephi knew that he could not administer the Law as it then stood with all its inequalities, and in it see the triumph of the wicked over the righteous. He therefore yielded up the Judgment-Seat "to a man whose name was Cezoram," and thereafter he and his brother, Lehi, preached the Word of God "all the remainder of his days."

Verses 5-14

They remembered the words which their father Helaman, spake unto them. In different language, but not in different meaning, their father, Helaman, he had admonished them thus: Behold, my sons ... In the first place, and most important of all, keep the commandments of God, and teach the people to do likewise. I have named you Nephi and Lehi after our first parents who came out of Jerusalem, so that when you hear their names, you will remember your own, and seek to emulate their righteous examples. It is said and written of them that their works were good, therefore go my sons and do that which is also good that the same may be written of you. Do not boast in what you do that is good; but rather do good "that men seeing your good works may be led to glorify your Father which is in Heaven." If you do this, you will lay up a "treasure in Heaven, yea, which is eternal, and which fadeth not away; yea, that ye may have that precious gift of Eternal Life...." No doubt Helaman in his last words to his sons, thought of the words of Isaiah for the Prophet's words were loved by all the Nephites: "And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the Lord is his treasure." ( Isa. 33:6 ) Again, we imagine he thought of Solomon: "In the house of the righteous is much treasure: but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble." ( Prov. 15:6 ) Also, "Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivereth from death." ( Prov. 10:2 ) (The word treasure, among the Hebrews, signifies anything collected together; provisions, stores. So they say, a treasure of corn, of wine, of oil, of honey. Jer. 41:8 . So also treasures of gold, silver, brass. Ezek. 28:4 ; Dan. 11:43 ) This magnificent thought, "treasures in Heaven," magnificently expressed, was so recorded in the words of our Savior when He visited the Nephites in the Land Bountiful some 65 years later: "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and thieves break in and steal; But lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal." ( 3 Ne. 13:19-20 )

Verse 9

Remember, remember, my sons, the words of King Benjamin. "And moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." (King Benjamin, Mosiah 3:17 ) Through Christ, and Him alone, is man redeemed from the effects of Adam's transgression. To a people who were taught to observe all the requirements of the Law of Moses, and were strict to conform their lives to its rules, Benjamin proclaimed that no matter how careful they were in its observance, it "availeth nothing" for their salvation except "it were through the Atonement of His blood."

There shall be no other name given by which salvation is brought about, and notwithstanding the many ordinances and signs which the Lord, in His loving-kindness gave to the Children of Israel, they were all a shadowing of Christ and pointed to His coming.

Through Adam's Fall, sin came into the world. Sin is the enemy of all righteousness; he who commits sin is also an enemy. We reverently speak of God as the Alrighteous Father; in Whom there is no sin. "Man is carnal, sensual, and devilish." ( Alma 42:10 ) Because of iniquity man was cast out from God's presence. Sin cannot abide with Him. The Father is separated from His children.

The Way must be found, a Plan prepared, whereby the Father and His children may be reunited, else all His promises to them go unfulfilled.

That Way has been found, a Plan wherein all His children may regain what once was theirs—an abode with God in His Celestial Home. Christ is the Way, and there is no other. That Way, or that Plan, is the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Prophet Nephi, the son of Lehi, in a discourse to his brothers shortly after his glorious vision, said unto them: "And now, behold, my beloved brethren, this is the Way; and there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the Kingdom of God. And now, behold, this is the doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is one God, without end." ( 2 Ne. 31:21 ) (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, Chapter 3)

Verses 10-11

Remember also the words which Amulek spake unto Zeezrom. When Alma and Amulek were performing their famous mission in the City of Ammonihah (See Alma 8:6 ), a lawyer of no little repute, named Zeezrom, became one of their most bitter adversaries. He abused and attempted to frighten the two missionaries, but the power of the Lord was too greatly manifest in their behalf that no evil happened unto them.

Helaman referred his sons to a dialogue of words that passed between the missionaries and the lawyer, Zeezrom. "And this Zeezrom began to question Amulek, saying: ... Thou sayest there is a true and living God? And Amulek said: Yea, there is a true and living God. And Zeezrom said: Is there more than one God? And he answered, No....Now Zeezrom said again: Who is He that shall come? Is it the Son of God? And he said unto him, Yea. And Zeezrom said again: Shall He save His people in their sins? And Amulek answered and said unto him: I say unto you He shall not, for it is impossible for Him to deny His word....Now Amulek saith again unto him: Behold thou hast lied, for thou sayeth that I spake as though I had authority to command God because I said He shall not save His people in their sins. And I say unto you again that He cannot save them in their sins; for I cannot deny His word, and He hath said that no unclean thing can inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore, how can ye be saved, except ye inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins....And He shall come into the world to redeem His people; and He shall take upon Him the transgressions of those who believe on His name; and these are they that shall have Eternal Life, and Salvation cometh to none else. ( Alma 11:21-40 )

Verse 10

The Lord surely should come to redeem His people. Redeem means, (1) to buy again something that has been sold, by paying back the price to him that bought it, Leviticus 25:25; 27:20; (2) to deliver and bring out of bondage those who were kept captive prisoners by their enemies, Deuteronomy 7:5; 32:6. (3) To rescue or deliver, as from bondage, by paying a ransom. (4) Deliverance from the bondage of sin, and the penalties of God's violated law.

Helaman impressed upon the minds of Nephi and Lehi, that the Son of God should not come down to Earth to redeem man in his sins, but to redeem him from them.

By sin came death. Sin, the violation of Divine Law, purchased it. God's Plan of Salvation provided that the price which was paid for it, be given back. What was that price? When it was paid, demand would be made by the One who paid the price for death to deliver up all those who were in its bondage, or were held in its relentless grasp. The ransom was high. Only God, Himself, could pay it. He, alone, could meet the prescribed terms! The Redeemer's Plan of Salvation provided beforehand that He would pay the price, even with His own life, to loose the bands of death. That price was paid, the ransom met! He died, the great Redeemer died.

Figuratively speaking, He hath redeemed Jerusalem. ( Mosiah 15:30 ) Jerusalem had been sold, figuratively speaking, by the apostate Jews. They had perverted the Ways of the Lord, and too, they had abandoned the Covenant their fathers had made with the Lord at Mount Sinai. The Land of Jerusalem was the land of their inheritance. The Mosaic Law provided that land, among other things, could be redeemed if perchance it had been sold. However, a price was demanded for its redemption. Again, we ask, "What was that price?" Jerusalem had not been bartered away for gold, or for silver; nor was it sold as common merchandise. There was only One who could redeem the pledge that had been made. That One was their king! Isaiah said, "He hath redeemed Jerusalem"; and we, in the light of God's holy Word, understand the Scriptures to mean, not with money, nor with the might of a great army, but He has redeemed it with the blood that was shed on Mount Calvary; the Redemption brought about by Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.

Verse 11

He hath sent His angels to declare the tidings of the conditions of repentance. The power and authority of God, often referred to as His holy arm, is, in the redemption of Jerusalem, made manifest to all nations. (See Mosiah 12:23 ) When Isaiah says, Jerusalem, we may interpret it as meaning the entire earth and all mankind. "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world and they that dwell therein." ( Ps. 24:1 ) The Salvation of all His children is the great purpose to which all God's providences are consecrated, and in them, all the people of the earth will behold His Redemption. Isaiah bids all mankind, "Break forth, sing together," the Lord has not forgotten His people, neither will He see them perish in the embrace of death. He hath redeemed Zion. He is our King, our Redeemer, our All. Great is our King! And Who is our King? but the Lord. And Who is the Lord? save He is God! (Jewish saying) "Let the Heavens be glad, and the Earth rejoice; let the fields exult, and all that is therein!" (See 1 Chr. 16:31-32 ) The Lord hath comforted His people.

The power and authority given by the Father to the Son, to redeem all men from their sins, was apparent in the gift of Eternal Life to all those who would keep God's commandments. Note that one of those commandments was repentance. God commands all men to repent. It is not optional in any case. He who will not repent, believe, and be baptized, "must be damned." No evil, it has been revealed, can enter the presence of God. The doer of evil, is equally barred. Of him who refuses to repent, there is no redemption. Such a man has no claim on God's mercy; forgiveness comes to none who will not repent. The justice of God cannot be thus violated. The supreme goodness and mercy of God cannot be made an excuse for evil. His promise of forgiveness is entirely predicated upon repentance, with first a belief on His only Begotten Son. Through Him, and Him, alone, He said, "will I have mercy upon you." Repentance is vital in the Plan of Salvation. "All them that repent, having a sincere heart and a steadfast spirit, can claim and will receive mercy through Mine Only Begotten Son, and will find rest with Me in My Kingdom, thus saith the Lord who is God over all the Earth." Modern-day revelation as is expressed in the foregoing quotation is upheld by Alma in his answer to Antionah, a Chief Judge in the City of Ammonihah: "And after God had appointed that these things should come unto man, behold, then He saw that it was expedient that man should know concerning the things whereof He had appointed unto him; Therefore He sent angels to converse with them, who caused men to behold of His glory." ( Alma 12:28-29 )

These Heavenly messengers, sent from God's presence, were commissioned by Him to minister unto the children of men, making known unto them the power and authority of God, the Plan of Salvation, and His great love. From then on, men began to see the greatness of God, the glorious majesty of His coming, and the wisdom of His word.

"And they began from that time forth to call on His Name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the Plan of Redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this He made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works....But God did call on men, in the Name of His Son, (this being the Plan of Redemption which was laid) saying: If ye will repent, and harden not your hearts, then will I have mercy upon you, through Mine Only Begotten Son; Therefore, whosoever repenteth, and hardeneth not his heart, he shall have claim on mercy through Mine Only Begotten Son, unto a remission of his sins; and these shall enter into My rest." (Ibid., 30, 33, 34)

The Nephites were a blessed people, in that angels constantly ministered unto them. They had revelations from Heaven to guide them. They prospered in material things, and those who were zealous in keeping God's commandments were benefitted and blessed. The mind and will of God were made known to them by their holy prophets. Special reference is hereby made to the account of Nephi's vision wherein an angel from the Courts of Glory went with him in the journey of his dream, and explained to him the meaning of all he saw. (I Nephi, Chapters 11, 12, 13, 14) Also See Chapter 3, Book of Mosiah, for Benjamin's story of the visit to him of an angel, and of the wonderful things the angel said to him. These are not all, and a full concordance of the word ANGEL is hereby given that the student of the Book of Mormon may know the many times angels from Heaven conversed with the leaders of this great and righteous people, the Nephites, and at times even the righteous Lamanites.

Verse 12

...Remember that it is upon the Rock of our Redeemer, Who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation. Not upon any man, nor his words or claims, must we build the foundation of our Salvation. Christ, and Him alone, is the Rock upon which we build. It is not upon Revelation as some have supposed; it is not upon the Plan of Salvation, or the Everlasting Gospel, but on Him Who is revealed therein. On Christ, the Son of God, our hopes of Life Everlasting are centered, and upon Him power "unto the Salvation of our souls" is given that through repentance we shall have peace and rest in God's Celestial Home.

Upon Christ, and we repeat, Him alone, our foundation is sure. If we build upon any one else or upon any other thing, we build upon a sandy foundation; "and when the rain descends, and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon them, they shall fall, and the gates of hell are ready, open to receive them." ( 3 Ne. 18:13 )

That Christ is the Rock, the foundation upon which the righteous build, is evidenced by many passages of Scripture, both in the Book of Mormon and in the Bible. In the 30th verse of the Fourth Chapter of Second Nephi, the section recorded therein closes Nephi's prayer with a shout of joy, or a glorious paean in praise to God, the Giver of all good: "Rejoice, O my heart, and cry unto the Lord, and say: O Lord, I will praise Thee forever: yea, my soul will rejoice in Thee, my God, and the Rock of my Salvation." Again: "Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss; therefore I will lift up my voice unto Thee; yea, I will cry unto Thee, my God, the Rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto Thee, my Rock and my Salvation." (Ibid., 35) In Nephi's great vision of the New Land of Promise, he saw that a record was kept of the things that should come to pass; "And in them shall be written My Gospel, saith the Lamb, and my Rock and my Salvation." ( 1 Ne. 13:36 ) Attention is also called to the preceding and the following verses, or the 35th and the 37th. The Hebrew Scriptures are replete with references to God as the Rock: "He is the Rock, His work is perfect: for all His ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is He." ( Deut. 32:4 ) David, when he was delivered out of the hands of his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul, in his song of thanksgiving cried: "The Lord is my Rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer." ( 2 Sam. 22:2 ) "For who is God, save the Lord? and who is a Rock, save our God?" (Ibid., 22:32) "Unto Thee will I cry, O Lord my Rock. . . . ( Ps. 28:1 )

Helaman taught his sons many other things, but the Rock upon which the foundation of all their hopes of Eternal Life was built centered on Christ, their Redeemer, who was the Son of God. And if they, as His children, remained faithful and true, the adversary, with his many devious ways, will, he assured them, "have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the Rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall."

These and many other things their father had taken great delight in teaching Nephi and Lehi. It seems that the fathers of the Nephites were very diligent in enlightening their sons in the ways of the Lord, and as the head of the family, they took great pleasure in raising their children, whom they regarded as trusts from the Lord, in the nurture and admonition of God.

The Sacred Record notes that both Nephi and Lehi remembered the things their father had taught them, and in the faith engendered thereby they not only themselves kept God's commandments, but they went forth teaching and preaching God's Holy Word "among all the people of Nephi, beginning at the City Bountiful."

Verses 15-19

They went forth among all the Nephites who were in the land southward. When Nephi retired from the Judgment-Seat, it was with the intention of devoting his entire time to the preaching of the Gospel. He associated his brother, Lehi, with him, and commencing at Bountiful, they journeyed and preached throughout all the land southward which was in the hands, or in the possession of the Nephites. From thence the two brothers passed onwards to Zarahemla, where they found many Nephite dissenters, to whom they proclaimed the Word of God in great power. Numbers of these confessed their sins and were baptized unto repentance. Upon accepting the teachings of the Gospel, they immediately returned to their brethren to repair, if possible, the wrongs they had done, and made such restitution as what lay in their power.

There was in Zarahemla and the regions round about, many thousands of Lamanites who, upon the end of the great war that had ravaged the country for so long, remained to make their homes where the Nephites had built up such a wonderful civilization. Nephi and Lehi preached the Gospel to them in such great power, and with such convincing authority, that even to the number of eight thousand, these Lamanites were "baptized unto repentance, and were convinced of the wickedness of the traditions of their fathers." It is worthy of note that the Sacred Record says, "they had power and authority, given unto them that they might speak, and they also had what they should speak given unto them." The arm of the Lord was with them in every way, and the power of the Great Jehovah protected and guided his servants to a vast "harvest of them who loved and served the Lord."

Verses 20-25

Nephi and Lehi did proceed from Zarahemla, thence to go to the Land of Nephi. From Zarahemla the prophets proceeded to the Lamanite Capital in the Land of Nephi, where yet mightier power attended them. The voice of God from Heaven sustained their testimony; angels ministered to the people who assembled to see them; neither prisons, nor chains, nor bonds, could restrain or hold them, and they accomplished an ever blessed and marvelous work among the benighted children of Laman. (30 B.C.) God's power was manifested at these times in mercy to the darkened condition of the minds of these Lamanites, when only extraordinary manifestations of His divine goodness could reach their hearts. They had no records to which they could appeal, and all their traditions were opposed to the Holy Being whose message of eternal joy the Nephite prophets bore. Thus in their weakness they were strengthened by signs and wonders which the people better educated in the things of God could but with ill grace claim.

The story of the ministration of Nephi and Lehi in the Land of Nephi is one of the greatest faith-promoting ever written. When they reached its chief city, they were thrust into that same prison into which Ammon and his companions were cast by the guards of King Limhi. (See Mosiah 7 ) Here they were kept with little or no food for a number of days. At the end of this time the officers of the Lamanites went to the prison with the intention of slaying the brothers. But to their intense surprise, the Lamanites found Nephi and Lehi encircled about as if by fire. At this strange spectacle, scenes never before witnessed and contrasts so striking, fear fell upon the Lamanite officers. They dared not touch the prisoners lest they should be burned. Yet when they saw that Nephi and Lehi were not consumed by the flames their hearts took courage, though they still stood as if struck by amazement.

Verses 26-28

Nephi and Lehi did stand forth and began to speak unto them. We may imagine that the Lamanite officers, in their almost overwhelming wonderment at the scene presented here, were about ready to thrust their swords through their breasts. But a voice of kindness from the men they had so recently scourged and were about ready to slay, so melted their hard hearts that they, too, bowed before the Majesty on High, and to the number of three hundred souls went forth and did proclaim to their fellows the things they saw and heard.

The words of Nephi and Lehi to the assembled throng reassured the startled Lamanites that no harm would come upon them, and what they saw was manifest to them that they might know that no one could harm the two brothers, and that they were the servants of the Most High, and His all-powerful arm shielded them. Nor was this all: a sudden earthquake shook the ground, the prison walls tottered to their foundations, a pall of thick darkness covered all whom curiosity or other motives had gathered to the prison. The unburning flame, the quivering walls, the earth that shook beneath their feet, the impenetrable cloud of blackness, all conspired to fill the hearts of the Lamanites with a solemn fear and awful dread. They began to see and realize the almighty power of God; they were filled with the sense of their own nothingness.

Verses 29-49

There came a voice as if it were above the cloud of darkness. A voice, the voice of One whom they knew not, sounded in their affrighted ears. Once and again, yea, a third time, and each time that the voice came it was followed by the trembling of the earth and the shaking of the prison walls. All nature quivered at the presence of the Majesty On High, while the heavy, palpable, impenetrable darkness still enshrouded them.

From above the voice descended: it was outside the cloud of darkness; its tones came not to their quaking hearts with the roar of pealing thunder, nor was it like the tumultuous flow of angry waters, but a still small voice of perfect mildness, almost a whisper that pierced to their inmost souls. That voice was the voice of the mighty God of Jacob, and He called upon all those who heard Him to repent and to do His servants no harm. With the third repetition of this command were added marvelous words of Salvation that cannot be uttered by man. And because of the darkness that enveloped them, and the fearful dread that filled their hearts, none of them dared to move. Fear, astonishment, apprehension of what was to come, had riveted each to the spot upon which he stood.

Verses 35-41

There was one among them who was a Nephite by birth. Among the crowd was an apostate Nephite, or a dissenter from the true Church, named Aminadab. This man, happened to turn his face in the direction in which the two disciples stood. He beheld that their countenances shone with a glorious light, and that they were conversing with someone who appeared to be above them, for their eyes were turned heavenward. Aminadab drew the attention of those who surrounded him to this glorious appearance, and the spell that bound them was sufficiently removed to enable them to turn towards the prisoners and to become witnesses of that fact also. "What do all these things mean?" they anxiously inquired. "They do converse with the angels of God," answered Aminadab. "What shall we do that this cloud of darkness may be removed?" was their next question. "You must repent and cry unto the Voice, even until ye shall have faith in Christ," he replied. They did cry unto God with all the energy that their terrifying surroundings inspired, and so continued to supplicate the Eternal Throne until the cloud was dispersed. Then to their great surprise, they discovered that they also were entombed in a pillar of living fire. Yet this fire did not hurt them, it did not singe their garments, it did not consume the prison walls, but their terror was swept away, and they were filled with joy that was unspeakable, for the Holy Spirit of God filled their souls, and they broke forth in marvelous words of praise and rejoicing.

Again, a pleasant, searching whisper reached their gladdened ears. It said to them: "Peace, peace, be unto you because of your faith in My Well-Beloved, Who was from the foundation of the world." Now there was about 300 souls who heard and saw these things, and they cast up their eyes unto Heaven, which was opened to their vision, and holy angels came down and ministered unto them.

Verses 50-52

The converted Lamanites did yield up unto the Nephites the lands of their possession. The tidings of this glorious appearing were quickly spread near and far in the lands where the Lamanites dwelt. So powerful was the testimony, and so great were the evidences, that the major portion of the people believed, repented and obeyed the Gospel message. Then, like all true Saints, they manifested the sincerity of their repentance by works of restitution; they laid down their weapons of war, they cast aside their false traditions, their hatred gave place to love, and they restored to the Nephites, Zarahemla and the other lands which they had taken from them. (30 B.C.)

The missionary labors of Nephi and Lehi provoke a lively interest in one who sees in the incidents of this life, a great plan slowly and surely making known the wise purposes of God. Let us not err by regarding these incidents as accidents, truly, "the accidents of man are the inspirations of God, and the incidents of this life are the leadings and guidings of Him Who made it."

As we have noted, it was then about 29 B.C., or thirty years before the birth of the Savior in the Land of Judea whence the fathers of both the Nephite and Lamanite races came. It was also the Sixty-second year of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi. The student of Nephite Annals, even the casual observer, is impressed with the time and manner in which the marvelous conversion of the Lamanites was accomplished. And to us all, no matter what is our station in life, it appears that the people who dwelt in the Promised Land were being made ready to hear that grand and glorious event proclaimed by holy men of God.

As we have already noted, as soon as the missionary brothers reached the capital city of the Lamanites they were imprisoned by some guards of the king. After suffering the pangs of hunger for many days—they were denied food and drink—and other barbaric tortures, in fact they were subjected to all the afflictions human ingenuity could suggest or evil power achieve, the royal soldiers came to the prison to slay them. But the power of Him Who dwells On High, and great assemblies of holy angels, interceded for them. The walls of the prison rocked beneath the surges of an earthquake; terror, a violent dread, and fright, overwhelmed the spectators who had gathered there. In the tumult the Lamanites saw two men conversing with visitors from Heaven, who were sent to comfort and minister unto them. The Lamanites stood as if transfixed; they could not move, they could not flee; fright came upon them; blackness, as if it were a dense fog surrounded them. But in their bewilderment, a soft, sweet voice, almost a whisper, but whose reverberations shook the earth, was heard to speak. It testified to them of Christ, and the message their prisoners bore. It promised them peace, and said unto them many other things that could not be written. "Peace, peace be unto you because of your faith in My Well Beloved, Who was from the foundation of the world," was the benediction it gave them. What was its effect? A great one! We will discuss that in our next chapter. But now, the glorious splendor of the Lord's might which was witnessed by those who were in the prison-house, and the majesty of His presence proclaimed to them by hosts of angels from Above, as we have said, so melted their hard hearts, that they, too, bowed before The Majesty On High, and said, "Behold, what do all these things mean, and Who is it with Whom these men do converse?" "They do converse with the angels of God," was the answer one of their own number gave. "What shall we do, that this cloud of darkness may be removed from overshadowing us?" they further inquired; to which their informer replied, "You must repent, and cry unto the Voice, even until ye shall have faith in Christ, Who was taught unto you by Alma, and Amulek, and Zeezrom; and when ye shall do this, the cloud of darkness shall be removed from overshadowing you." "And it came to pass that they did begin to cry unto the Voice of Him Who had shaken the earth; yea, they did cry even until the cloud of darkness was dispersed." Thus, suddenly, the Lamanites looked forward to Christ's coming although before they knew Him not. Everything portended its glory; all Creation seemed to mingle songs in His praise, and therein offered its homage to His Great Name. The Lamanites' vision of God's glory and might transcended all else, even all thoughts of material welfare and filled their hearts with a joy of everlasting bliss.

AMINADAB

A Nephite who in early life was a member of the Church of God. From it he turned away, went over to the Lamanites, and took up his residence in the City of Lehi-Nephi where he dwelt 30 B.C.

When the two prophets, Nephi and Lehi, the sons of Helaman, came into the Land of Nephi and there were cast into prison, God made use of Aminadab as an instrument in explaining the meaning of the glorious manifestation of His power which then took place. We may therefore infer that Aminadab was not radically a bad man. Whether he was in the prison as an officer, prisoner, or a stranger led thither by curiosity or by sympathy for the two Nephites is not explained, but we find him there when the earth shook, when the voice of God was heard from Heaven, and the other wonderful and awful manifestations of His presence occurred.

Aminadab was apparently the first who was permitted to notice that the faces of the prophets shone with the glory of God, and that they were conversing with angelic beings. To this he drew the attention of the multitude, and when they inquired what these things meant he had faith and intelligence sufficient to explain the situation to them and to instruct them in what they should do to escape the terrible cloud of darkness that overspread them. Further, he instructed them in the principle of faith in the coming Redeemer, and of repentance for past misdeeds. It is not unreasonable to suppose that Aminadab was among those who went forth from the prison bearing joyous testimony to what they had seen and heard, through which testimony thousands were brought to a knowledge of, and obedience to the Gospel Plan, and that Aminadab, himself, again yielded obedience to its laws and remained faithful thereto to the end.
