Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 6

Verses 1-6

The Lamanites had become, the more part of them, a righteous people. In the last chapter we discussed the marvelous manner in which many of the Lamanites were brought to believe in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to accept membership in God's Holy Church. It was as the event of a day; so great was the sudden change in their character, and so marked the reversal of their desires, that the Lamanites soon exceeded the Nephites in their good works and faith in the living God. Extraordinary as it may seem, instead of Nephite missionaries visiting the Lamanites, Lamanite missionaries were soon ministering the precious truths of the Gospel among the Nephites. Then a universal peace, such as had never before been known since the division of the two races, extended over the whole land. Indeed, from this time forth the history of the two nations, to a large extent, became one. Together they worshiped the Lord; together they rose and sank; together they battled with the assassin hosts of Gadianton, together they triumphed over the desperate free-lancers, and together they sought refuge in one vast body when there was no safety but in massing the people into one land; together the more unrighteous portions of both races were destroyed at the Crucifixion of the Savior, and together the more righteous ones witnessed His appearing, listened to His words, received His Law, and became true worshipers in His Holy Church.

Henceforth, for generations, they were no more of Nephi, no more of Laman, no more of Jacob, no more of Ishmael—all were of Christ.

As we have noted, the Nephites of this generation were an admixture of the righteous who were righteous for righteousness' sake, and the wicked who were wicked because their deeds were wicked, and who saw therein no need for repentance. The Sacred Record says that the wicked became "grossly wicked"—refusing to keep the Lord's commandments, and also rejecting the prophets who came to them warning of destruction. In material ways all prospered, the wicked as well as the righteous. Worldly goods were had by them in abundance. Gold and silver filled their treasure houses, their flocks and herds increased, their orchards budded and blossomed and their fields yielded much meat. Notwithstanding their waywardness and backsliding the Lord prospered them, and above all else, peace, the Lord's most precious gift, was their portion and sanctified to Him their every worthwhile endeavor. This peace, however, lasted only a few years. There were many Nephites who could not endure what promised to be a lasting peace. Like the Jews from whom they sprang, they grew intolerant, proud and haughty. Also like their ancestors on the Eastern Continent who made alliances with ungodly neighbors, they were impolitic. They forgot that there is no happiness in doing wickedly, or in other words, "If there be no righteousness there be no happiness." ( 2 Ne. 2:13 ) Righteousness, peace, and happiness dwell in the same tent.

Nevertheless, and in spite of their class distinction, the Nephites, as a whole, welcomed and found great joy because the Lamanites had aligned themselves with the Church of God. For the Lamanites it was a new awakening. The old traditions of their fathers were abandoned by them. There was a change within them that was almost complete; what once they hated they now loved, and the things they once held tightly to their bosoms they now despised. The Spirit of the Lord imbued almost the entire race and raised it to a higher level of peace and happiness.

Not only did the Lamanites bask in the light of God's Holy Word, but the warmth of His love encircled them about and filled their hearts with joy unmeasured. This equally true comment may be made of the righteous Nephites. Both Nephites and Lamanites now rejoiced in the Lord. They intermingled in their worshiping assemblies, testifying to each other of God's goodness, and bearing to the extent of their own strength each other's burdens. Truly, the fruits of the Gospel of Christ were spread upon His table, and the Nephites bade the Lamanites, and the Lamanites, the Nephites, "O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name together." ( Ps. 34:3 )

Fellowship among the different races, and communion between its members, soon knit together the righteous of each into one vast people, whose strength was in serving the Lord, and whose joy was in doing His will. The Lamanites, not content with being passive partakers of His goodness, took it upon themselves to proclaim God's mercy and kindness. Many of the Nephites who had become rich, were dwindling in unbelief; the Lamanite missionaries declared unto them the first principles of the Gospel, faith and repentance, with such great power that the leaders and teachers of the Nephites, as well as those who sat in darkness, were amazed. The long-suffering of God, and that He provides Salvation for all who obey His word, was the burden of their message. Zarahemla and all the Lands of the Nephites, together with their own Land of Nephi, was the field of labor which these Lamanite missionaries chose, and to bring souls to Christ, they profoundly meditated, was the greatest work of the angels in Heaven, or of man on Earth. The Lamanites, we are assured, did not neglect their work!

Verses 7-9

There was peace in all the land. Peace is to be found in every land where righteousness prevails. Peace and righteousness, we have before time stated, go hand-in-hand. It is therefore only natural that there is peace where the people keep the commandments of the Lord. Peace is God's most precious gift. "There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked," ( Isa. 57:21 ) and we remember God's most gracious promise to ancient Israel, "And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid." ( Lev. 26:6 ) When, in this Chapter, we read of the peace that covered all the land because of the righteousness of the Lamanites in Nephi's and Lehi's time, we think of the blessing commanded of the Lord upon the Children of Israel, "The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make His face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up His countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they shall put My Name upon the Children of Israel; and I will bless them." ( Num. 6:24-27 ) The blessings pronounced upon the Lamanites in the Land of Nephi was similar to the one noted above; "Peace, peace be with you . . ." (v. 47) was the Voice of Him Who Reigns On High. Again, we say, Peace and righteousness go hand-in-hand. Any peace in opposition to this, is all peace, peace, when there is no peace. ( Jer. 6:14 )

The incidents recorded in the Book of Mormon bear witness that where peace is founded upon truth, upheld and sustained by righteousness, the people prosper and the land is free from strife and contention. Note: "And now it came to pass that Alma did walk in the ways of the Lord, and did keep His commandments, and he did judge righteous judgments; and there was continual peace through the land." ( Mosiah 29:43 ) Again: "And it came to pass that peace and the love of God was restored again among the people; and they searched the Scriptures, and hearkened no more to the words of this wicked man." ( Jacob 7:23 ) and still again and again: "For O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him that bringeth good tidings, that is the founder of peace, yea, even the Lord. . . . ( Mosiah 15:18 ) The Savior, on the occasion of His visit to the Nephites in the Land Bountiful, quoted the Prophet Isaiah in regard to events of the Last Days: "And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." ( 3 Ne. 22:13 ) For we remember the words of the Psalmist: "Great peace have they which love Thy law . . ." (119:165) See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume III, pp. 52ff. "Indeed, He is the Prince of Peace." (See 2 Ne. 19:6 )

The ancient enemies, the Nephites and the Lamanites, now became friends through righteous living. The old custom among the Lamanites was to leave to the whim of their king whether or not to slay any Nephite intruder, but this was done away with in the love of God that filled their bosoms with a new hope in Christ. (See Alma 17:20-21 ) The Sacred Record notes that "the Nephites did go into whatsoever part of the land they would, whether among the Nephites or the Lamanites. . . . and the Lamanites did also go whithersoever they would, whether it were among the Lamanites and the Nephites; and thus they did have free intercourse one with another, to buy and to sell, and to get gain, according to their desire." The exchange of common merchandise brought to both parties many riches, "exceeding plenty of gold, and of silver, and of all manner of precious metals, both in the land south and in the land north."

Verse 10

North America was called Mulek. To the ancient Nephites the whole of North America was known as the Land of Mulek, and South America as the Land of Lehi. The reason why these names were so given was because the Lord brought Mulek to the Land North, and Lehi into the Land South when He led them from Judea to this greater Land of Promise. From the days of the first Mosiah to the Christian era, South America was divided into two grand divisions. These were the Land of Zarahemla and the Land of Nephi. During this period, except in times of war, the Lamanites occupied the Land of Nephi, and the Nephites inhabited the Land of Zarahemla.

Verses 11-14

Among the Nephites were men who worked and refined all kinds of ore who raised grain, and flocks and herds, and their women toiled and spun. The Nephites were not an idle people. Work in abundance was everywhere found. Among them could be seen workers in every kind of ore, refining it, and making jewelery with which they made ornaments of every kind and of which their women were very fond. Of the goldsmith's art in ancient Mexico it has been said, "It is a well established fact that the arts and industries of ancient Mexico had come to a high degree of perfection. The historians of the Conquest are full of admiration for the works that Mexican goldworkers executed, as well as the stone workers, the jewelers, and the artisans of feather-work." (Professor Eduard Seler, Paris 1890, in a paper read at the Eighth Session of the Congress—International des Americanistes.)

In the Record of Zeniff, who led the unstable Zarahemlaites in the unsatisfactory attempt to colonize what they considered to be the Land of their First Inheritance, we read: "And I did cause that the men should till the ground, and raise all manner of grain and all manner of fruit of every kind. And I did cause that the women should spin, and toil, and work, and work all manner of fine linen, yea, and cloth of every kind, that we might clothe our nakedness; and thus we did prosper in the land—that we did have continual peace in the land for the space of twenty and two years." ( Mosiah 10:4-5 ) About ninety years later, Alma, the younger, noted that "because of the steadiness of the Church they began to be exceeding rich, having abundance of all things whatsoever they stood in need—an abundance of flocks and herds, and fatlings of every kind, and also abundance of grain, and of gold and of silver, and of precious things, and abundance of silk and fine-twined linen, and all manner of good homely cloth." ( Alma 1:29 )

In addition to the material blessings which God, in His goodness and mercy, gave to those who obeyed His word, the people enjoyed His blessings of the Spirit. They prospered not only in their fields and in their flocks and herds, but the Church was enlarged by the addition of new converts who greatly enjoyed the preaching and the prophecies of God's servants. The peace and happiness of the Nephites continued until the end of the Sixty-sixth year of the Judges when to their great dismay the complacency of the Nephites' political existence was marred by the activities of the Gadianton Robbers who grew in strength and influence, and who were actually fostered by the Nephites, but were destroyed by the more righteous Lamanites when found within their borders.

Verse 15

The Chief Judge, and his son who succeeded him, were murdered by an unknown hand. In the year 26 B.C., or in the Sixty-sixth year of the Judges, Cezoram, the Chief Judge, was murdered by someone unknown as he sat upon the Judgment Seat administering the Law, and his son, who succeeded him, suffered a like end within the same year.

Verses 16-19

In the year 25 B.C., which was the year Sixty-seven of the Judges, the people began to grow exceedingly wicked again. The universal peace of which we have just spoken brought the Nephites many blessings, but also it provided them with much time for idleness and merry-making. Its effect upon the converted Lamanites was indeed different. Instead of it furnishing idle time and time for gaiety, it rendered firm and steadfast their resolve to cherish faithfully every worthwhile endeavor their new-found faith inspired. The Nephites had enjoyed prosperity to such an extent and for a period so long, accumulating material throughout, that their possessions crowded all thoughts of God from their hearts, and they made little effort to keep the Lord's commandments, but sank deeper and deeper into sin and degradation. It did not occur to them to ascribe to the Lord thanks for His many blessings. Each emolument and increase they received was to them a means to overcome a neighbor in distress. Soon their riches became power, and worldly goods were idols before which they bowed. It was not long before jealousy routed contentment, and personal ambition mocked humility. The Nephites sought for riches upon any basis whatsoever; on it their hearts were set. "Therefore they began to commit secret murders, and to rob and to plunder, that they might get gain."

The wicked impulses that drove the Nephites to murder and to plunder their weaker brethren were inspired by a band of ruthless agitators who put robbery and stealth above the higher things of life. These lawbreakers and desperadoes were known as the Gadianton Robbers, they having been "formed by Gadianton and Kishkumen." They were they who murdered the "Chief Judge, Cezoram, and his son while in the Judgment Seat . . ." The Robbers grew fast in numbers, getting footholds among the Nephites and the Lamanites. But while the Nephites looked upon them with an air of disdain, they at the same time fostered their growth in their midst. At first it appears that among the more wicked of the Lamanites there were more Gadiantons, but that status quo did not last long. The Lamanites quickly recognized the peril of having them as friends and neighbors. In fear of the Robber's united and ultimate strength they yielded to the brusque demands of safety, and destroyed whosoever they found of them dwelling within their lands.

Verses 21-24

Satan did stir up the hearts of the more part of the Nephites. The increasing wickedness of the Nephites was not only apparent in the number of them who chose to do evil, but by the grossness evinced in their daily lives. Grossly, as used by the Prophet Joseph Smith (v. 2) in the translation of the Sacred Record, means, we believe, coarse; unrefined; vulgar; sensual; obscene; depraved; corrupt. The wicked, both Nephite and Lamanite of that period, sank to such unfathomable depths of iniquity and moral depravity that the voices of God's servants could not reach them. The annals of those times mark in blackest type one of the darkest pages of Book of Mormon history. Its whole nature is but a composite of crime and cruelty. We cannot understand it. So evil became the hearts of "the more part of the Nephites" that the voice of a righteous indignation was as if never spoken. In spite of the warnings of the holy prophets whom the Lord sent to guide them, they wandered into forbidden paths where death and destruction awaited the long-suffering of the Lord. Satan had great hold upon their hearts; instead of peace there was contention; instead of unitedly serving the Lord each walked in his own way; instead of joy there was sorrow, there was darkness where there should have been light. We cannot overstate or exaggerate the awful plight into which the cunning of the devil led the Nephites. Men of mighty faith became weak like unto servants of evil; their bodies and minds seemed to be under the control of demons; they were slaves of pride and passion, and soon became the victims of corruption which they in their fallen condition could not elude.

It was then but a short step for this once favored people to take when they openly rebelled towards God. We have already said that if ever there was a people swift to do evil, it was the Nephites of this generation. They espoused the cause of the Gadianton Robbers, "they did unite with those bands of robbers, and did enter into their covenants and their oaths." They swore by all things in Heaven and on Earth that, come what may, they would protect and shield each other in their murders, and their plunderings, and in their sins, no matter what.

In order that none of their brethren in sin should be discovered in transgression, the Robbers had secret signs and words which protected the evil doer. These signs were given and these words spoken that they identified the evil doer as a brother, or as one who had entered into the covenant not to divulge the perpetrators of a crime when committed, or to injure, in any way, "one who did belong to his band." Thus crime and every type of iniquity grew up like rank grass, and the fair and fragrant flowers of Christianity which had been the heritage of the Nephites, were either lost sight of, or were stifled under the dense undergrowth of wickedness. "And thus they might murder," the Sacred Record says, "and plunder, and steal, and commit whoredoms and all manner of wickedness, contrary to the laws of their country and also the laws of their God."

To protect the undivided group of robbers, it was necessary for them to invoke similar signs and words to govern the whole number who had united for the sole purpose of robbing and stealing as they used to protect the individual. It was part of the Gadianton's creed, when one of their number was taken in the act of revealing to the world the purpose of their organization, to take him and try him of themselves, and not turn him over to the duly constituted authorities of the land.

Verses 25-30

It is he who is the author of all sin. The devil is the author and the creator of all sin, just as he is the father of all lies. Every sin and all evil has its beginning in a false premise, or, in other words, in a lie. From the very first, it was Satan who by his lies and deceptions tempted Mother Eve, and by the same token beguiled Adam into partaking of the Forbidden Fruit. It was Satan, under the specter of a friend, who plotted with Adam's son, Cain, to murder Cain's brother, Abel, and promised Cain that the knowledge of it would never come into the possession of the world. To Cain the secret scheme wherein the devil and he, himself, had conspired, was so favorable in attaining their end that ever afterward he and his followers resorted to that same source for guidance.

And also it was Satan who put it into men's hearts to build the Tower of Babel in order to circumvent the purposes of God, and get to Heaven in spite of His will. "It was that same being," the sacred historian notes, who with devise and cunning led the Brother of Jared's followers for hundreds of years into forbidden paths or until he "dragged the people down to an entire destruction, and to an everlasting hell." It was by deceit and promises of unending carnal satisfaction that the destroyer of all that is good "spread the works of darkness and abominations over all the face of the land," which the sacred historian also notes "is this land."

Now, these works of darkness and the abominations which were spread over all the land were like unto those which brought sorrow and dissension to the Nephites who lived about a quarter of a century Before Christ. These abominations were the secret oaths and the covenants that were recorded upon the Twenty-four Plates of Gold which were delivered to Helaman, Alma's son, when his father turned over to him the sacred things of the Nephites of which he was custodian. However, we are here informed that these oaths and covenants "did not come forth unto Gadianton from the records which were delivered unto Helaman; but behold, they were put into the heart of Gadianton by that same being" who caused only trouble to come unto the children of men, and who now plotted their destruction. (See Alma 37 )

The wicked plans of the devil are never-ending. His works of darkness continue from generation to generation. His method of inducing awful wickedness is the same in all ages of the world, and among all people. Early in his rebellion against all that is good, he discovered certain weaknesses that make men victims of his guile, and believers in his wicked ways. "It is he who is the author of all sin. And behold, he doth carry on his works of darkness and secret murder, and doth hand down their plots, and their oaths, and their covenants, and their plans of awful wickedness, from generation to generation according as he can get hold upon the hearts of the children of men."

Verses 31-41

The devil had got great hold upon the hearts of the Nephites. In a very few years Satan obtained a commanding grasp of the Nephites. They walked in his ways, and trampled under their feet whatsoever was good. Their riches became their gods, and their gold and silver the things they loved most. By the Sixty-seventh year of the Judges the large majority of the Nephites "had become exceedingly wicked," notwithstanding the untiring efforts of the righteous to stem what to them was the rising tide of iniquity. Their failure to do so was a great cause of lamentation among them.

But in another endeavor they had great cause to rejoice. "The Lamanites began to grow exceedingly in the knowledge of their God; yea, they did begin to keep His statutes and commandments, and to walk in truth and uprightness before Him." The Lamanites thus took upon themselves the traditional place which the Nephites had long occupied, that of being the true worshipers of Christ. The Nephites abandoned that sacred, holy, calling, while the Lamanites grasped it with zealous hearts.

In this strange way the Nephites by fostering the growth of the Gadiantons among them not only made the Laws of Mosiah a thing of ridicule and derision, but they obtained for them the complete rule of the government by which the Gadiantons filled the offices thereof with their own kind. With the aid of the power of government in their hands, the wicked and those who chose to do evil, evinced a peculiar hatred for "the poor, and the meek, and the humble followers of God." "They did trample under their feet and smite and rend and turn their backs upon" them and in no way sought righteousness and peace.

"And thus we see that they were in an awful state, and ripening for an everlasting destruction."

This ended the Sixty-eighth year of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi.
