Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 7

Verses 1-3

Nephi . . . returned to the Land of Zarahemla from the land northward. Nephi, who had gone to the northern continent, tarried there until the year 23 B.C., the Sixty-ninth year of the Judges, when his teachings and prophecies having been rejected by its inhabitants, returned in sorrow to Zarahemla; but he found no comfort there. The Gadianton Robbers filled the Judgment-Seats, and perverted the laws to suit their own avarice and lust. The life, the property, the liberty, the virtue of righteous men and women, were counted as things of naught, but by the robber judges their playthings or their spoil.

The depths of depravity and moral decay into which the Nephites of that time had sunk, is judged by the purposes to which the lofty calling of the judges was prostituted. Not only did the judges deny and deride justice for the poor, but they often passed judgment on the righteous just because of their righteousness, "letting the guilty and the wicked go unpunished because of their money." Great was Nephi's grief when he realized that their tenure in office was almost a permanent one, and that in the position of Judge, they could do anything they pleased, and therefore make of their office a citadel of infatuation and greed. The judges sought glory; to be held in high repute was what they loved, as in being so retained, it was easier for them "to commit adultery, and steal, and kill, and do according to their own wills."

The hearts of the Nephites had become so depraved in so short a time that Nephi was amazed at its suddenness. During what was really only a few years, when Nephi was in the north, these things had entered their souls, and had debased a people of high ideals to a "generation of vipers," who longed for nothing better than to obtain, by stealth if necessary, their neighbor's goods, their gold and silver. To say the least, the heart of Nephi was sickened, and he cried out in "the sorrow of his soul," "O that I could have had my days in the days when my father Nephi first came out of the Land of Jerusalem, that I could have joyed with him in the Promised Land; then were his people easy to be entreated, firm to keep the commandments of God, and slow to be led to do iniquity; and they were quick to hearken unto the words of the Lord—Yea, if my days could have been in those days, then would my soul have had joy in the righteousness of my brethren. But behold, I am consigned that these are my days, and that my soul shall be filled with sorrow because of this wickedness of my brethren."

Verses 10-12

In the garden of his home in Zarahemla, there was a tower. Nephi's house in Zarahemla was situated on one of the principal thoroughfares of that city. It led to the chief market place. In his garden, near the highway, he had built a tower whither it was his wont to repair for prayer. On an occasion shortly after his return from the north he became so deeply concerned because of the iniquity of the people that in earnest supplication to the Lord he raised his voice so high that he was heard by the passers-by in the street below. A listening crowd soon gathered, and when the prophet had ended his devotions and became aware of their presence, he commenced to teach them.

Verses 13-29

Nephi opened his mouth and said unto them. "Behold, why have ye gathered yourselves together?" Nephi answered the question he asked them by propounding another, "That I may tell you of your iniquities?" Those who gathered about him wondered at his boldness and marveled because he was unafraid. Undoubtedly they knew his position in the Church of God which was established among them, and of his office in the Priesthood. They knew he was the head of the Church and that he was its Presiding High Priest. They also knew that they failed as individuals to keep the Lord's commandments, and that, at least, some of them were dangerously near the point of no return to God.

It was because of a sorrowing heart which yielded to the forlorn conclusion Nephi made that because of their iniquities, the Lord had forsaken the Nephites. In humble prayer to God, he had sought His help in re-establishing righteousness among them. But what concerned Nephi most was embodied in his next question to them: "Yea, how could you have given away to the enticing of him who is seeking to hurl away your souls down to everlasting misery and endless wo?"

Amid much that was painful to Nephi's heart, and perplexing to his mind, he clearly remembered that his people had, from the very first, been given a great and abounding light concerning God and His righteousness; also he remembered that he, himself, and his fathers before him, had caused that this light should be disseminated among them, but now he saw that all was darkness because they had rejected that light and had forsaken the Lord. He thought of the time when his people were happy because they served their Maker. Now, he mused, they seek for happiness in doing iniquity. Righteousness and happiness are component parts of life, was Nephi's conclusion as he thought of the words of Lehi, the great ancestor of both the Nephites and Lamanites: "For if there be no righteousness there be no happiness." ( 2 Ne. 2:13 ) He also remembered the words of Alma, his grandfather: "Wickedness never was happiness." ( Alma 41:10 )

Nephi thought of the pseudo-joys and follies of the world; the misery they each entailed and the sorrow they brought. The fallen condition of his erstwhile friends and neighbors recalled to his mind other words of God's holy servants; these he applied to his own people: "Happy is that people whose God is the Lord"; "Happy are they who are upright in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord"; "Happy are they that keep His testimonies, that seek Him with the whole heart"; "Happy are they that keep justice, that do righteousness at all times"; "Happy is he who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God." "Happy is everyone that feareth the Lord, that walketh in His ways."

Nephi boldly rebuked the sins of those who gathered to listen, their murders and their wickedness. At the same time, in the love of the Gospel he entreated and plead with them to amend their lives and do better. He also warned them of the terrible judgments that would fall upon them if they did not turn from their sinful ways. With a voice filled with charity, which only the hardest heart could resist, he begged earnestly that they listen to his petition, and forget their lust for the vain things of the world. He admonished them to repent, crying aloud, "Repent ye, repent ye! Why will ye die? Turn ye, turn ye unto the Lord your God." He reminded them that it was but a short time since the Lord had delivered them from the hands of their enemies, and appealed to them with great emotion, "O, how could you have forgotten your God in the very day that He has delivered you?" It is, he noted, that you have crowded all thoughts of Him from your hearts, and substituted therefor the plaudits of men. The things of the world are the Gods that fill your hearts, we may imagine Nephi said, and to them you fall down and worship. "You murder, and plunder, and steal, and bear false witness against your neighbor, and do all manner of iniquity," that you might get riches, and gold and silver.

It is here that Nephi, weighed down by the burden their wickedness imposed upon him, prophesied to them in the Name of the Lord, that, if they did not forsake their evil ways and turn to God, their much-loved city with all its grandeur, its temples and palaces, and other great cities round about "shall be taken away that ye shall have no place in them; for behold," he cried, "the Lord will not grant unto you strength, as He has hitherto done, to withstand your enemies." No doubt he reminded them that righteousness is strength, both physical and spiritual, as he thought of the words of King Lamoni to Ammon, the son of King Mosiah, "I know, in the strength of the Lord thou canst do all things." ( Alma 20:4 ) Nephi's mind went back still further; he recalled the experience of Zeniff and his people in the Land of Nephi-Lehi. Of the incident recorded, the historian says, "And it came to pass that we did go up in the strength of the Lord to battle. Now the Lamanites knew nothing concerning the Lord, nor the strength of the Lord, therefore they depended upon their own strength." ( Mosiah 10:10-11 ) The battle that followed was a decisive one. Zeniff's people won a grand and glorious victory. Why? Because says Zeniff, they put their trust in the strength of the Lord.

The Lord's strength is made known only to the righteous and to the wicked who repent. Again, we imagine Nephi saying, "The Lord will recompense the righteous for their righteousness, but the wicked who will not repent, He will destroy." We are reminded of King David's song of thanksgiving. It is recorded in II Samuel, Chapter 22; it was engraven upon the Plates of Laban, and as copies of the Hebrew Scriptures had been made available to all the Nephites, ( Alma 63:12 ) Nephi had a copy of them. He undoubtedly remembered how full of hope David's words were to the merciful and the upright, to the righteous and the pure in heart. In his troubled mind, we can conceive that Nephi compared the wayward citizens of Zarahemla to the Psalmist who saw in the Lord a Lamp which "will enlighten my darkness." His comparison became a contrast; the Zarahemlaites rejected the light. O! what a gap he saw between them. Nephi also remembered the words his forefathers spake, even those who dwelt in Jerusalem before Father Lehi left the Holy City; "O, House of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord," ( 2 Ne. 12:5 ; Isa. 2:5 ) "For," said the ancient Hebrew brethren, "In Thy light do we see light." ( Ps. 6:9 ) David repented of the evil he had done, while the wicked in Zarahemla boasted of the might doing iniquity seemed to bring.

Nephi compared his people with the Lamanites, or asked them to do so. He said: "Behold, my brethren, it shall be better for the Lamanites than for you except ye shall repent." "For behold," he noted, "they are more righteous than you, for they have not sinned against that great knowledge which ye have received; therefore the Lord will be merciful unto them; yea, He will lengthen out their days and increase their seed, even when thou shalt be utterly destroyed except thou shalt repent."

Alma, the younger, when he was fulfilling his notable mission among the apostate Ammonihahites, cautioned them in this same manner, he said: "And now behold I say unto you, that if this people, who have received so many blessings from the hand of the Lord, should transgress contrary to the light and knowledge which they do have, I say unto you that if this be the case, that if they should fall into transgression, it would be far more tolerable for the Lamanites than for them. For behold, the promises of the Lord are extended to the Lamanites, but they are not unto you if ye transgress; for has not the Lord expressly promised and firmly decreed, that if ye will rebel against Him that ye shall utterly be destroyed from off the face of the earth? And now for this cause, that ye may not be destroyed, the Lord has sent His angel to visit many of His people, declaring unto them that they must go forth and cry mightily unto this people, saying: Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is nigh at hand." ( Alma 9:23-25 )

Verses 25-26

Wo be unto you because of that great abomination which has come among you. The Gadianton Robbers who cared little, or nothing for the law, and who delighted in evil, had usurped the authority of the Government, and through their works of iniquity had robbed the people of any sense of restraint to that which was wicked.

Pride, which, because of great riches, had "lifted" the Zarahemlaites up "beyond that which is good," and had hardened their hearts and blinded their eyes, thus giving the Robbers a fertile field into which to cast their soul-destroying seed. Nephi pronounced wo would come upon them because of this great abomination which had entered their lives. Abomination means anything which incites extreme disgust and hatred for it; also, abhorrence; detestation; loathing. Anything hateful or hopelessly vile. "Yea," Nephi cried, "wo be unto you because of your wickedness and abominations."

Verse 28

Except ye repent ye shall perish. The Lord, in every generation, has sent His servants to proclaim repentance to His children. It is a mark of His loving-kindness and long-suffering. It is a pledge given by Him to withhold His anger if only they will forsake their evil ways and turn to Him. In this verse, Nephi warns the Zarahemlaites to do just that, if not, their lands and other riches should be taken from them, and "ye shall be destroyed from off the face of the earth."

Verse 29

It is not of myself that I know these things. Not ascribing any glory unto himself for the knowledge he has of things to come, Nephi sealed his testimony with an appeal to the Lord to witness the truth whereof he spoke. Not that such an appeal was in the form of an oath, but he says, "I know that these things are true because the Lord God had made them known to me."

Again, we refer the reader to Alma's discourse to this same people nearly sixty years before; it is a full comment:

"And now, my brethren, I would that ye should hear me, for I speak in the energy of my soul; for behold, I have spoken unto you plainly that ye cannot err, or have spoken according to the commandments of God.

"For I am called to speak after this manner, according to the Holy order of God, which is in Jesus Christ; yea, I am commanded to stand and testify unto this people the things which have been spoken by our fathers concerning the things which are to come.

"And this is not all. Do ye not suppose that I know of these things myself? Behold, I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety?

"Behold, I say unto you they were made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by His Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me." ( Alma 5:43-46 )
