Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 8

Verse 1

There were men who were judges ... and they cried out against him. Continuing his address, Nephi boldly proceeded to point out their iniquities to the people of Zarahemla, and also to prophesy unto them utter destruction if they did not repent of their wickedness. He foretold the loss of their beautiful city to the Lamanites, saying as he did so, "This great city and also all those great cities which are round about, which are in the land of our possession, shall be taken away that ye shall have no place in them; for behold, the Lord will not grant unto you strength, as He has hitherto done, to withstand your enemies." ( Hel. 7:22 )

Nephi fiercely denounced the evil that existed among them, and warned of impending disaster if they persisted in following iniquity's enticements and its empty promise of reward. His plainness and frankness enraged the corrupt judges who had been placed in office by equally corrupt men, who, with each other, were associated in the powerful band of Gadianton Robbers. They therefore sought Nephi's own destruction. They thought that to destroy the accuser, the ones accused would be held guiltless. We may imagine the horror and dismay that greeted Nephi on his return to the land of his nativity from the north country where he had been preaching the Gospel. He was filled with remorse when upon "seeing the people in a state of such awful wickedness, and those Gadianton Robbers filling the Judgment-Seats—having usurped the power and authority of the land; laying aside the commandments of God, and not in the least aright before Him; doing no justice unto the children of men; condemning the righteous because of their righteousness; letting the guilty and the wicked go unpunished because of their money; and moreover to be held in office at the head of government, to rule and do according to their wills, that they might get gain and glory of the world, and, moreover, that they might the more easily commit adultery, and steal, and kill, and do according to their own wills." ( Hel. 7:4-5 )

The judges, fearing the wrath of Nephi's hearers for there were many who believed his words, appealed to all those who gathered about him to do what they, themselves, would like to have done, but to do which they were afraid; they did not say, but shout, "Why do ye not seize upon this man and bring him forth, that he may be condemned according to the crime which he hath done?" These judges wanted Nephi arraigned before them that whatever sentence should be imposed upon him would appear just. Injustice to Nephi in the form of legality was their aim. That their judges judge justly was a Nephite tradition since the days of King Mosiah II, and the judges hoped to make a pretense of its preservation, or a mere ostentation of doing so.

Verses 2-6

Why do ye suffer this man to revile against us? Keeping up a continual harangue, the judges sought to stir the people up to a point of mobocracy. Nephi's indictment of the judges because of their evil intentions toward God and His laws was unanswerable. Especially condemned by him were their designs of public polity that sooner or later would bring the Nephites into the bondage of sin. As a reward of Nephi's faithfulness, they sought of him, physical restraint, and in addition trod upon his freedom to choose right or wrong as God had vouchsafed this wonderful people in their divinely inspired constitution. Why do ye stand idly by, the judges wanted to know, and with complacency hear him abuse us as he rants and rails about our laws which are just and our supposed wickedness which he imagines; they urged bodily action against Nephi.

Nephi, unafraid, testified of the corruption which their laws had ceremonially been made unclean, and that how through popular voice, the power to alter them from the Code of King Mosiah had been delegated to hearts, diseased and depraved, who had changed them to suit their own infatuation and greed. Many things Nephi pointed out to them, but nothing that he said, the Sacred Record notes, "was contrary to the commandments of God."

Many of those who listened to Nephi and his detractors were sympathetic to the plan of physical repression proposed by the judges and therefore wanted to silence him thereby, but the others, who were also many, desired to hear more of his disclosures. He, without sparing anyone, invoked censure upon the judges whose works of darkness contributed to the iniquity which abounded among the people; he bemoaned the judges who judged unrighteous judgment, and who penalized the poor because, after all, they had no riches to purchase immunity. Nephi's catalogue of the judges' abuse of public service included many diabolical acts of infidelity, therefore they "durst not lay their own hands upon him, for they feared the people lest they should cry out against them."

Again, the judges, though outwardly calm, began a tirade against Nephi. "Why do you suffer this man to revile against us?" At length they turned their persuasive powers into ridicule, hoping in that way to accomplish their nefarious purposes. They attempted to make light of Nephi's promise of destruction because they said it included the entire people, and with contemptuous words they noted that "We are powerful, and our cities great, therefore our enemies can have no power over us."

Verses 7-9

Let this man alone, for he is a good man. With arguments of sophistry and with the help of ridicule, the judges succeeded in stirring up the people to anger against Nephi. But their calculations did not count upon the contentions that would thereby arise. Some demanded that action against him was the proper answer to his accusations, and that it should be taken, while others, more receptive of truth than they, cried out: "Let this man alone, for he is a good man, and those things which he saith will surely come to pass except we repent."

Nephi's teachings now began to bear fruit, and his words brought forth a response from many who heard him speak testifying of their belief. "For we know," they said, "that he has testified aright concerning our iniquities. And behold they are many, and he knoweth as well all things which shall befall us as he knoweth of our iniquities; yea, and behold, if he had not been a prophet he could not have testified concerning those things."

Verses 10-26

Nephi's words caused a division among his hearers, some clamoring for his arrest and imprisonment as one who bore false testimony and who reviled the law, while others maintained that he spoke the truth and was a prophet. So many of the latter class now became his defenders that those who sought to do him harm "were compelled because of their fear, that they did not lay their hands on him." This change in the expressed attitude of the mob standing before him, emboldened Nephi, and seeing that he found favor in the sight of some, "began again to speak unto them.

Many who listened to Nephi's admonishments were astonished because of his knowledge concerning them, and wondered at the information he had available of their wickedness. (v. 8) Could one man, be he ever so introspective, have such power that even the thoughts and feelings of others be known to him? Nephi answered their doubts by reminding them of Moses to whom much power was given of the Lord that he, being only one man, did "smite upon the waters of the Red Sea, and they parted hither and thither, insomuch that the Israelites, who were our fathers, came through upon dry ground, and the waters closed upon the armies of the Egyptians and swallowed them up." Do not deceive yourselves into thinking that God could not, and this ye do in spite of the marvelous manifestation of the power given Moses of which you have read, give unto me the same power by which I know "concerning the judgments that shall come upon you except ye repent." By denying the truth of my words, you, he said, "deny all the words which have been spoken by our fathers, and also the words which have been spoken by this man Moses, who had such power given unto him, yea, the words which he hath spoken concerning the coming of the Messiah."

From the very first, when Lehi, 600 years before the birth of the Savior in the Land of Judea, led his little company consisting of his family and some of their friends out of the doomed City of Jerusalem, they carried with them a copy of the Hebrew Scriptures engraved upon plates of brass. These proved to become the basis of their learning. Observing scriptural facts made of the Jews, students of history, politics, and religion, as well as worshipers of the true God, the Nephites inherited this type of learning from the Jews of whom they sprang. Copies of the Hebrew Scriptures were made and widely disseminated among them, and was considered an important part of Nephite wisdom and understanding. Nephi now called upon this great store of learning folded up in the bosoms of even the humblest of his hearers to verify the things he said. As we have noted, he first summoned the account of Moses, the leader of the Children of Israel, to testify in affirmation of whether or not power to fulfill God's word could be given one or many. After citing the incident of crossing the Red Sea, wherein Israel was spared and the waters thereof swallowed up and drowned the Egyptians who followed them, he recalled much of Israel's history under Moses to affirm and confirm that to him (Nephi) the spirit of prophecy revealed the iniquities of the Zarahemlaites. This answered their query as to the source of his knowledge about them.

The spirit of prophecy is indeed the testimony of Christ, and every prophet down from Adam has made Christ's mission on earth the sum and substance of his message to which all else points. Nephi, one of the greatest prophets to whom the God of our Salvation revealed His holy mind and will, quickly seized upon this opportunity to declare anew, the coming of the Son of God, and Eternal Life to all who believed on His Name. Repentance is the natural result of belief on Him, and all believers are commanded so to do. Conviction in one's mind of wrong doing and one's determination to do it no more, is a required step in attaining Life Everlasting. Nephi's call to the Zarahemlaites that they repent of all evil was a prophetic one, and one in which the glories of God's Plan of Salvation, forgiveness of sin, is best exhibited. Nephi's condemnation of iniquity was not solely to remind the people of Zarahemla of their wickedness, but for them to repent was his admonition, and prepare themselves thereby to receive Him when He comes, which the Prophet-King Benjamin, almost a hundred years before ( Mosiah 3:5 ), and Alma sixty (See Alma 7:7 ), declared: "For behold, the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from Heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay...."

Beginning with Moses' account of the Brazen Serpent, Nephi further declared the coming of the Son of God. And as the Serpent was lifted up upon a pole, "so shall he be lifted up who is to come." (See Num. 21:9 ) When Alma and his companion were on their famous mission to the Zoramites, they, also, brought Moses' words to confirm their own.

But behold, this is not all; these are not the only ones who have spoken concerning the Son of God.

Behold, He was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behold a type was raised up in the wilderness, that whosoever would look upon it might live. And many did look and live.

But few understood the meaning of those things, and this because of the hardness of their hearts. But there were many who were so hardened that they would not look, therefore they perished. Now the reason they would not look is because they did not believe that it would heal them.

O my brethren, if ye could be healed by merely casting about your eyes that ye might be healed, would ye not behold quickly, or would ye rather harden your hearts in unbelief, and be slothful, that ye would not cast about your eyes, that ye might perish?

If so, wo shall come upon you; but if not so, then cast about your eyes and begin to believe in the Son of God, that He will come to redeem His people, and that He shall suffer and die to atone for their sins; and that He shall rise again from the dead, which shall bring to pass the resurrection, that all men shall stand before Him, to be judged at the last and judgment day, according to their works. ( Alma 33:18-22 )

The type spoken of by Alma was a pattern after the order of belief in God, and repentance of sin. It was also an emblem of God's mercy to His children who did not see Him through an eye of faith. It was a visable sign to them that He lived, and one in which He was recognized as the Giver of life. In their journeyings throughout the Arabian Wilderness, the Children of Israel were pestered by poisonous reptiles, and of their bite, many died. Moses prayed for help, and the Lord in answer instructed him what to do. The Lord told him to prepare a metal serpent, and to raise it upon a pole in the midst of his people. Furthermore He said that whosoever was bitten by one of these serpents would be made whole providing he only looked upon it. Many had faith to do so, but there were others who believed not, because after all, it was such a simple thing to do, therefore life was taken from them and they died. The Brazen Serpent became a symbol of the Messiah Who was yet to come, and so, in the same manner, all who "look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal."

Nephi called upon other witnesses of whom the Zarahemlaites were familiar to add verity to his testimony. Not only did Moses, he urged, know of the coming of the Son of God, but also all the holy prophets even unto the days of Abraham. Of His coming Abraham knew and "was filled with gladness and did rejoice." Not only Abraham was filled with gladness, but before his time many prophets holding the Holy Priesthood knew of His coming, and proclaimed its purpose to the people many thousand years before that glorious event, that even through Him "Redemption should come unto them."

Beside Moses and Abraham, Nephi particularly mentioned by name, Zenos, Zenock, Ezais, Isaiah and Jeremiah, all of whom, he said, "have testified these things."

Zenos was a Hebrew prophet whose words were preserved, and often quoted by the Nephite servants of God. All we are told of his personal history is that he was slain because he testified boldly of what God had revealed to him. That he was a man greatly blessed of the Lord with the spirit of prophecy is shown by that wonderful and almost incomparable parable of the Vineyard given at length by Jacob ( Jacob 5 ). His prophecies are quoted by Nephi, the son of Lehi, ( 1 Ne. 19:10 ; 12; 16); Alma ( Alma 33:3 , 13, 15); Amulek ( Alma 34:7 ); Samuel, the Lamanite ( Hel. 15:11 ); and Mormon ( 3 Ne. 10:16 ).

Zenock was also a prophet of Israel of whose personal history, or to what age he belonged, we know nothing. His writings were familiar to the Nephites as he is quoted by Nephi ( 1 Ne. 19:10 ); Alma ( Alma 33:15 ); Amulek ( Alma 34:7 ); and Mormon ( 3 Ne. 10:16 ).

Ezias was also a Hebrew prophet, referred to by Nephi ( Hel. 8:19 ). Elder Orson Pratt suggests that "Ezias may have been identical with Esaias, who lived contemporary with Abraham." (See D&C 84:11-13 .)

Isaiah. The Hebrew Prophet. His prophecies were engraved upon the Plates of Brass which were obtained from Laban, and were greatly valued by Nephi and his righteous descendants. The following chapters from the Book of Isaiah are quoted in full in the Book of Mormon: Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53. They are given to us very much as they appear in the Bible, with here and there an important addition which had evidently been left out of the manuscripts from which the Bible, as we have it today, was originally taken. In a few instances the meaning of the passage is entirely altered, for instance: Thou hast multiplied the nation and not increased the joy ( Isa. 9:3 ), appears, Thou hast multiplied the nation and increased the joy. ( 2 Ne. 19:3 )

Jeremiah lived and prophesied at the same time as Lehi, and appears to have known him personally. Many of his prophecies were recorded on the Plates of Brass obtained by Nephi from Laban ( 1 Ne. 5:13 ). His prophecies regarding the destruction of Jerusalem and the advent of the Messiah are referred to by Nephi, the son of Helaman ( Hel. 8:20 ).

Nephi was particular in his reference to Jeremiah, who was that same Jeremiah who foretold the destruction of Jerusalem. That Jerusalem was destroyed was known to the Nephites, the Prophet Lehi had that fact revealed to him shortly after he left that City. Nephi argued that the destruction of that great City was known to them by the spirit of prophecy, so is it not possible that Jeremiah's prophecy concerning the Son of God, and His coming into the world, should also be fulfilled. The one as the other.

There were some among Nephi's listeners who doubted that Jerusalem had been destroyed, or so they said, and that Jeremiah's prophecy was thereby unfulfilled. For them his answer was clear. Nephi brought their own history to prove that it was destroyed. They were all familiar with the story of the Mulekites. How Mulek was the youngest son of King Zedekiah; how all his brothers were slain by the Babylonians, and he, himself, was the only survivor of the Jewish Royal Family. The Babylonians, under King Nebuchadnezzar, occupied Jerusalem, plundering and murdering its inhabitants, and as a final act of savagery, destroyed it. Mulek was spirited away by some of the household courtiers, and in their perplexity, or rather, let us say guided by the hand of the Lord, they reached the Promised Land of America. Here they founded the marvelous city that now was the scene of Nephi's battle against corruption and sin. Nephi asserted that all doubt about Jerusalem being destroyed should be dispelled, because the seed of the Jewish king was scattered among them, and in fact, had become part of the Nephite race. "The seed of Zedekiah are with us," Nephi declared, and further he said, "They were driven out of the Land of Jerusalem," because of the Hebrew idea of the Messiah.

In addition to all the witnesses whose words Nephi brought to testify of the Son of God, their own ancestor, the Prophet Lehi was among the greatest. He, also, was driven out of the wicked City of Jerusalem because he testified of the coming of Jesus Christ. And also, besides that, many of their own prophets including Lehi's son, Nephi, testified of these things, and they rejoiced as they looked forward to the day of His coming.

"And," Nephi said, speaking of God's Son, "He is God," and here we may say as do the righteous everywhere, "There is no other." He is now with the prophets, Nephi declared, "And He did manifest Himself unto them, that they were redeemed by Him; and they gave unto Him glory, because of that which is to come."

That they sin inasmuch as they deny the power of God as testified to in the words of His holy prophets, was Nephi's rebuttal to the exclamations of unbelief thundered at him by the raucous crowd gathered before him. You, having heard the many witnesses which I have called to verify my words, lie if you say, "They are not true." Nephi's ire was like a flame, it burned them inwardly, and as a refiner's fire it separated the dross from the precious metal, the good from the bad, those who believed his words and those who rejected the things of which he testified. In spite of the evidence I have brought before you, "both things in Heaven, and all things which are in the Earth," notwithstanding them all, Nephi concluded, "You have rejected the Son of God, and cast all thoughts of Him out of your hearts."

After Nephi had plead with them to accept the truth and repent of their evil ways, they still assumed a riotous and menacing attitude towards him. In rebelling against His servant, you rebel against God Who sent him, and in so doing, Nephi protested, "Even at this time, instead of laying up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, where nothing doth corrupt, and where nothing can come which is unclean, ye are heaping up for yourselves wrath against the Day of Judgment."

Verses 27-28

Your Judge is murdered. Towards the conclusion of his address, Nephi surprised his hearers by stating that the Chief Judge, Seezoram, had been murdered by his brother, Seantum, who was anxious to obtain the office of Chief Judge for himself. Both these men were members of the vile band who owned Gadianton as their chief.
