Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 9

Verses 1-2

Certain men ... ran to the Judgment-Seat. The people did not believe Nephi's statement, so five incredulous men ran to the Judgment Hall to find out the truth of the matter. As they went on their hurried way, they discussed the contentions that had arisen because of Nephi's accusations, and the source whence he got the knowledge portrayed. They wondered if as he says God has commanded him to prophesy such marvelous things unto them. They doubted that Nephi was a prophet, but "if this thing which he hath said concerning the Chief Judge be true, that he is dead, then will we believe that the other words which he has spoken are true."

Verses 3-5

When they reached the Judgment Hall. When the five men reached the Judgment Hall, they discovered Seezoram lying dead in a pool of blood near the Judgment-Seat. The five messengers were so overcome with fear at this awful sight that they fell to the earth. They having not believed the words of Nephi concerning the Chief Judge, and now faced with their certitude, believed all his words, and wonder and amazement seized upon them and they therefore shuddered and their bodies quaked for fear all the judgments pronounced by Nephi should come upon them.

Verses 6-41

Some of the people said that Nephi was a prophet. Soon after, other citizens who had not heard Nephi, came in. Finding the dead Judge and the five men all there, they concluded that the latter must be the murderers, who, by some manifestation of Heaven's power, had been prevented from leaving the scene of their shameful deed. The officers therefore took the five and cast them into prison.

When the wicked learned that Nephi's words had proven true, they charged him with being an accomplice. They did not believe in revelation from God, so argued that Nephi must have had a hand in the murder or he could not have known anything about it. He was therefore taken and bound and brought before the multitude. Then they cross-examined him, abused him, and finally offered him money to confess that he had employed someone else to commit the dreadful crime. They were anxious to bring reproach and trouble upon him that they might have an excuse for not believing his words or heeding his counsel and teachings.

Nephi, to establish his innocence sent his accusers to the house of Seantum, and instructed them what to say. He further told them how the fratricide would act; how he would acquit him (Nephi) of all complicity in the murder, and assert his own innocence, until shown stains of blood on his cloak, and then, overwhelmed with terror, he would confess.

The people went and followed Nephi's instructions to them, and all he told came to pass; for according to his words Seantum did at first deny, and afterwards confess as Nephi had said he would, acknowledging also that Nephi knew nothing of the matter, unless it had been revealed to him of God.

Some of Zarahemla's citizens now acknowledged that Nephi was a prophet, others declared that he was a god, while many remained hardened in their sins. So violent became the contention that the people gathered in excited crowds upon the streets, wrangling and disputing about the events of the past two days, and in their excitement they entirely forgot Nephi and left him standing alone in the street.
