Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 10

Verses 1-3

Nephi went his way towards his own house. As we have noted, Nephi was left standing alone while all about him were engaging in verbal battle concerning the events of the last two days. The multitude that had gathered closely around Nephi now dispersed, some going this and some another way, but all intent upon whether or not, Nephi was a prophet. We quote in full what the sacred historian records of the reactions of many of those who participated in or at least saw the contest between good and bad that had been waged by God's servant, Nephi and the servants of evil:

"And there were some of the Nephites who believed on the words of Nephi; and there were some also, who believed because of the testimony of the five, for they had been converted while they were in prison. And now there were some among the people, who said that Nephi was a prophet. And there were others who said: Behold, he is a god, for except he was a god he could not know of all things. For behold, he has told us the thoughts of our hearts, and also has told us things; and even he has brought unto our knowledge the true murderer of our Chief Judge." ( Hel. 8:39-41 )

With a sorrowful heart Nephi wended his way homeward, but before he reached there the voice of the Lord came to him with many words of comfort and commendation. As with others of His servants, the Lord made a covenant with him that He would bless him forever; that whatsoever he bound on Earth should be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever he loosed on Earth should be loosed in Heaven; that he should have power over the elements to bless and to curse; to smite the earth with famine, and pestilence, and destruction. The Lord then commanded Nephi to preach repentance unto the Zarahemlaites, declaring to them His displeasure, even His anger, because of their wickedness. At the same time He gave Nephi a definite commitment which he was to perform. That commitment was to deliver to the rebellious people of Zarahemla this warning, sealing it with these words: "Thus saith the Lord God, Who is the Almighty, 'Except ye repent ye shall be smitten, even unto destruction.'"

Verses 12-15

Nephi began to declare the word of the Lord which had been spoken unto him, concerning their destruction if they did not repent. Nephi, troubled in his heart because of the wickedness of the people, their secret works of darkness, their plunderings, and their murderings, and all manner of iniquities, (v.3) quickly yielded obedience to the Lord's commandment. He regarded every Nephite as a brother, and felt an obligation to them to warn of impending disaster, even as the Lord said, if they longer trod the paths of wickedness and thereby repented not. He retraced his steps and found there were still many who loitered in crowds around the scene of his recent struggle and who saw him even in the face of threatened death, proclaim the coming of the Son of God, and Salvation through belief on His Name.

Notwithstanding the many proofs the ungodly Nephites had that Nephi was a true prophet, they continued to reject his teachings, the while ridiculing his warnings. They persecuted him with all manner of degrading accusations, suggesting that he was a liar, and perhaps a little mad. They even sought to take his life, but Nephi true to the Lord's commandment, declared to them, the words which he had been authorized by the Lord.

Deeply showing meekness under persecution, and long-suffering, Nephi went about his way, solemnly pleading with his persecutors to mend their own ways, and return to the God of their fathers. But the more he entreated them to use wisdom and understanding that they might be spared the destruction that awaited the wicked, the more hardened became their hearts and the more they reviled against him. In spite of their evil intentions towards him, he was conveyed out of their midst by the power of God, and ministered among other people.

Guided by the Holy Spirit, Nephi went from place to place declaring Salvation through the Son of God to all those who believed and obeyed His word. But no matter how diligent he tried, or how great was the Holy Spirit evidenced in his ministry, very few hearkened to the message he bore, "and there began to be contentions, insomuch that they were divided against themselves and began to slay one another with the sword."

"And thus ended the seventy and first year of the Reign of the Judges over the people of Nephi."
