Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 11

Verse 1

There were contentions amongst all the people. The general character of the Nephites continued to grow worse and worse. The Gadianton Robbers grew stronger and stronger. For a few years there was inceasing commotion, disunion, and bloodshed. At last, wearied at beholding so much misery and contention, Nephi prayed to the Lord that He would not suffer the people to be destroyed by the sword, but rather let a famine desolate the land, and, peradventure, bring the people to an understanding of their awful condition and cause them to humble themselves and repent. The Holy One heard and answered his petition, the heavens became as brass over the land, the rains ceased, the earth dried up, the crops failed, the people perished for want of food.

Verses 7-16

The people began to remember the words of Nephi. Two years passed (19 and 18 B.C.) and the third came, and still the refreshing rain was withheld (17 B.C.). During this year the people, humbled by their sufferings, turned towards the Lord. They endeavored to root out iniquity from their midst. They destroyed the Gadianton Robbers, and established the government on a more righteous foundation. Nephi, observing the change in their conduct and feelings, interceded with the Lord in their behalf. His prayers were answered, the welcome rain descended on the parched soil, and a bounteous harvest once more crowned the labors of the husbandmen. (16 B.C.)

Verses 7-8

They began to remember the Lord their God. Adversity is to human beings what the refiner's fire is to precious metals; it comes to purify and strengthen them. The Nephites in their many periods of apostasy and rebellion against God and His righteousness, were visited in His wrath by a kind and loving Father Who sometimes used stern measures which were hard or severe in aspect to teach them necessary truths. He, contrary to the teachings of many, does not desire to punish His children with acts of Providence, but we must accept adversity as a mark of His chastening love that, as we have said, comes to purify and strengthen them. The Nephites were now rebellious; they resorted to the sword to settle their disputes one with the other, and with disdain rejected the commandments of God. One of the blessings pronounced by God upon Nephi because of his faithfulness was pertaining to famine ( Hel. 10:6 ), and of this he prayed that his people should perish instead of by the sword. His prayer was answered. Hunger, pestilence, distress, and disease, marshalled their forces and accomplished in a few years what the sword had attempted. The Nephites wilted under the barrage which famine delivered, but only after the power of the sword had proved its weakness.

Thousands of the Nephites, especially those who lived in the most populous localities, perished for want of food; disease counted many victims, and all suffered because iniquity had robbed them of their trust in God. Realizing that they all would sooner or later die of the want of the necessities of life, they implored their Chief Judges and other of their leaders to importune Nephi to intercede with Heaven in their behalf, saying to him as they did so: "Behold, we know that thou art a man of God, and therefore cry unto the Lord our God that He turn away from us this famine, lest all the words which thou hast spoken concerning our destruction be fulfilled."

Verses 9-16

When Nephi saw that the people had repented, he cried again unto the Lord. In response to the cries of the people who were laden with cares and afflictions far beyond their ability to endure them without help, Nephi earnestly besought the Lord to ameliorate their sufferings. Year after year he had seen the famine grow worse, and its victims less able to combat its effects. Compassion for them filled his heart. He remembered their threats to his personal safety, and their rejection of his teachings, to which, if they had listened, would have saved them from this awful destruction. These terrible straits, he knew, his people had brought upon themselves. Yet he saw that "the people had repented and did humble themselves in sackcloth." All their sins committed against him personally he forgave, and in humble submission to His holy mind and will, Nephi sought the Lord that His anger may be appeased, and that the famine may cease in the land.

Verses 17-18

The Lord did turn away His anger. As we have said, Nephi, observing the change in the peoples' conduct and feelings, interceded with the Lord in their behalf. His prayers were answered; the welcome rain descended to refresh the parched soil, and a bounteous harvest once more crowned the labors of the husbandmen.

The repentant people now regarded Nephi in his true light; they revered him as a great prophet, and for a few years listened to his teachings. While they did so, they prospered. The sacred historian of these times, said of them: "The whole face of the land was filled with rejoicing; they did no longer seek to destroy Nephi, but they did esteem him as a great prophet, and a man of God, having great power and authority given unto him from God."

Verse 19

We also note that here the historian says of Lehi, Nephi's brother, that he was "not a whit behind" his brother in preaching righteousness

Verses 20-38

But the leaven of unrighteousness had too thoroughly permeated the national life for their faithfulness to God, long to endure. Two, three, or perhaps half a dozen years they would maintain their integrity, and then corruption would seethe; the vile would snatch the reins of government, the good would be oppressed, and contention and war with all its horrors would reign supreme. Thus it was after three years of famine. For two years there was peace, and in the third there began to be much strife (13 B.C.); in the next, the Gadianton Robbers reappeared, and carried havoc amongst their more peaceable countrymen. Going on, year by year, they grew in iniquity and therein ripened for destruction. For many more years Nephi strove to stem the tide of vice and corruption. At times partial success rewarded his unceasing efforts, and he had joy in the baptism of some honest souls. But the great bulk of the people rejected the things of the Gospel; they had no love for its holy principles, and were unfit for its blessings.
