Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 12

Verses 1-2

The Lord ... doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in Him. Mormon, in making his abridgment of the record which was kept by Helaman and his sons, was so struck by their recital of God's care of His children that he could not refrain from including therein his own conclusions regarding God's goodness and mercy. The lessons already taught by many other historians who had written the things of their own experience, so filled his heart with a glow of heavenly praise that he bowed before the Majesty on High, and almost in ecstacy engraved the words found in this chapter. His theme, or general thought throughout was, The Lord in His great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in Him.

The history of the Nephites here in this great American Land of Promise is one which proclaims loud and often, the fulfilling of God's promise to their forefathers that as long as they should keep My commandments they should prosper in the land. Keeping the Lord's commandments and trusting in Him are two ways of saying the same thing. The combined reasoning power of both, however, is that when we obey Him, we may rely assuredly upon His word.

Notwithstanding the many blessings which in loving-kindness the Lord bestows upon His children, Mormon notes that the human heart is often untrue to the Giver of all good things. "Pride rules the human heart," is a trite phrase, but one that expresses a statement or principle which is universally received as true. Pride hardens the heart, and enfeebles our efforts to advance the interests of God's Kingdom; it "dulls our desires for the higher things of life." What was true of the Nephites then is now true of us; human nature remains the same—the slave of passion, the victim of corruption. The conditions or circumstances that surround unworthy deeds and acts are usually found in idleness and ease. The bounties which God spreads among His children are merely tokens of His providential care, expressing His desire to bless them more and more. Sooner or later, the ease with which the treasures of the earth are obtained by them, the more His people indulge in false and forbidden things. Mormon makes a strange statement, but one that has been proven by the Nephites many times to be true; "Yea, ... the very time when He doth prosper His people ... doing all things for the welfare and happiness of His people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity."

Verse 3

And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten His people ... they will not remember Him. The adversities which the Lord sends upon His people to bring them to remembrance of Him, come not penally or, in the last analysis, punishing. The Lord does not delight in punishing His children. Tribulations come as good gifts from Heaven notwithstanding that sometimes they are severe. "Trials make our faith grow stronger," is an maxim quoted by all sincere religionists, who see in it a statement of a self-evident truth. They come to lead, and to guide, and to warn of things to come. The afflictions of the Lord, we confidently assert, are His blessings in disguise. Adversities and trials wherein sacrifice humbles the hearts, and at the same time unites in the bonds of brotherly love, the true and courageous upon the altar of man's devotion to God, brings forth many blessings from Heaven. In tribulation and sorrow our hearts are drawn out unto the Lord, but in prosperity and ease the opposite is equally true; all thoughts of Him are crowded therefrom. "Ye do not remember the Lord your God in the things with which He hath blessed you, but ye do remember your riches, not to thank the Lord your God for them; yea, your hearts are not drawn out unto the Lord, but they do swell with great pride, unto boasting, and unto great swelling, envyings, strifes, malice, persecutions and murders, and all manner of iniquities." ( Hel. 13:22 ) Mormon, in speaking of God's children, says, "Except He doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember Him."

Verses 4-6

Mormon, at this point in making his abridgment, had become acquainted with the wisdom and folly, the righteousness and wickedness, the loves and hatreds, of many generations of Nephites. Of them he had drawn many conclusions.

In making his abridgment of the Larger Plates of Nephi, Mormon had read many times of the promise the Lord made to Nephi near the very beginning of Nephite history, and which in years afterwards was quoted time and time again by Nephite teachers and leaders: "And inasmuch as ye shall keep My commandments, ye shall prosper, and shall be led to a land of promise; yea, even a land which I have prepared for you; yea, a land which is choice above all other lands." ( 1 Ne. 2:20 ; See also 2 Ne. 1:20 ; 2 Ne. 4:4 ; Alma 9:13 )

He also read that in accordance to His promise the Lord bestowed with a bounteous hand, the riches of the earth upon the heads of the righteous descendants of Father Lehi. But as we have noted, the riches of the earth and the accumulation thereof crowded all thoughts of God from their hearts—"Yea, and we may see at the very time when He doth prosper His people, yea, in the increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold and in silver, and in all manner of precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and delivering them out of the hands of their enemies; softening the hearts of their enemies that they should not declare wars against them; yea, in fine, doing all for the welfare and happiness of His people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity." (v. 2)

Mormon's lamentation, for such it was, did not stop in deploring the foolishness and the follies of men, but pointed directly to man's Salvation. The vain things of the world, upon which men set their hearts, breed contempt for God's holy word, and puts to naught God's promise of Life Everlasting. "O," said Mormon, "how quick to do iniquity, and how slow to do good. Yea, how quick to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to boast, and do all manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow are they to remember the Lord their God, and give ear to His counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom's paths!" Pride and boasting therein prompted the Nephite doers thereof to covet that which was not theirs, and to seek honor where there was none; it was like seeking to draw water from a dry well. The history of the Nephites is replete with accounts of just such actual undertakings. Mormon had read the account of Alma as he had recorded the conditions of the Church in Zarahemla about seventy-five years previously: "And it came to pass in the eighth year of the Reign of the Judges, that the people of the Church began to wax proud, because of their exceeding riches, and their fine silks, and their finetwined linen, and because of their many flocks and herds, and their gold and their silver, and all manner of precious things, which they had obtained by their industry; and in all these things they were lifted up in the pride of their eyes, for they began to wear very costly apparel. Now this was the cause of much affliction to Alma, yea, and to many of the people whom Alma had consecrated to be teachers, and priests, and elders over the Church; yea, many of them were sorely grieved for the wickedness which they saw had begun to be among their people. For they saw and beheld with great sorrow that the people of the Church began to be lifted up in the pride of their eyes, and to set their hearts upon riches and upon the vain things of the world, that they began to be scornful, one towards another, and they began to persecute those that did not believe according to their own will and pleasure." ( Alma 4:6-8 ) Again, when Alma and Amulek were on their famous mission in the Land of Antionum among the Zoramites, they found a sect of apostate Nephites practicing a strange form in their worship. Once a week they assembled in their synagogues and went through an empty form, which was a little prayer, a little praise, and considerable self-glorification. They claimed to be a chosen and a holy people, separate from their fellow men, and elected of God to eternal Salvation, while all around were predestined to be cast down to hell. This atrocious creed naturally resulted in its adherents and advocates being puffed up in vanity and consumed with pride. They became haughty, uncharitable, and tyrannical, and oppressors of their poorer neighbors. They covered their bodies with the finest apparel, and profusely adorned their persons with costly ornaments of gold and jewels. In their arrogance and self-righteousness they became the Pharisees of their age and country; but in other phases of iniquity they far exceeded their counterparts in the Holy Land. "Now when Alma saw this his heart was grieved; for he saw that they were a wicked and a perverse people; yea, he saw that their hearts were set upon gold, and upon silver, and upon all manner of fine goods. Yea, and he also saw that their hearts were lifted up unto great boasting in their pride." ( Alma 31:24-25 ) We can see in the two narratives above referred to, the truth of Mormon's conclusions: "Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their God, Who hath created them, should reign over them; notwithstanding His great goodness and His mercy towards them, they do set at naught His counsels, and they will not that He should be their guide." (v. 6)

Verses 7-8

The power of His voice. Mormon now contrasts the power of God and the weakness of men. "O how great is the nothingness of the children of men; yea, even they are less than the dust of the earth," he cried. The strength of man, he implied, even his utmost strength, is absolute weakness when compared to God's, and his wisdom but foolishness. There is no doubt that man can do much, but it is in a sphere which God has given him, and the moment he steps out of that sphere into God's he finds himself an unsuccessful imitator of a grand and glorious creation. We may express this though by saying, "Man's right hand becomes withered." King Benjamin quite well understood the unfathomable depths of God's power when it is compared to man's, and therein he joyed when in his address to the Saints of Zarahemla in conference assembled: "For behold, if the knowledge of the goodness of God at this time has awakened you to a sense of your nothingness, and your worthless and fallen state—I say unto you, if ye have come to a knowledge of the goodness of God, and His matchless power, and His wisdom, and His patience, and His long-suffering towards the children of men; and also, the Atonement which has been prepared from the foundation of the world, that whereby Salvation might come to him that should put his trust in the Lord, and should be diligent in keeping His commandments, and continue in the faith even unto the end of his life, I mean the end of his mortal body—I say, that this is the man who receiveth Salvation. . . ." ( Mosiah 4:5-7 ) Earlier in his address King Benjamin took occasion to remind his hearers that, as Mormon herein says, they were "less than the dust of the earth:" ". . . He doth require that ye should do as He hath commanded you; and therefore He hath paid you. And ye are still indebted unto Him, and are, and will be, forever and ever; therefore, of what have ye to boast? And now I ask, can ye say aught of yourselves? I answer you, Nay. Ye cannot say that ye are even as much as the dust of the earth; yet ye were created of the dust of the earth; but behold, it belongeth to Him Who created you. And I, even I, whom ye call your King, am no better than ye yourselves are; for I am also of the dust. And ye behold that I am old, and am about to yield up this mortal frame to its mother earth." (Ibid., 2:24-26)

Yet, notes Mormon, the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither to accomplish the Lord's pleasure, and His purposes are served by even the smallest portion thereof.

Verses 9-19

To hear the voice of the Lord is to obey Him, and even the hills and the mountains do His will. They tremble and quake; if He says so, where the mountains were once, a valley will come forth, and by His Word the whole earth shakes.

While ancient Greek and other philosophers were groping among the fallacies of the absurd system of astronomy given to the world by Ptolemy, and teaching that the sun with all the stars revolved around the Earth, the Nephites were in possession of the true knowledge with regard to the heavenly bodies, etc. Possibly they were the only people of their age that were blessed with a comprehension of these sublime truths. It is altogether probable that among their scriptures were copies of the Book of Abraham, from which they could acquaint themselves with the beauties and harmonies of celestial mechanism. They had undoubtedly the writings of Joseph, the son of Jacob, as these are quoted in the Book of Mormon; and, as the Prophet Joseph Smith found the writings of Abraham and Joseph together in the Egyptian mummies, it is far from improbable that the Nephites, as well as the Egyptians, possessed both. To show the astronomical knowledge possessed by the Nephites, we will draw attention to the words of Alma, the younger, besides the reflections of Mormon expressed in this chapter. In the reply of Alma to Korihor, the anti-Christ (75 B.C.) when the latter asked for a sign to prove there is a God. Alma's words were, "Thou hast had signs enough; will ye tempt your God? Will ye say, Show me a sign, when ye have the testimony of all these thy brethren, and also all the holy prophets? The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a supreme Creator." ( Alma 30:44 ) Together in the words of Alma and of Mormon we find that in these points, the astronomical knowledge of the Nephites was, at least, equal to that of the moderns.

In the discourse recorded here, and which was made by Mormon to himself when in solitude, he enriched his fervent adoration by adding thereto his prayers, and his praise, and his offerings of homage to our great and everlasting God. He loved to revere His Holy Name. God's power amazed him; thought of it filled his whole being. God's presence, and His power, and His purposes, were in every experience of Mormon's life. He remembered many times when the power of His voice sustained the righteous, upheld the falling, and raised the dead in trespass and in sin. In contemplating the Lord's power, Mormon noted besides the things already enumerated that at the sound of His voice, the waters of the great deep are dried up, and that cities are buried under mountains that move at God's command. Mormon confidently affirmed in his own mind, that material treasures put in the earth for safe keeping are sometimes accursed by Him—because of their ill-gotten nature, or the iniquity of them that hath hid them up—so that in the end they would not hinder the progress of God's Kingdom here upon Earth. Both men and their treasures shall be accursed according to His word.

Verses 20-22

Thou shalt be cut off from My presence. Mormon, as many others before him had done, emphasized the importance of men eschewing all evil, thereby keeping all the commandments which God had given, and therein, always having His Spirit to be with them. Mormon remembered the Lord's promise to Lehi given to him almost six hundred years before his own time: "Inasmuch as ye shall keep My commandments ye shall prosper in the land; but inasmuch as ye will not keep My commandments ye shall be cut off from My presence." ( 2 Ne. 1:20 ) Mormon, in retrospect, saw the history of the Nephites, and the incidents thereof confirmed the Lord's word. To be cut off from the presence of the Lord, or spiritual death, is the penalty of disobedience, and prosperity under God's hand, the reward of them that give ear unto His counsels.

Mormon went still further back in his meditation of spiritual gifts or cursings than those recorded as happening since Lehi left Jerusalem. He undoubtedly thought of father Adam and the rebuke administered to him for disobedience. He remembered how, about sixty or seventy years previously, Alma who was the Church of God's High Priest instructed his son, Corianton, concerning the curse Adam bequeathed his children. Many questions plagued Corianton's mind, and therefore Alma, in filial grace and desire to comfort him, said, "Now behold, my son, I will explain this thing unto thee." After Alma had made plain to Corianton the conditions of the Fall, and of its immediate after-effects, he said unto his son:

"And now, ye see by this that our first parents were cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord; and thus we see they became subjects to follow after their own will.

"Now behold, it was not expedient that man should be reclaimed from this temporal death, for that would destroy the great plan of happiness.

"Therefore, as the soul could never die, and the fall had brought upon all mankind a spiritual death as well as a temporal, that is, they were cut off from the presence of the Lord, it was expedient that mankind should be reclaimed from this spiritual death.

"Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to prepare; it became a preparatory state.

"And now remember, my son, if it were not for the plan of redemption, (laying it aside) as soon as they were dead their souls were miserable, being cut off from the presence of the Lord.

"And now, there was no means to reclaim men from this fallen state, which man had brought upon himself because of his own disobedience;

"Therefore, according to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God." ( Alma 42:7-13 )

"Therefore," Mormon ejaculated, "blessed are they who will repent and hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; for these are they that shall be saved."

Mormon ends his paean of praise to God by adding to his offering of adoration the petition that by His power all men might be saved, although Mormon, himself, knew that the prophets had said that there "are some who shall be cast out, yea, who shall be cast off from the presence of the Lord. Yea, who shall be consigned to a state of endless misery, fulfilling the words which say: They that have done good shall have everlasting life; and they that have done evil shall have everlasting damnation."
