Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 13

Verses 1-4

Samuel, a Lamanite, came into the Land of Zarahemla. We now come to the days of Samuel, the Lamanite (6 B.C.). Without any previous reference to him, he suddenly appears in the foreground of ancient American history bearing a weighty and solemn message: a messenger of God's displeasure; he stands a Jonah to the Nephites. That message is faithfully delivered, then he disappears forever from our sight.

The condition of society in the days of Samuel was somewhat peculiar. The Nephites and the Lamanites had, so far as righteousness is concerned, changed places. The former were puffed up with worldly pride, were full of vain boastings, envyings, stripes, malice, persecutions, murders, and all manner of iniquities. They cast out, they stoned, they slew God's servants, while they encouraged, exalted and rewarded the false teachers who flattered them in their vileness and sang in their ears the siren's song of "all is well." They reveled in all the luxury that the fatness of the land brought forth; they were ostentatious in the use of gold and silver and other precious things, but their hearts never turned in thankfulness to the great Giver of all these bounties. The Lamanites, that is the most of them, to the contrary, walked circumspectly before God. They were full of faith and integrity, were zealous in the work of converting their fellows, and they kept the commandments, statutes and judgments of the Lord according to the Law of Moses.

Such was the condition of affairs when the Lamanite Prophet, Samuel, appeared among the sin-stained citizens of Zarahemla, and for many days preached repentance in their midst. Their eyes were blind and their ears were deaf, sin filled their souls, and in their anger because of his rebukes to them, cast him out. But the work of his mission was not yet accomplished. As he was preparing to return to his own country, a holy angel visited him and proclaimed the will of the Lord. Samuel was commanded to turn back to Zarahemla and prophesy to the people there, who had already rejected his testimony, the things that should come into his heart.

He returned to the City, but the inhabitants thereof refused him admission at its gates. The iniquitous dwellers therein had no desire to have their peace disturbed by the voice of divine threatenings. But Samuel had the word of God burning within him, and could not be restrained. He mounted the walls of the City, and from this conspicuous vantage ground, with outstretched arms and loud voice, he proclaimed to the wicked the unwelcome tidings of their coming destruction. Many listened to his proclamation, some few were pricked in their hearts, repented of their evil deeds, and sought the Prophet Nephi that they might be baptized. Others were angry and called for his destruction.

Verses 5-10

I, Samuel, a Lamanite, do speak the words of the Lord which He doth put into my heart. The preaching of the Prophet Samuel caused many to repent, and to seek out Nephi who was the High Priest of God's Church, that they might be baptized for a remission of their sins. Others among them became more bitter and malignant. They inveighed against him, and some even wanted to put him to death. But in spite of their threats he boldly proclaimed his message; he neither flinched nor feared their angry words. To Samuel, what mattered most was for him to deliver his divine communication and to impart to those concerned the Word of the Lord. He offered no apologies, no pretexts, or excuses, in order to mitigate the sufferings that to them would come unless they sincerely repented. He entered calmly, and even joyously, upon the task the angel had committed to him. Not that Samuel delighted in the warnings he bore, but he took joy in serving the Lord. His faith was so great that nothing else mattered but to share with those in danger of the Lord's fierce wrath, the abundance of truth which the Lord had put into his heart. Without any hesitation, Samuel boldly declared that it was He, the Lord God, Who commanded him to warn the wicked inhabitants of Zarahemla, "that the Sword of Justice hangeth over this people; and four hundred years pass not away save the Sword of Justice falleth upon this people."

The Prophet's words were plain and simple, and together they expressed God's gracious care of His children, His long-suffering and His loving-kindness, yet, withal, His fierce anger.

Samuel, notwithstanding the intention of the tumultuous crowd standing before him to do him evil or bodily harm, stepped forward to meet this danger and with words so plain that none could err, declared that "repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, Who surely shall come into the world . . . and shall be slain for His people," will, and will alone, save them from the destruction, that, unless they repent, surely awaiteth them. Christ's reality was, Samuel announced so that all could hear, declared to him by an angel of the Lord "and he did bring Glad Tidings to my soul." The angel further commanded him to declare unto the people of Zarahemla the wonderful message of Christ Whose coming was sure. Let us use Samuel's own words for in them is his message for us also: "I was sent unto you to declare it unto you also, that ye might have Glad Tidings."

Like many others before Samuel, the Zarahemlaites rejected the message of God's prophet. They would not receive him, but cast him out from their presence. We must remember that for many days Samuel had preached repentance unto them, but few believed his words, whereupon he was about to "return to his own land." It was then that the voice of the Lord came to him and commanded him to return to the wicked city "and prophesy unto the people whatsoever things should come into his heart." Again, as sacred history unfolds its secrets to our understanding, we find that the Lord is slow to anger. Time and time again His servants, the holy prophets, have warned His children of His displeasure, but not until the cup of their iniquity is full does He allow the destruction which they themselves bring about, to fall in its fury upon their unsheltered heads.

In studying the Book of Mormon, and, praise God, learning more of His love and long-suffering, we conclude that: God is slow in visiting the transgressor with tribulation; He is long-suffering. Divine retribution does not come penally. He does not visit the house of evil with evil, nor does He delight in punishing His children. His loving-kindness endures forever, but when and if punishment comes, it may be in some form of adversity, we must learn to accept it as a mark of the chastening love of our Father which comes to purify and strengthen us just as the refiner's fire comes to purify and strengthen precious metal. We also conclude that in giving us Jesus Christ as the Savior of the world, God affirms to us His greatest love. All these things are evidenced in Samuel's address to the Zarahemlaites, and through them we are constrained to say in humble supplication to Him Who reigns On High: "O continue thy loving-kindness unto them that know Thee; and Thy righteousness to the upright in heart." ( Ps. 36:10 )

Now that pride had hardened the Nephites' hearts, and they showed no sorrow unto repentance, Samuel, inspired by the Lord, made the dire prediction, that unless they did repent, the Lord would withdraw His "Spirit from them, and I will suffer them no longer, and I will turn the hearts of their brethren against them."

Samuel, unafraid, continued to prophesy of the Nephites' destruction; he even stated the exact time thereof. In four hundred years, if so they continue their rebellion against God and His righteousness, the Lord caused him to say, "They shall be smitten; yea, I will visit them with the sword and with famine and with pestilence. Yea, I will visit them in My fierce anger, and there shall be those of the fourth generation who shall live, of your enemies, to behold your utter destruction; and those of the fourth generation shall visit your destruction." A hundred years is spoken of as a generation.

Verses 11-16

Yea, wo unto this great city of Zarahemla. The Lord does not desire the death of the transgressor, but that the sinner live and "return unto the Lord" his God. This truth is made plain when the Lord, through Samuel, makes the solemn promise, "I will turn away mine anger," if ye will repent. Repent or repentance, is used when human actions are said to bring forth remorse or sorrow for some deed committed. In the sense it is used here it means a godly sorrow which in turn will cause a complete change of action. Judas repented of his betrayal of Jesus, but it did not change his life. It means sorrow for things done which should not have been done, and sorrow for things left undone which should have been done. "Yea," Samuel said, "blessed are they," he no doubt expressing the words the Lord put in his heart, "who will repent and turn unto Me, but wo unto him that repenteth not."

The Lord warned the inhabitants of Zarahemla that their beautiful city would be destroyed unless they turned away from their wicked practices, and henceforth would serve Him. It was only that a few who were righteous lived therein, and that for their sake had the city, itself, been saved from the destruction that awaited. Nevertheless, the Lord let them know that the more part of Zarahemla's citizenry were inclined to do evil, and when tempted would harden their hearts against Him.

The fate pronounced against Zarahemla by Samuel reminds us of a similar fate against Jerusalem foretold by Jeremiah:

"For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest? Thou hast forsaken Me, saith the Lord, thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out My hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting . . . I will destroy My people, since they return not from their ways." ( Jer. 15:5-6 )

We may conclude of the Nephites as did Isaiah many hundreds of years before concerning the Jews, and whose words were written upon the Brass Plates of Laban. The Prophet after pronouncing woe upon the wicked and the wise, who were wise in their own eyes, also the mighty who justify the wicked for reward, and who take away the righteousness of the righteous, exclaimed:

"Therefore, as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, their root shall be rottenness, and their blossoms shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. Therefore, is the anger of the Lord kindled against His people, and He hath stretched forth His hand against them, and He hath smitten them." ( Isa. 5:24-25 ; 2 Ne. 15:24-25 )

We are reminded of God's loving-kindness and His long-suffering when He blesses them that repent and return unto Him. We think of the Children of Israel, who after the many wonderful things the Lord did for them, fell down and worshiped a golden calf. The Prophet Nehemiah, in giving a resume of their history, ascribes to Him the honor and glory that He, alone, is God, and there is no other, and that in spite of their waywardness His loving-kindness and mercy endured towards them. The Prophet said:

"But they and their fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to Thy commandments. And refused to obey, neither were mindful of Thy wonders that Thou didst among them; but hardened their necks, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage; but Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsooketh them not." ( Neh. 9:16-17 )

Nehemiah here reminds us that God is not quick to anger, ready to forgive, and will extend His mercy unto all those who will repent. For men to repent is a commandment of God. He requires all to repent; this command is for us to obey, not ignore. Even a showing of repentance, or for one to lay the foundation thereof, will renew to him, Heaven's gracious promise: "I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." ( Isa. 53:25 )

Samuel, undoubtedly, one of the newly-converted Lamanites; (See Hel. 5 ) his heart burning within him because of the transcendent truths so recently learned by him, and he, himself, proclaiming those truths by God's own gift and power; protected by the Mighty Jehovah, pronounced wo unto Zarahemla because of the wickedness of her people, just as Jeremiah previously had warned Jerusalem, but at the same time he called unto the Zarahemlaites to repent and "return unto the Lord your God," adding the words of Him Whose servant he was: "But if ye will repent and return unto the Lord your God I will turn away Mine anger," yea, "blessed are they who will repent and turn unto Me, but wo unto him that repenteth not." (v. 11)

Verses 17-23

A curse shall come upon the land. Because that the Zarahemlaites had become worshipers of worldly goods, and had made gold and silver and other precious things their god to whom they bowed and to whom they tendered their praise and their offerings of homage, the true God, seeing their wickedness in not serving Him, and Him alone, threatened that a curse would come upon the land insomuch that their riches all would vanish, and that their treasures, which they buried in the earth for safe-keeping, would disappear, and that they no more would be found.

To deprive the Nephites in Zarahemla of what they loved most, was the Lord's way of bringing their thoughts back to Him. Ostentation, pretention, and unnecessary show of costly apparel, crowded all thought of Him from their hearts, and covetousness and envy guided their actions one with another. Each walked in his own way and all were in pursuit of their own happiness. They would not listen to the words of Him Who gave them these riches, therefore, the Lord promised that these riches would have an end. To this end, He cursed the land, and also the riches which the people had gathered.

But to the righteous, those who chose to serve the Lord, and who hid up their treasures unto Him for the benefit of His Kingdom, would regain them, and their enemies would reap no benefits therefrom.

We can obtain a complete understanding why this particular curse was pronounced by Samuel, in reading the twenty-second verse of this chapter; in it there is a lesson each and all may learn, and in which the Prophet teaches the truth that pride, envy, strife, malice, and in fact all forms of evil, render as unfit to receive His blessings, all who seek profit in doing iniquity: "Ye do not remember the Lord your God in the things with which He hath blessed you, but ye do always remember your riches, not to thank the Lord your God for them; yea, your hearts are not drawn out unto the Lord, but they do swell with great pride, unto boasting, and unto great swelling, envyings, strifes, malice, persecutions and murders, and all manner of iniquities."

Verse 24

This time . . . has arrived. The long-suffering of the Lord had almost come to an end insofar as the people of Zarahemla were partakers of it. Many times in the past, He had sent His holy prophets to warn His children about following the paths of wickedness, and also at that same time declare unto them His Plan of Salvation. Only fifteen or twenty years previously the Prophet Nephi and his brother, Lehi, had ministered light and life to the Nephites in Zarahemla, but they persecuted the prophets, and rejected their message. They preferred darkness to light and spiritual death to everlasting life. They failed to heed the words of Isaiah which concerned them as well as the Jews to whom he spoke: "O House of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord; yea, come, for ye have all gone astray, every one to his wicked ways." ( 2 Ne. 12:5 )

Verses 25-29

If our days had been in the days of our fathers of old. The Nephites, or the faithless part of them, sought to excuse their waywardness by claiming that no prophets, then as in olden days, ministered to them, and showed unto them the proper paths in which to walk. "We," they said concerning the Jews, "would not have slain the prophets; we would not have stoned them, and cast them out." "But," answered Samuel, "ye are worse than they." If a prophet of the Lord should come unto you with his message of Salvation, and therein bore witness of your sins and iniquities, calling upon you to repent; in your unrighteousness and unworthiness, you would, as did they the prophets of old, seek to destroy them. In their utter lack of discernment, he told them that because of their evil deeds they would regard him as a false prophet, "a sinner and of the devil."

But, on the other hand, if a man does come among you, and with flattering words, shall bid you, "Do this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer; yea, he will say, walk after the pride of your own hearts; yea, walk after the pride of your eyes, and do whatsoever your heart desireth—and if a man shall come among you and say this, ye will receive him, and say that he is a prophet." Samuel went further and described their reception of such a man; their support of him not only as a leader and teacher, but by material maintenance as well. "Ye will give unto him of your gold and silver, and ye will clothe him with costly apparel . . . and he saith that all is well, then ye will not find fault with him."

Verses 29-32

O ye wicked and perverse generation. Perverse means a deviation from the right, true, correct; erring. It is from the Latin perversus, turned the wrong way. In the sense it is used here, it connotes willful disobedience.

In this verse, Samuel rose to that place in his address where he called upon the wicked people of Zarahemla to repent and return to the ways of righteousness before it was too late, or before they had reached that point in their journey through life, beyond which the last effort of human wickedness cannot pass. "Ye hardened and stiffnecked people," he cried, and reasoned with them thusly: that notwithstanding the long-suffering of the Lord toward His children who rebel against Him, and His loving-kindness to them that despitefully use Him; in your minds you make of Him a tyrannical Being Who delights in punishing them. That is not true! He does not. He is "full of grace, equity, and truth, full of patience, mercy, and long-suffering, quick to hear the cries of His people and to answer their prayers." ( Alma 9:26 ) Samuel continued his admonitions: "How long will ye suppose that the Lord will suffer you? Yea, how long will ye suffer yourselves to be led by foolish and blind guides? Yea, how long will ye choose darkness rather than light?" Samuel undoubtedly remembered reading from the Plates of Laban, the words of David, the King of the Jews, "In Thy light shall we see light." ( Ps. 36:9 )

Throughout every age of the Gospel, religious philosophers have likened ignorance and error to darkness, and knowledge and truth unto light. "I will be a light unto them forever, that hear My words." ( 2 Ne. 10:14 ) Again: "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light?" ( 2 Ne. 7:10 ) Let us consider more Book of Mormon Scripture that refers to darkness and light, and conclude therefrom the meaning of Samuel's question to the Zarahemlaites regarding the awful confusion that guided their actions:

"To the law and the testimony; and if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." ( 2 Ne. 18:20 ) "Come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord." ( 2 Ne. 12:5 ) ". . . they were in the midst of darkness; nevertheless, their souls were illuminated by the light of the everlasting Word. . . ." ( Alma 5:7 ) "Now this was what Ammon desired, for he knew that King Lamoni was under the power of God; he knew that the dark veil of unbelief was being cast away from his mind, and the light which did light up his mind, which was the light of the glory of God, which was a marvelous light of His goodness—yea, this light had infused such joy into his soul, the cloud of darkness having been dispelled, and that the light of Everlasting Life was lit up in his soul, yea, he knew that this had overcome his natural frame, and he was carried away in God—" ( Alma 19:6 ) "And thus we see the great call of diligence of men to labor in the vineyards of the Lord; and thus we see the great reason of sorrow, and also of rejoicing—sorrow because of death and destruction among men, and joy because of the light of Christ unto life." ( Alma 28:14 ) "And now, my son, I have told you this that ye may learn wisdom, that ye may learn of me that there is no other way or means whereby man can be saved, only in and through Christ. Behold, He is the life and the light of the world. Behold, He is the Word of Truth and Righteousness." ( Alma 38:9 ) "He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death." ( Mosiah 16:9 ) "Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold, I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen Me do." ( 3 Ne. 18:24 )

From these few Book of Mormon scriptural passages we begin to see the real meaning of darkness when contrasted with light. And if we substitute the words knowledge and truth in the place of light, and ignorance and error for darkness, Samuel's query to the Zarahemlaites would be: "Yea, how long will ye choose ignorance and error rather than knowledge and truth?" In this way we can also understand the words of the Psalmist—"Through Thy precepts I get understanding . . . Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path." ( Ps. 119:104-105 ) "How sweet are Thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth." ( Ps. 119:103 ) As Samuel pronounced woe upon the people of Zarahemla, we imagine he remembered the words of Isaiah: "Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter. . . . Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against His people, and He has stretched forth His hand against them, and hath smitten them. . . ." ( Isa. 5:20 ; 24:25)

As Samuel stood unafraid before the churning mob that had gathered about him and threatened him with bodily harm, we imagine more of the words of the Psalmist came to his mind and therewith was he strengthened: "The Lord is my light and my Salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? . . . though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear. . . ." ( Ps. 27:1-3 ) Encompassed about by the power of the Great Jehovah, and upheld by His eternal truths, Samuel neither flinched nor feared the threats they made, but bolder and even bolder, he denounced their wickedness and again and again warned them that while there was yet time to repent, the Lord "hath cursed the land because of your iniquity," therefore, do not procrastinate that day.

Living in a land where the gifts of God were plentifully distributed, and where the riches of the earth were easily acquired by all, even the indolent; also where freedom and liberty enhanced the value of good-living, the Nephites in Zarahemla, notwithstanding these bounties, failed to continue in remembrance of Him, the Giver of all these things. Only the righteous among them rejoiced in His grace and exulted in His goodness. His law which in days past ruled in their hearts, and His word which united them in bonds of brotherly love and kindness, now became a wedge that separated the living and the spiritually dead, the righteous and the wicked, those who loved evil more than they loved good. Of this latter class, there were many, and their wealth brought them sorrow instead of gladness.

At this point in our discussion we recall the words of King Solomon, that the blessings of the Lord maketh us truly rich and no sorrow is added thereto. And also those of his own father, King David: "Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart." ( Ps. 97:11 )

Because of their iniquities, not only was the land of the Nephites cursed, but their riches also. Bounteous crops that hitherto had filled their bins to overflowing were now only mediocre. Liberally bestowed riches from the earth were lost or stolen as if by magic. The Sacred Record quotes Samuel as warning the Zarahemlaites: "The time cometh that He curseth your riches, that they become slippery, that ye cannot hold them; and in the days of your poverty ye cannot retain them."

In considering Samuel's warnings to the Nephites, of this we may be sure, words of wisdom spoken by good men and women in every age of the world, fail to gain admittance into the hearts of the proud and haughty. Also vanity is a barrier unto truth. True piety is a song of praise continuously raised to the Majesty on High. In speaking of the same generation of Nephites as we now consider, Dr. Hugh Nibley (An Approach to the Book of Mormon, p. 326) gives the following brief summary of their chief characteristics: "Their piety was plainly of that brand which styles itself broad-minded, liberal, and understanding. These smart, up-to-date, prosperous, intensely respectable people were in no mood to be told" by one such as they thought was Samuel—a poor illiterate man of lower breeding; a narrow-minded man of no understanding; a person bereft of the finer things of life. They also saw him as a man, whose ignorance made him bold, and whose intent in haranguing them was to deceive them with much talk about the Lamanites whose chief quality was the adroitness with which they stole from the industrious Nephites, and otherwise despoiled the riches they had already accumulated about them; thus he added hypocrisy to his pious fraud.

Verse 38

Your days of probation are past. The days are now past, Samuel admonished his hearers, when the Almighty Father would quickly forgive the trespasses of the errant Nephites, therefore without hesitation turn ye from your ways of darkness and walk henceforth in paths of light. The Nephites did not sin ignorantly, but with vain shortcomings they willfully abandoned the precepts that had guided their forefathers for many generations. They were an enlightened race of God's children; holy men of God had been their constant companions; angels from Heaven ministered to their wants; the words of the Lord which flowed unto them like a river of peace, inundated their fears, and sanctified to their life and prosperity, their trials and tribulations. They knew what was right and what was wrong, and had power to choose therein. We fail in the attempt to find in all the world's history another people so blessed in almost every way as were the Nephites. Yet they, in spite of God's watchful care over them, made idols of worldly things and aspired to their worship.

Days of probation, means (1) allotted time in which to prove, or to offer proof; (2) any proceeding designed to ascertain truth; (3) to determine character, qualification, etc.; (4) trial, or a period of trial; (5) as, to engage a person on probation—in some universities, colleges, and schools, a status of trial for delinquent, deficient, or culpable, students, usually marked by certain penalties. (See, Merriam-Webster New Collegiate Dictionary) The word, probation, as used by Samuel in addressing the people of Zarahemla connotes a special something which was expected of them; a pattern of life wholly devoid of pride and haughtiness; a life wherein humility and service to God were predominent. They had neglected all these things, and put off the forthright offering of "their prayers, and their praise, and their offerings of homage to God," until the time had expired when proof of their righteous behavior was "everlastingly too late." Man, said the Lord, cannot be saved in his iniquity, or words to that effect, and since Salvation is a condition of happiness, it follows that iniquity, whatsoever, does not end in happiness. "Wickedness never was happiness." ( Alma 41:10 ) But Samuel, by the voice of inspiration, told the Zarahemlaites that they, by doing iniquity, have sought for that which could not be found. All the days of your lives you have attempted to gain by your sinful practices that which is "contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head." (See, Alma 41:10 , Volume IV, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON)

SAMUEL, THE LAMANITE

The condition of society in the days of Samuel was somewhat peculiar (6 B.C.). The Nephites and the Lamanites had, in so far as righteousness was concerned, to a great extent, changed places. The former were puffed up with worldly pride, were full of vain boastings, envyings, strifes, malice, persecutions, murders, and all manner of iniquities. They cast out, stoned and slew the servants of God while they encouraged, exalted and rewarded false teachers who flattered them in their vileness. They reveled in all the luxury that the fatness of the land brought forth; they were ostentatious in the use of gold and silver and precious things, but their hearts never turned in thankfulness to the Great Giver of all those bounties. The majority of the Lamanites, on the contrary, walked circumspectly before God; they were full of faith and integrity, were zealous in the work of converting their fellows, and in keeping the commandments of God according to the Law of Moses.

Such was the condition of affairs when the Lamanite prophet, Samuel, appeared among the citizens of Zarahemla and for many days preached repentance in their midst. Their eyes were blind and their ears were deaf; sin filled their souls, and in their anger they cast him out. But the work of his mission was not yet accomplished. As he was preparing to return to his own country a holy angel visited him and proclaimed the voice of the Lord; that voice said that he should turn back and prophesy to the people of Zarahemla the things that should come into his heart.

He returned to the city but was refused admission at its gates. The iniquitous dwellers therein had no desire to have their peace disturbed by the voice of divine threatenings. But the prophet had the word of the Lord burning within him and he could not be restrained from its proclamation. He mounted the walls of the city and from this conspicuous vantage ground, with outstretched arms and with a loud voice, he proclaimed to the wicked inhabitants of Zarahemla the unwelcome news of their coming destruction. Many listened to his proclamation, some few were pricked in their hearts, and then repented of their evil deeds and sought the prophet Nephi that they might be baptized. Others were angry; they gathered up the stones in the roadway and hurled them at Samuel, they drew their bows and shot arrows at him, but to no effect; the protecting power of God was around him and he could not be harmed. When some beheld how wonderfully he was preserved, it was a testimony to them that God was with him, and they also sought Nephi, confessing their sins. But the great body of the populace grew more enraged at the want of success that attended their murderous efforts. They called upon their captains to seize and bind him. Following the wild, satanic cry of the multitude the officers of the law attempted to take him, but he cast himself down and fled to his own country and his own people. And from that time forth the voice of Samuel was never heard again among the people of Nephi, but in later years, Jesus, Nephi, Mormon, and others quoted his prophecies or referred to his testimony.

Nearly all the events, great and glorious, terrible and heartrending, of which Samuel prophesied were fulfilled before the inspired historians of the Book of Mormon sealed up the Record. Prominent among these predictions were the signs that should occur at the advent of our Savior; the two days and a night of continued light and the appearance of a new star in the heavens that should mark His birth at Bethlehem. He even told the exact year when these things should take place; also he told of the convulsions, the storms, the earthquakes that should attend His crucifixion, and the resurrection of many of the Saints that would follow His own resurrection. He also foretold, with great clearness and minuteness, that in subsequent years, the Nephites should grow in iniquity and because of their wickedness, their treasures, their tools, their swords, etc., should become slippery, and that within four hundred years the Nephite race should be destroyed. To the fulfillment of these predictions, Nephi, Mormon, and Moroni, bear record.
