Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 14

Verse 1

Samuel, the Lamanite, did prophesy many things. This chapter contains an account of the continuation of Samuel's preaching to the people of Zarahemla as he stood upon the walls of their ancient capital. Previously from the same vantage point he had called upon the inhabitants of this great city to repent and return unto the Lord their God. He foretold of the coming destruction of both the city and its people if the people thereof did not forsake their wicked ways. He prophesied of many things which are not contained in this record, but mainly it consists of the birth and death of Christ Whom he testified would come.

Verses 2-7

Behold, I will give unto you a sign. To a generation who were looking for a sign, Samuel's proclamation was an answer. In definite words he prophesied that the Son of God would come within five more years to "redeem all those who shall believe on His Name." And that they would know for a surety when that event should come to pass, he offered them proof thereof, "For behold," he said, "there shall be great lights in heaven, insomuch that in the night before He cometh there shall be no darkness, insomuch that it shall appear unto man as if it was day. Therefore, there shall be one day and a night and a day, as if it were one day and there were no night; and this shall be unto you for a sign; for ye shall know of the rising of the sun and also of its setting; therefore they shall know of a surety that there shall be two days and a night; nevertheless the night shall not be darkened; and it shall be the night before He is born. And behold, there shall be a new star arise, such an one as ye never have beheld: and this also shall be a sign unto you. And behold this is not all, there shall be many signs and wonders in heaven. And it shall come to pass that ye shall all be amazed, and wonder, insomuch that ye shall fall to the earth."

VERSE 8. The message proclaimed by Samuel, that all men, whosoever they are, will be partakers of Life Everlasting through belief on the Son of God, are the Glad Tidings that every prophet from Adam down to the seers of our own time have made the burden of their Heavenly communication.

VERSE 9. "Cry unto this people, repent and prepare the Way of the Lord," was a command of the Lord to Samuel, spoken to him by the angel who stopped him when he was about to return to his own land (the Land of Nephi), and told him to return to Zarahemla and prophesy whatsoever things should come into his heart. (Chapter 13:2-3)

Verses 10-13

Because Samuel was a Lamanite, the Zarahemlaites refused all the more to believe his words of warning and Salvation. They scoffed at and scorned his claim to divine appointment, and in their eagerness to quiet his denunciation of them, he said that "ye do seek to destroy me, and have cast me out from among you." (Chapter 13:2)

To the end that the people of Zarahemla should hear his message, and know whereof Samuel spoke, he mounted to the top of the city's walls, and with a loud voice proclaimed the judgments of God that would surely come upon them unless they repented and turned unto the Lord their God. In plainness and with great confidence in the word of the Lord, he explained to them the conditions of repentance by which and through which the sins of all men would be forgiven, and thereby commence to make ready the Way of the Lord, making its beginning straight.

"And also that ye might know of the coming of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of Heaven and of Earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and that ye might know of His coming," to prepare you for that glorious event, I declare these things unto you as He has commanded that I should. Samuel now referred back to the signs of His coming of which he had just spoken, and declared anew their purpose: "that ye might believe on His Name." It is not difficult to understand Samuel's next statement, "If ye believe on His Name ye will repent of all your sins, that thereby ye may have a remission of them through His merits."

VERSE 14. And behold, again, another sign I give unto you, yea, a sign of His death. The prophecies of Samuel are among the most wonderful recorded in Holy Writ. Besides the prophecies concerning the birth of the Savior, and the future destiny of the Nephites, he prophesied much in regard to His death. Especially, he said: "But behold, as I said unto you concerning another sign, a sign of His death, behold, in that day He shall suffer death, the sun shall be darkened and refuse to give its light unto you; and also the moon, and the stars; and there shall be no light upon the face of this land, even from the time that He shall suffer death, for a space of three days, to the time that He shall rise again from the dead!

"Yea, at the time that he shall yield up the ghost, there shall be thunderings and lightnings for the space of many hours, and the earth shall shake and tremble, and the rocks which are upon the face of this earth; which are both above the earth and beneath, which ye know at this time are solid, or the more part of it is one solid mass, shall be broken up;

"Yea, they shall be rent in twain, and shall ever after be found in seams and in cracks, and in broken fragments upon the face of the whole earth; yea, both above the earth and beneath.

"And behold there shall be great tempests, and there shall be many mountains laid low, like unto a valley, and there shall be many places, which are now called valleys, which shall become mountains, whose height thereof is great.

"And many highways shall be broken up, and many cities shall become desolate.

"And many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many.

"And behold thus hath the angel spoken unto me; for he said unto me, that there should be thunderings and lightnings for the space of many hours:

"And he said unto me that while the thunder and the lightning lasted, and the tempest, that these things should be, and that darkness should cover the face of the whole earth for the space of three days.

"And the angel said unto me, that many shall see greater things than these, to the intent that they might believe that these signs and these wonders should come to pass, upon all the face of this land; to the intent that there should be no cause of unbelief among the children of men."

We shall see as we proceed how wonderfully all these sayings of Samuel the Lamanite were fulfilled.
