Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 15

Verses 1-3

Except ye shall repent your houses shall be left unto you desolate. Not to leave a thing undone which might in any way induce the people of Zarahemla to forsake the evil practices that like a raging torrent had carried them downstream until helplessly they struggled against a current that almost overwhelmed them, Samuel continued to cry repentance to the wicked and sin-stained people of the Nephite Capital.

He warned them of how, if they persisted in doing evil, the generation of which they were now part would bequeath to their offspring, especially in numbers, a weak progeny, because, he said, when your enemies come upon you, your women who give suck and they who are heavy with child and cannot flee will be "trodden down and shall be left to perish." "Yea, except ye repent, your women shall have great cause to mourn," he said, appealing to that most tender court of righteous and holy decisions folded up in the bosoms of all men who love even the appearance of justice to the womenfolk.

Because the Nephites had been a chosen people unto the Lord, and because He loved them so much, Samuel noted that the Lord, despite their iniquities, chastened them because of His love thus preventing their continued wickedness.

Verses 4-9

But behold my brethren, the Lamanites. Because Samuel's own people, the Lamanites, had been mislead by many traditions which had been handed down to them from father to son, and in which they had been taught to believe, they had continually been doers of evil. This contrasted bitterly with the conduct of the Nephites who were doers of His word except at those times when portions of them rebelled against keeping the commandments of the Lord, their God. The Nephites were usually a righteous and God-fearing people who rejoiced in serving Him.

A knowledge of the Gospel of Christ came to the Lamanites through the preaching thereof by Nephite missionaries, who had risked their own lives to the end that Salvation might come unto the Lamanites and Eternal Life might be their portion as well as the heritage of the righteous Nephites. That the Lamanites be made partakers of the blessings of Christ's Gospel, the Lord, in His mercy, Samuel avowed, will prolong their days.

As a proof of their integrity, Samuel invited those to whom he spoke to observe that the Lamanite converts were not lacking in obedience to the commandments of God; "they," he said, "do walk circumspectly before God," keeping "His statutes and His judgments according to the Law of Moses."

As the result of the labors expended by their Lamanitish brethren, who already had accepted the truth, many Lamanites have added their names to the growing throng of those who have taken upon themselves the Name of Christ, "and with unwearied diligence" serve the Lord, Samuel testified.

"Ye do know for yourselves, for ye have witnessed it," was the bold assertion Samuel made, meaning that they themselves could verify the fact of his peoples devotion to truth and righteousness and their abhorrence of evil. No evidence, though it may seem preponderant, could overcome personal observation; no witness could be more convincing than to behold for himself the truth of any claim. The larger portion of Samuel's people had recognized the truth by accepting it; they had disavowed the wicked traditions of their fathers; they now believed in the Holy Scriptures and that the prophets who wrote therein were men of God whose writings they now sought to show unto them the way of Life Eternal. In his own people, he averred, there had come a change within, therefore there was a change without. The things they once hated, they now loved; and the joys of what yesterday brought them happiness, they now despised. They served the Lord. Therefore Samuel drew the only just conclusion: "As many as have come to this, ye know of yourselves are firm and steadfast in the faith, and in the thing wherewith they have been made free."

As a proof of his people's integrity to the principles of righteousness which they had espoused, Samuel needed to refer only to the one great evidence of their common faith and their belief in the great Father of all men: the Lamanites had buried their weapons of war "and they fear to take them up lest by any means they should sin," and because of their newly found faith in Christ "they will suffer themselves that they be trodden down and slain by their enemies" and will not even as much as defend themselves because they see in Him the great Giver of life itself. (See Alma 24 )

Verses 10-17

Because of their steadfastness . . . the Lord shall bless them. Notwithstanding any iniquity that his people shall ignorantly commit, Samuel said that the Lamanites' days upon the earth would be prolonged because of their steadfastness and their firmness to the truth when once they had espoused it. "The Lord shall bless them," in spite of their weaknesses, he also said, and even in the event that they should entirely forsake the truth and dwindle away in unbelief, He will lengthen out their days until such time comes, when in the Lord's mercy, they shall be restored to "a full knowledge" of the Gospel Plan according to the words of the prophets.

"And the God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by Him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth Himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos, which he spake concerning the three days of darkness, which should be a sign given of His death unto those who should inhabit the Isles of the Sea, more specially given unto those who are of the House of Israel.

"For thus spake the prophet: The Lord God surely shall visit all the House of Israel at that day, some with His voice, because of their righteousness, unto their great joy and Salvation, and others with the thunderings and the lightnings of His power, by tempest, by fire, and by smoke, and vapor of darkness, and by the opening of the earth, and by mountains which shall be carried up.

"And all these things must surely come, saith the prophet Zenos. And the rocks of the earth must rend; and because of the groanings of the earth, many of the kings of the Isles of the Sea shall be wrought upon by the Spirit of God, to exclaim: The God of nature suffers.

"And as for those who are at Jerusalem, saith the prophet, they shall be scourged by all people, because they crucify the God of Israel, and turn their hearts aside, rejecting signs and wonders, and the power and glory of the God of Israel.

"And because they turn their hearts aside, saith the prophet, and have despised the Holy One of Israel, they shall wander in the flesh, and perish, and become a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations.

"Nevertheless, when that day cometh, saith the prophet, that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will He remember the covenants which He made to their fathers.

"Yea, then will He remember the Isles of the Sea; yea, and all the people who are of the House of Israel, will I gather in, saith the Lord, according to the words of the prophet Zenos, from the four quarters of the earth.

"Yea, and all the earth shall see the Salvation of the Lord, saith the prophet; every nation, kindred, tongue and people shall be blessed.

"And I, Nephi, have written these things unto my people, that perhaps I might persuade them that they would remember the Lord their Redeemer.

"Wherefore, I speak unto all the House of Israel, if it so be that they should obtain these things.

"For behold, I have workings in the spirit, which doth weary me even that all my joints are weak, for those who are at Jerusalem; for had not the Lord been merciful, to show unto me concerning them, even as He had prophets of old, I should have perished also.

"And He surely did show unto the prophets of old all things concerning them; and also He did show unto many concerning us; wherefore, it must needs be that we know concerning them for they are written upon the Plates of Brass.

"Now it came to pass that I, Nephi, did teach my brethren these things; and it came to pass that I did read many things to them, which were engraven upon the Plates of Brass, that they might know concerning the doings of the Lord in other lands, among people of old.

"And I did read many things unto them which were written in the Book of Moses; but that I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the Prophet Isaiah; for I did liken all Scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning.

"Wherefore I spake unto them, saying: Hear ye the words of the prophet, ye who are a Remnant of the House of Israel, a Branch who have been broken off; hear ye the words of the prophet, which were written unto all the House of Israel, and liken them unto yourselves, that ye may have hope as well as your brethren from whom ye have been broken off; for after this manner has the prophet written. ( 1 Ne. 19:10-24 )

The words of the Prophet Zenos, referred to by Samuel, were also made part of the writings of Nephi, the son of Lehi, ( 1 Ne. 19:10-24 ) just quoted. In it Nephi speaks of the Book of Moses (v. 23). This is important because on it hangs much that is worthwhile for the Latter-day Saints, as well as the sincere investigator of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Moses. Special attention is called to this phrase. Why does not Nephi say: "The Books of Moses?" Or, even, "the five Books of Moses?" For the simple reason that, to the Jews of his day, what we know as the five books of Moses were one volume which was called, "the Law" (Torah). The division into five parts took place centuries after the time of Nephi, probably in Alexandria, in Egypt. The Pentateuch as a title means in Alexandrian Greek, "The five volumes." Origen is said to have used it in that sense. It was introduced to the western world by Jerome (d. A.D. 418) and his contemporary, Rufinus. To the Jews it was, "Five Fifths of the Law." To them it was, "The Book of Moses." The term, "Book of Moses" as used by Nephi is therefore remarkable evidence of the genuineness of the Sacred Record, which a well-informed student of the Book of Mormon will appreciate. (See also Verse 11 ff. beginning p. 46, Volume I, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON )

The Book of Mormon contains many instances when God's holy prophets pronounced blessings upon the heads of the Lamanites because the prophets foresaw the time when they would excel the Nephites in keeping God's commandments, and that He, Himself, would accomplish His purposes through them unto their Salvation.

"For behold, thus saith the Lord: I will not show unto the wicked of My strength, to one more than the other, save it be unto those who repent of their sins, and hearken unto My words. Now therefore, I will that ye should behold, my brethren, that it shall be better for the Lamanites than for you except you repent. For behold, they are more righteous than you, for they have not sinned against the great knowledge which ye have received; therefore the Lord will be merciful unto them; yea, He will lengthen out their days and increase their seed, even when thou shalt be utterly destroyed except thou shall repent." (Nephi, son of Helaman; Hel. 7:23-24 )

Now listen to Alma, the younger, about three-quarters of a century before Nephi who is quoted in the paragraph preceding: "Behold, now I say unto you that He commandeth you to repent; and except ye repent, ye can in nowise inherit the Kingdom of God. But behold, this is not all—He has commanded you to repent, or He will utterly destroy you from off the face of the earth; yea, He will visit you in His anger, and in His fierce anger He will not turn away. Behold, do ye not remember the words which He spoke unto Lehi, saying that: Inasmuch as ye shall keep My commandments, ye shall prosper in the land? And again it is said that: inasmuch as ye will not keep My commandments ye shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. Now I would that you should remember, that inasmuch as the Lamanites have not kept the commandments of God, they have been cut off from the presence of the Lord. Now we see that the word of the Lord has been verified in this thing, and the Lamanites have been cut off from His presence, from the beginning of their transgressions in the land. Nevertheless I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for them in the Day of Judgment than for you, if ye remain in your sins, yea, and even more tolerable for them in this life than for you, except ye repent. For there are many promises which are extended to the Lamanites; for it is because of the traditions of their fathers that caused them to remain in their state of ignorance; therefore the Lord will be merciful unto them and prolong their existence in this land. And at some period of time they will be brought to believe in His word, and to know of the incorrectness of the traditions of their fathers; and many of them will be saved, for the Lord will be merciful unto all who call on His name." ( Alma 9:12-17 ) In this same sermon to the Ammonihahites, Alma said: "And now behold I say unto you, that if this people, who have received so many blessings from the hand of the Lord, should transgress contrary to the light and knowledge which they do have, I say unto you if this be the case, that if they should fall into transgression, it would be far more tolerable for the Lamanites than for them. For behold, the promises of the Lord are extended to the Lamanites, but they are not unto you if ye transgress; for has not the Lord expressly promised and firmly decreed, that if ye will rebel against Him that ye shall utterly be destroyed from off the face of the earth?" (Ibid., 9:23-24)

Verses 15-17

As surely as the Lord liveth shall these things be, saith the Lord. If the Lord had wrought so many mighty miracles among the Lamanites, and, too, had the power of the Holy Priesthood been made manifest in their midst as it was among the Nephites, the Lamanitish traditions which captured their darkened minds, would never have led them, Samuel declared to the iniquitous Nephites, into unlighted paths where error and superstition robbed them of their belief in the true and living God, which belief they had inherited, as had the Nephites, from their forefathers, the Jews.

Therefore, the Lord, seeing this to be true, altered His solemn edict, and said through Samuel: "I will not utterly destroy them, but I will cause that in the day of My wisdom they shall return again unto Me." (v. 16) And the Nephites, unless they repent, the Lord said, "and observe to do My will, I will utterly destroy them." We shall see in their records which follow how through their wicked ways the Nephites, even after the visit to them of the Risen Redeemer and the two-hundred years of unprecedented peace and prosperity, sank to such depths of depravity that we are prone to close the record in disgust and thank the great Giver of all good that such diseased hearts were no longer permitted to disgrace His Footstool. And all this in spite of the "many mighty works which I have done among them, and as surely as the Lord liveth shall these things be, saith the Lord."
