Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 5 ( 1960)

CHAPTER 16

Verses 1-2

There were many who heard the words of Samuel, the Lamanite. Samuel had the words of the Lord so deeply implanted within his heart, that they like a good seed (See Alma 32:28 ) began to swell within his breast and therefore to enlarge his soul, insomuch that he could not be restrained from, not saying, but shouting to the multitude, words of Life and Salvation.

From the towering vantage point which he had gained upon the walls of the great City of Zarahemla—with outstretched hands a loud voice—he prophesied to the wicked the unwelcome tidings of their coming destruction. Many listened to his proclamation; some few were pricked in their hearts, and in response to his admonition they repented of their evil deeds and and sought out Nephi, the High Priest of God's Church, that they might be baptized. Others were angry, they gathered up the stones in the roadway and hurled them at Samuel; they drew forth their bows and shot arrows at him. But to no effect, the protecting power of the Holy Spirit was around him and he could not be harmed.

Verses 3-5

There were many more who did believe on his words. When some beheld how wonderfully the prophet was preserved, it was a testimony to them that God was with him, and they also sought Nephi that they, too, might be baptized, and at the same time they confessed their sins "and denied not."

During all the time that Samuel was in the act of delivering the message which God had commissioned him to communicate to the willfully wicked people of Zarahemla, Nephi was "baptizing, and prophesying, and preaching, crying repentance unto the people, showing signs and wonders, working miracles among the people, that they might know that the Christ must shortly come."

To the end that the unbelievers should have no excuse for their lack of faith, and that the most skeptical of them could not hide their doubts beneath the rank grass of apostasy, Nephi labored among them, telling them of things "which must shortly come, that they might know and remember at the time of their coming that they had been made known unto them beforehand, to the intent that they might believe." All those who confessed their sins, and in no way denied them, but therein humbly resolved to do them no more, were added to the fold of Christ through baptism, having had faith on His Holy Name.

Verses 6-8

The more part of them did not believe in the words of Samuel. The great body of the populace grew more enraged at the want of success that attended their murderous efforts. Because they in no wise could inflict bodily injury upon Samuel, and also being unimpressed by his words, they reasoned among themselves that he was protected by the power of the devil. "They cried to their captains, saying, Take this fellow and bind him, for behold he hath a devil." Away with him, they cried, and following the wild satanic demands of the multitude, the officers of the law endeavored to arrest Samuel. But he cast himself down from the wall of the city and fled out of the lands of the Nephites into his own country. There he preached and prophesied among his own people, but among the Nephites he was never heard from any more.

Verses 9-12

It was now six years before the coming of the Savior. Notwithstanding the many promises and signs of the Savior's appearance which were given to the Nephites, the great majority of them persisted in their unbelief and iniquity. With increasing pride and wickedness their hearts became more and more hardened, and more and more, they sought for the baser things of life.

Samuel appeared among the Nephites about six years before the birth of the Redeemer in the Land of Jerusalem whence their forefathers came, and from that time forth, in spite of Samuel's words of warning, which were preserved, the moral and spiritual condition of the people became rapidly worse, until at length the more wicked of them were killed during the great convulsions of the earth that attended the Savior's crucifixion.

The Sacred Record, in summarizing the history of this particular period, says, that there was little change in the affairs of the people "save it were the people began to be more hardened in iniquity, and do more of that which was contrary to the commandments of God."

Verses 13-14

There were great signs given unto the people. In the ninetieth year of the Reign of the Judges, or about 2 B.C., the words of the prophets began to be fulfilled. Great signs were given concerning that which had been promised to the righteous. Wonderful things bore testimony of the truth spoken of by inspired and holy men of God. Angels, messengers from the presence of Celestial beings, ministered unto men. The pleasing harmonies of Heaven united in songs of praise to Him, Whose coming at a not-far-distant time was foretold by King Benjamin and Alma. The righteous among the people rejoiced, while the wicked feared and trembled. Tiding of great joy filled hearts that had, through waiting, become weary and ill at ease. Suddenly, and with the barest heraldry, the Scriptures began to be fulfilled. The Lord of Glory would soon come among men.

Verses 15-16

Nevertheless, the people began to harden their hearts. In spite of the many wonderful things that filled the heavens and the earth with causes of rejoicing, the more part of the people began to make excuses for their backsliding and ways of darkness which led them into one form of iniquity after another. To the righteous appeals of the faithful, they were not only deaf, but rebellious. Each call to repentance was made a pretext by them to clothe their iniquities with robes of righteousness. Of such a course there could be but one result, the hearts of the people began to become bitter and malignant. Day after day they followed their own paths, forgetting that their utmost strength when compared to God's is absolute weakness, and their greatest wisdom, but foolishness. Still they "began to depend upon their own strength and upon their own wisdom."

To excuse their iniquities, when they saw these marvelous manifestations of God's power, they argued among themselves that it was not improbable that some of the many things about which the prophets had talked could come to pass. "Some things they may have guessed right," they said, "but behold, we know that all these great and marvelous works cannot come to pass, of which has been spoken."

Verses 17-21

They began to reason and contend among themselves. In their wisdom, which they thought was great, the Zarahemlaites probed the meaning of these phenomena which everywhere abounded. They began to reason the Whys and Wherefores? thereof, and guided by men's follies and foolishness, they at last contended that in them they had no interest. By the spirit of man they sought to know the things of God; and with hearts, diseased and depraved, and with minds attuned to falsehood, they failed to recognize the truth of prophetic utterance even when outward signs verified the prophets' words.

The Sacred Record at this critical time in the Nephites' history says, "They began to reason and to contend among themselves," and then it was not long until the friendly discussion of one became the bitter wrath of another. Some contended that it was not reasonable to suppose that "such a being as a Christ shall come." They never thought to arrive at a valid conclusion thereof, only to overlook and justify their own personal sins. And, too, they said, if "He be the Son of God, the Father of Heaven and of Earth, as it has been spoken, why will He not show Himself unto us as well as unto them who shall be at Jerusalem?"

As is the case with most unbelievers, the more the apostate Nephites argued among themselves, the more contention arose. It was wickedness and error against wickedness and error. In their disputes there was no truth; to them, the wind soon became a whirlwind. Like travelers along an unlighted byway at night, they went first this way and then that, not knowing where to go. In their hurry to end their self-imposed incubus, they stumbled over boulders in the way. Evil apparitions rose from out of the darkness; doubt, lest they lose their way, brought fears and trembling; the path they once trod with safety, was now strewn with failure and disaster. Guided by the counsel of wicked men, sustained by the power of Satan, and with hopes bolstered by iniquity and its promise of reward, the dissident Nephites, at the behest of their leaders, rejected the words of the prophets that would have led them out of the dark and dismal waste into which they had wandered.

This state of moral and religious decay into which the Nephites had plunged, was indicative of their inability to choose between good and bad, the right from the wrong, and to hold fast that which is true. In their fallen condition only that which offered sensual enjoyment was understood, and only by taking a deep plunge into the pseudo-joys and follies of the world could they reap the pleasures of life.

It then is no wonder that they could not solve the problems of Christ's birth in the Land of Jerusalem. In their ignorance and infatuation they wondered "why will He not show Himself in this land as well as in the Land of Jerusalem?"

One of the chief devices used by Satan to subjugate the human mind, and bring it under his power and dominion, is to destroy, if possible, one's confidence in God's Holy Word. If the devil can convince one that divine prophecy is really not the mind and will of the great Ruler of the Universe, but merely that of a dreamer who may have contrived to mislead the weak and unwary; if, in the minds of the children of men, he can destroy the reality of Christ's Atonement, he cares not what else they believe, nor whom they worship. Through his influence, he tells us that revealed truths are only traditions, and that the glorious promise of Salvation is a bait upon which hangs the lure of Everlasting Life, through Christ Jesus.

It is often regarded as a mark of much learning to relegate to the limbo all things supernatural, or spiritual beyond our ken. To do so, many consider erudiate, and with one fell swoop they would answer all our claims to the contrary, notwithstanding. The Nephites of olden times did just that; they called the Atonement of Christ a wicked tradition, which had been preserved by their fathers. They excused themselves from unbelief in it because, forsooth, they did not understand why, if He be the Son of God, He was to be born in a land far away; a land known to them only by tradition, or in the writings of their ancestors who, like unto them, were the victims of the spoken word. Therefore, to make of their unbelief in Christ's Atonement a worthy cause for its rejection, they said of their teachers and priests, "They can keep us in ignorance, for we cannot witness with our own eyes that they are true."

Thus, their thoughts beguiled by their evil one, and, they themselves, left alone to search out the truths of Christ's promised coming to redeem mankind, the Nephites, unable to accept their own explanations of the wondrous happenings that surrounded them, nor to understand the words of the prophets that daily were being fulfilled, could only attribute deception to their already great bewilderment. They saw the promised signs and heard their brethren's testimonies, yet they could not fathom the depth of their own depravity. Looking forward to greater perplexity, they, with scanty evidence, surmised that the believers in Christ's coming "will by the cunning and the mysterious arts of the evil one, work some great mystery which we cannot understand." And if we yield to their entreaties now, and believe in their words, we will forever more be their servants, and as they teach us the proper way they say in which we should walk, and what we should believe, they will tell us only the things of their own choosing, thereby keeping us in ignorance "all the days of our lives."

Verses 22-25

Satan did get hold of all the hearts of the people upon all the face of the land. Not content with the riches of the earth which they had gathered about them, and unmindful of the bounties of God's hand, the Nephites, nevertheless, sought by them doing iniquity to obtain more worldly goods and greater power over the lives of their brethren. To them, their wickedness was a small matter, but to get gain was their aim whatever the cost. First this scheme and then that, they tried. They contrived many foolish and vain things, until throughout the whole land contentions arose; not only were the righteous opposed by the wicked, but the wicked opposed the wicked. This was the way Satan planned it for he stirred the people "up to do iniquity continually." By spreading rumors, setting brother against brother, building fires of discontent, and thoroughly rousing them to a condition of quarreling and enmity, the evil one sought to "harden the hearts of the people against that which was good and against that which should come."

"And notwithstanding the signs and the wonders which were wrought among the people of the Lord, and the many miracles which they did, Satan did get great hold upon the hearts of the people upon all the face of the land. And thus ended the ninetieth year of the Reign of the Judges over the people of Nephi. (1 B.C.) And thus ended the Book of Helaman, according to the record of Helaman and his sons."
