The Book of Mormon gives four keys to understanding Isaiah, which we must obtain and use for ourselves:

Be righteous—do not do "works of darkness" or "doings of abominations" (2 Ne. 25:2). Righteousness brings the Spirit, which increases understanding.

Be "filled with the spirit of prophecy" (2 Ne. 25:4), which is the spirit of revelation.

Live in the last days, "when they [Isaiah's prophecies] shall come to pass, . . . for in that day shall they understand them" (2 Ne. 25:7, 8).

Make the effort to search, which implies mental and spiritual exertion. Jesus declared twice that we ought to "search these things diligently" (3 Ne. 20:11; 23:1), and Moroni added, "Search the prophecies of Isaiah" (Morm. 8:23).

The Book of Mormon is one of our best commentaries on the book of Isaiah. Nearly a third of the book of Isaiah is quoted in the Book of Mormon, with changes in about half of the verses. In addition, several chapters and verses in the Book of Mormon provide inspired explanations and commentaries of Isaiah's writings. Understanding Isaiah brings together all the Book of Mormon insights and changes in the proper context; it also incorporates all the significant changes and insights found in the Joseph Smith Translation of Isaiah.

Nephi taught that we can better understand Isaiah if we understand the "manner of prophesying" among the Jews (2 Ne. 25:1). This manner of prophesying included symbolism and poetic parallelism. Understanding Isaiah explains the symbolism Isaiah used in all sixty-six of his chapters, phrase by phrase. And it shows how he used parallelism to teach his divine lessons.

Nephi also suggested that it helps to be familiar with the regions around Jerusalem (2 Ne. 25:6). There are 106 different geographical place-names in the book of Isaiah. Understanding Isaiah explains their significance, both literal and symbolic.

Sometimes we tend to read Isaiah's warnings and indictments as having application only (or primarily) to ancient Israel. But when we read by the spirit of prophecy, we suddenly see that they all can be likened to ourselves. We need to remind ourselves constantly that this book is about ancient Israel—and it also is about us.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie plainly taught this principle, saying, "Many prophetic utterances have dual or multiple instances of fulfillment." 3 "As with so many ancient prophecies, these words of Isaiah are subject to the law of dual fulfillment." 4 "The scriptures also provide clear instances of prophecies that may be fulfilled at more than one time," writes Stephen D. Ricks. "The possibility that prophecies may have more than one fulfillment indicates the richness and relevance of the writings of the prophets." 5 Isaiah is filled with multiple meanings—and this volume seeks to explain many of them.

Even several volumes would not provide adequate space for us to say all that we desire about the words of Isaiah. For this volume, we have therefore limited our discussion of historical and cultural perspectives, and we have often not looked at Isaiah's writings from the point of view of his contemporaries. Nevertheless, it has been our goal to present our best possible interpretation of each chapter and verse, even phrases, of this great prophet, focusing on their meaning for our time. We have also sought to be nondogmatic in our views and presentation.
