Understanding Isaiah is intended not to be read from beginning to end but to be used as a reference and study aid. The book is organized in chapters following the format of Isaiah, with internal sections breaking the chapters into smaller units. Each section consists of a descriptive heading, an introduction to the section, the text of that passage of Isaiah, and a phrase-by-phrase commentary.

The Isaiah text includes alternate readings from the Book of Mormon, the Joseph Smith Translation, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and the Masoretic text of the Hebrew Bible. It also includes clarifications of archaic words.

The text is arranged in poetic form where possible. Isaiah usually wrote in parallelisms (matching phrases that repeat the same thought in different words). We have marked matching sets of words with italics. If a second parallelism occurs in a set of lines (which is often the case), the parallel words are underlined. For example:

shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills;

Brackets in the text indicate a word or phrase that has been added to or altered from the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible. Brackets are generally accompanied by explanatory footnotes. Scripture citations with only chapter and verse numbers are from Isaiah unless otherwise indicated. Citations such as 1:5a and 1:5b refer, respectively, to the first and second half of the verse cited. Phrases from the verse under discussion appear in italics without quotation marks or a source citation. Full references for the sources in the notes are found in the Bibliography. The transliteration of Hebrew words has been done according to the style guide of Harold Scanlin, The Dead Sea Scrolls and Modern Translations of the Old Testament.

It has been our goal to make this a work that combines divine inspiration with human scholarship. Accordingly, we have sought the guidance of the Spirit in coming to our understandings of Isaiah while at the same time seeking insight from inspired statements of prophets and apostles (both ancient and modern) and from the best thinking of scriptural scholars. It has been wonderful for us to read and study the powerful words of the prophet Isaiah. We began as typical students, hoping to find our way to deeper understanding. We bear testimony that that understanding has come, both through diligent effort and through the blessings and grace of the Spirit of the Lord. Because the Lord is just—and because he loves us all—we can bear testimony in confidence that he will help every soul to come to understand the words of his ancient prophet for our day. Those who do will have cause to rejoice, and they will marvel as we do at the greatness of the words of Isaiah.
