Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Appendix 6

Symbolism and Isaiah

An important aspect of the manner of prophesying among the Jews is the use of symbols and symbolic language. The Lord said through Hosea, "I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes" (Hosea 12:10). Symbols and types are so important that Nephi wrote, "My soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; . . . and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him" (2 Ne. 11:4). Symbolism is a key element of Isaiah's text; it appears to be part of every single revelation. Through revelation, Isaiah drew upon his social, cultural, religious, and political background to produce hundreds of different symbols. He used items that deal with common aspects of everyday life to illustrate prophecy and eternal truths.

As we seek to understand Isaiah and his use of symbolism, it is helpful to recognize that symbolic speech is a greater part of our own culture than we may realize. One example, the concept of heart, will illustrate this. Here are some of the ways that we use the heart symbolically:

"Change of heart" deals with a change in our affections, a change of mind, a change of feelings, or all of these.

"Eat one's heart out," a very different expression, means to feel frustration or unhappiness.

" From the bottom of my heart" means to be very sincere.

"Have a heart" means to be kind or sympathetic.

"He has his heart in the right place" means he is well-intentioned.

"She works with heart and soul" means she performs her work with great enthusiasm.

"He has his heart set on the riches of the world" means that riches were what he most desired.

"She stole his heart away" means that she caused him to love her deeply.

"Take heart" means to have courage, or to be encouraged.

"With all your heart" means to do something with all your emotional or physical power.

These are common idioms in our culture, each one symbolic. We all know that a person's heart is the muscle that pumps blood through our systems, but these expressions refer to something besides the physical heart in our bodies.

In the same way, much of what Isaiah says is symbolic, referring not to actual bears, cedars, or barley but to something else represented by each of these. We have to work harder to understand his symbols and idioms than we do those that are familiar to us, but through study, accompanied by the Spirit of the Lord, we can come to a true understanding of each.

The kinds of symbols Isaiah used seem to come from all aspects of life. Following are twenty-one major categories of Isaiah's symbols, with a few examples in each:

Actions

Common actions: drinking, eating, falling down, fornicating, shaving hair, singing, sitting

Sacred actions: anointings, ordinations, sacrifices, spreading forth hands

Animals/insects—asses, bear, beast, bee, bird, bittern, bullock, calf, camels, cattle, crane

Architectural elements—bulwarks, foundation, gate, house, pillar, wall, watchtower, windows

Armor and weaponry—armor, arrow, bow, shield, sword, weapon

Astronomical elements—cloud, constellations, heaven, moon, stars, sun

Atmospheric conditions—earthquake, flood, hail, storm, tempest, whirlwinds, wind

Colors—crimson, red, scarlet, white

Ecclesiastical offices—priests, prophet

Elements/rocks/minerals—ashes, clay, clods, dirt, gold, iron, rock, silver, tin

Family and social relationships—bridegroom, brother, children, daughter, father, firstborn, handmaids

Foods—barley, berries, bread, butter, corn, fruit, grapes, honey, milk, wheat, wine

Geography—brook, cities, deep, desert, dry ground, field, highways, hill, mountain, river

Human anatomy—arm, beard, belly, blood, bones, cheeks, ear, eye, face, feet, finger, heart

Names and titles

Of Deity: Immanuel, Jehovah, Wonderful

Of persons: Beulah, Cyrus, Lucifer

Numbers—thousand

Objects

Common objects: ax, bed, bill of divorcement, book, chains, chariots, cup, idol

Sacred objects: altar, drink offering, incense, temple

Occupations—carpenter, creditors, fishermen, harvester, king, officers, seller, servant

Persons—Abraham, Cyrus, David, Jesse, Sarah

Places—Ariel, Assyria, Babylon, Egypt, Jerusalem, Sodom, Tarshish

Plants—cedars, fig tree, flower, grass, groves, leaf, oak, olive tree, orchard, root, seed

Time—day, daytime, night, noonday, summer, winter

This list of symbols is representative only, for Isaiah used literally hundreds of symbols in his writings. As we study Isaiah's symbolic expressions, we will more fully appreciate his message to us.
