Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Appendix 7

The Spirit of Prophecy

A key to understanding Isaiah is to have the spirit of prophecy. Those who live righteously have claim to the Holy Spirit of God, which gives them, as a gift, the spirit of prophecy. Nephi taught that "the words of Isaiah . . . are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy" (2 Ne. 25:4). This is a vital and essential key to understanding the writings of Isaiah. In our opinion it is the most important key, although, of course, it depends on the key of righteousness.

It seems reasonable that the reader would be required to possess the spirit of prophecy to understand Isaiah's words, because Isaiah needed that same spirit of prophecy to receive revelation. Nephi explained to his brethren that the prophecies of Isaiah "were manifest unto the prophet [Isaiah] by the voice of the Spirit; for by the Spirit are all things made known unto the prophets, which shall come upon the children of men according to the flesh." (1 Ne. 22:2.)

The expression the spirit of prophecy belongs almost exclusively to the Book of Mormon, being used there more than twenty times. Contrast that number with the one instance in the Bible, found in Rev. 19:10. The definition of the phrase, as presented in scripture, refers to the testimony of Jesus. Joseph Smith understood this well, as he explained on one occasion: "Salvation cannot come without revelation; it is in vain for anyone to minister without it. No man is a minister of Jesus Christ without being a Prophet. No man can be a minister of Jesus Christ except he has the testimony of Jesus; and this is the spirit of prophecy. Whenever salvation has been administered, it has been by testimony." 1

President John Taylor taught, "The testimony of Jesus was the very principle, essence, and power of the spirit of prophecy whereby the ancient prophets were inspired." 2 Thus those who have a deep and true testimony of Christ have already experienced the spirit of prophecy. Those who have received the spiritual message, or testimony, that Jesus is the Christ have received a vital spiritual communication from on high. The spirit of prophecy is but another manifestation of that same Spirit.

Several ancient prophets have connected the spirit of prophecy to the Holy Ghost. Modern prophets have seen a virtual equivalency between the spirit of prophecy and the Holy Ghost. Elder Wilford Woodruff wrote that "it is the privilege of every man and woman in this kingdom to enjoy the spirit of prophecy, which is the Spirit of God." 3 Elder Delbert L. Stapley said that "the Holy Ghost is the spirit of prophecy." 4

The formula for receiving the spirit of prophecy is presented in Alma 17:2-3. The key requirements appear to be diligent search of the scriptures, much fasting, and much prayer: "Now these sons of Mosiah . . . had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God. But this is not all; they had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation."

Revelation and the spirit of prophecy are terms commonly found together in scripture. Of twenty-six instances of the term spirit of prophecy in the scriptures, fourteen also refer to revelation or revelations.
