This section presents the two hymns that we will sing to the Lord in the future, both of which are introduced with similar statements: "And in that day thou shalt say" and "And in that day shall ye say." Both hymns center on the Lord; the first uses the titles Lord (twice), God, Lord Jehovah, and a number of metaphors and terms that identify the Lord as our salvation, strength, and song. The second hymn uses the titles Lord and Holy One of Israel. The two hymns also refer to those who are singing them. The first hymn is filled with first-person singular pronouns such as I (twice), me (twice), and my (four times); the second simply refers to the "inhabitant of Zion." Hence, the hymns juxtapose two essential elements: God and those who worship him.

The principal theme of the first hymn is the salvation of the members of the house of Israel: three times salvation is mentioned, twice affirming that the Lord is "my salvation" and once referring to the righteous who "draw water out of the wells of salvation." The chief theme of the second hymn pertains to the singer or worshiper who rejoices in the Lord's greatness. The hymn features a number of command verbal forms, such as praise, call upon, declare, make mention, sing, cry out, and shout, all of which recognize and honor the Lord's exalted name, his excellent works, and his greatness for dwelling in the midst of Israel.

Isa. 12:1-6

And in that day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me. (12:1) Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song; he also [has] 1 become my salvation. (12:2) Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. (12:3) And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. (12:4) Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth. (12:5) Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. (12:6)

Notes and Commentary
