The Medes identified in 13:17 indicate that this prophecy of Isaiah (13:11-22) was fulfilled when the Medes, under the leadership of "Darius the Median" (Dan. 5:31) and in alliance with the Persians led by Cyrus (Dan. 6:28), destroyed Babylon in approximately 539 b.c. The destruction of ancient Babylon served as a shadow of what will happen to the sinful inhabitants of the world during the judgments in the last days, for Babylon is a symbol of the world (D&C 1:16). The wicked will flee destructions with fear, only to find destruction in their own country; their young men and women and children will suffer terrible deaths at the hands of others; and their homes and palaces will be made desolate, inhabited by frightful creatures—all within a short period of time.

Isa. 13:11-22

And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay down the haughtiness of the terrible. (13:11) I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir. (13:12) Therefore, I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger. (13:13) And [he] 12 shall be as the [hunted deer], 13 and as a sheep that no man taketh up; and they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land. (13:14) Every one that [is proud] shall be thrust through; yea, and every one that is joined [to the wicked] 14 shall fall by the sword. (13:15) Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled and their wives ravished. (13:16) Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver and gold, nor shall they delight in it. (13:17) Their bows shall also dash the young men to pieces, and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not spare children. (13:18) And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. (13:19) It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there. (13:20) But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and [he-goats] 15 shall dance there. (13:21) And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and [jackals] 16 in their pleasant palaces; and her time is near to come, and her [day] 17 shall not be prolonged. [For I will destroy her speedily; yea, for I will be merciful unto my people, but the wicked shall perish]. 18 (13:22)

Notes and Commentary
