Moab, which was named after the firstborn son of Lot's eldest daughter (Gen. 19:37), was the nation that bordered the Dead Sea on the east. The prophet warns the Moabites that they will be destroyed, despite the fact that they are prosperous in trading and commerce. The listing of sixteen cities and places in this section, which are located in both the northern and southern regions of Moab, indicates that all of Moab will be affected by the devastation.

Moabites will mourn and lament their destruction. They will mourn by weeping, howling, shaving their heads, cutting off their beards (15:2), girding with sackcloth, howling on housetops and in the streets (15:3), and crying out to the point that the voice is heard from distant places ("even unto Jahaz"); even "soldiers of Moab shall cry out" (15:4).

Isa. 15:1-9

The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; (15:1) He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off. (15:2) In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl, weeping abundantly. (15:3) And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard even unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his life shall be grievous unto him. (15:4) My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction. (15:5) For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing. (15:6) Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows. (15:7) For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim. (15:8) For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land. (15:9)

Notes and Commentary
