The prophecy, which appears to have a latter-day application, consists of two parts. The first part consists of the judgments against Egypt's people, leaders, and deities (19:1-18). Egypt will experience internal confusion, perhaps civil war, and eventually the rule of an external tyrant (19:1-4). Egypt will also encounter economic upheaval when the Nile and irrigation ditches dry up, negatively affecting the farmers and the fishing, flax, and weaving industries. Egypt's inhabitants will suffer (19:5- 10).

The second part of this prophecy (19:19-25) deals with the Egyptians' turning to the Lord, with evidence that the gospel will exist among them. The prophecy speaks of prayer ("they shall cry unto the Lord," 19:20; and "he shall be intreated of them," 19:22); a Savior and deliverance (19:20); and a people that "shall know the Lord" (19:21). In addition, spiritual healing will come through God's power (this aspect of the prophecy is emphasized when it is twice repeated, 19:22); repentance and conversion ("they shall return even to the Lord," 19:22); oneness among the nations (19:23-24); blessings unto the people (19:25); and a temple of the Lord ("shall there be an altar," 19:19); sacrifices and vows (19:21).

The two parts of the prophecy may be summarized in two words, smite and heal, both occurring twice in 19:22. The first section, the smiting of Egypt, refers to the turmoil and confusion that Egypt experiences by not knowing God (19:1-18); the second section deals with the healing that will occur when Egypt's people turn to God (19:19-25). Notice how Isaiah compares the two parts: civil war and internal confusion (19:2) are replaced with one language (19:18); the idols and false gods (19:3) are replaced with the Lord and Savior (19:20); the fierce and evil king (19:4) is replaced with the Lord who heals Egypt (19:22); and the drying up of the river (19:5) is replaced with the highway and the Lord's blessing (19:22-23).

Isaiah teaches that it is God who has governed and will continue to govern Egypt's affairs—as he does with all nations. This truth is emphasized by including the term Lord (Jehovah) ten times, Lord of Hosts (Jehovah of Hosts) seven times, and Lord (Adonai), saviour, and great one once. Specific phrases that identify God as the chief moving force behind certain events that have or will take place in Egypt include: "let them know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt" (19:12), "the Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof" (19:14), "because of the counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined against it" (19:17), "the Lord . . . shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them" (19:20), "Lord shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it" (19:22).

This chapter may be interpreted on at least two different levels. It is possible that Isaiah saw these events occurring in the literal latter-day Egypt. But it may be that these things refer to another nation (or many nations) that will repent and turn to God after suffering great judgments and punishments for their sins.

Isa. 19:1-25

The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. (19:1) And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom. (19:2) And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards. (19:3) And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts. (19:4) And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up. (19:5) And they shall turn the rivers far away; and the brooks of defence shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall wither. (19:6) The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be no more. (19:7) The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish. (19:8) Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave networks, shall be confounded. (19:9) And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish. (19:10) Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings ? (19:11) Where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee now, and let them know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt. (19:12) The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes thereof. (19:13) The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit. (19:14) Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do. (19:15) In that day shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shaketh over it. (19:16) And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined against it. (19:17) In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of hosts; one shall be called, The city of the Sun. 1 (19:18) In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord. (19:19) And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them. (19:20) And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and perform it. (19:21) And the Lord shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it: and they shall return even to the Lord, and he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them. (19:22) In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. (19:23) In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land: (19:24) Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. (19:25)

Notes and Commentary
