Jehovah plays a very active role in the events of the earth, including those that will occur during these last days and at his second coming, as set forth in this section. He will make a feast for all people (although only the meek and humble of the earth will attend), "destroy . . . the veil that is spread over all nations," he will "swallow up death in victory," "wipe away tears from off all faces," and take away the "rebuke of his people."

After we have partaken of the Lord's feast, and after he has wiped away our tears, we will worship him with these words (25:9):

Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

Note that with these words we will twice testify "this is our God/Lord," twice affirm "we have waited for him," and twice speak of his salvation ("save us"/"salvation").

Isa. 25:6-12

And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. (25:6) And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all nations. (25:7) He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it. (25:8) And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. (25:9) For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, (25:10a) And Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the dunghill. (25:10b) And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands. (25:11) And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust. (25:12)

Notes and Commentary
