In this prayer Israel addresses God as "O Lord," "Lord," or "O Lord our God" seven times. The prayer is uttered by more than one person, as indicated by the frequent use of the plural we, although 26:9 twice uses the singular I. The theme of the prayer is the justice of the Lord, for the term judgments appears often; it is found in such expressions as "the way of thy judgments" and "thy judgments are in the earth." Other expressions are less explicit: "thy hand is lifted up" and "thy chastening was upon them."

The Lord's justice works two ways: the wicked suffer shame ("they shall see, and be ashamed") and destruction ("fire . . . shall devour them") as the result of the judgments, while the righteous experience peace ("Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us"), an increase of Zion's numbers, and an expansion of Zion's borders (26:15).

When will this prayer be uttered? This prayer or one like it has been offered by the righteous since the beginning of the world, for it sets forth their desires for God's judgments. The prayer should also represent our desires.

Isa. 26:7-18

The way of the just is uprightness: thou, most upright, dost [make level] 5 the path of the just. (26:7) Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. (26:8) With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. (26:9) Let favor be [shown] 6 to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord. (26:10) Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them. (26:11) Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all our works in us. (26:12) O Lord our God, other lords beside thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name. (26:13) They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish. (26:14) Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified: thou hast [extended all the boundaries of the land]. 7 (26:15) Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. (26:16) Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. (26:17) We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen. (26:18)

Notes and Commentary
