The last three verses of the previous section (6:11-13) refer to the deportation of ancient Israel's inhabitants from their homeland and to the ruin of their cities. These somber prophecies deal with the scattering of Israel brought about by her spiritual blindness and hard-heartedness (6:10). This section (7:1-9) nevertheless presents a prophecy intended to bring joy and hope to the people through the presence of a living symbol (8:18) named Shear-jashub, the son of Isaiah and his wife, the prophetess. Shear-jashub means "a remnant shall return," and the prophecy is that a remnant of the house of Israel will someday return to their homeland. More is said of Shear- jashub in later prophecies.

An Isaiah scholar explains that the prophecy in this section "was delivered on the occasion of Isaiah's first interview with King Ahaz, after the first alarm had reached Jerusalem that invasion was imminent. The king was apparently supervising the measures being taken to ensure a water-supply for the city in the event of a siege, when the prophet received the command to go with his son Shear-yashub." 1

Rezin king of Syria and Pekah king of Israel tried to persuade Ahaz king of Judah to ally with them against Assyria, their neighboring superpower. Meanwhile, Isaiah pleaded with Ahaz to trust the Lord for deliverance from the invading armies (7:1-10). Ahaz rejected Isaiah's spiritual counsel and won the support of Tiglath- pileser III, king of Assyria, who in 732 b.c. invaded the Northern Kingdom of Israel and captured many cities (2 Kgs. 15:29; 16:7). Because Ahaz rejected Isaiah's (i.e., God's) plan, the armies of Rezin and Pekah invaded Judah, slew one hundred twenty thousand warriors, and carried away some two hundred thousand women and children. Judah was slaughtered, because, in part, of the great sins of her king and her people (2 Kgs. 16:5; 2 28:5-8).

The section begins with a historical note that explains the setting and context from which the prophecy originated (7:1-2). Next, the Lord speaks to Isaiah (7:3). Isaiah delivers God's word to Ahaz (7:4), telling him that the two invading kings are but blazing firebrands which will soon be burnt out, and that Syria's plan to rule Judah, dethrone Ahaz, and place a king on Judah's throne will not be successful. Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah make evil plans (7:5) which the Lord explains will not work (7:7-9).

Isa. 7:1-9

And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it. (7:1) And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is [an ally] 2 with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. (7:2) Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the [aqueduct] 3 of the upper pool in the highway of the [washermen's] 4 field; (7:3) And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. (7:4) Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying, (7:5) Let us go up against Judah, and [cause her sickening dread], 5 and let us [break her down] 6 for us, and set a king in the midst of it, [yea,] 7 the son of Tabeal: (7:6) Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. (7:7) For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus, 8 Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people. (7:8) And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. (7:9)

Notes and Commentary
