Isaiah addresses the issue of trusting in man rather than in God. Judah's leaders sought an alliance with Egypt against Assyria, contrary to the counsel of the Lord (30:1-2). Now Isaiah promises that their reliance on Egypt will be unfruitful and will cause their downfall (30:3). Because of Judah's wickedness and her rebellion against God, her destruction will come "suddenly at an instant" (30:13). Her sins are many: she does not take counsel from the Lord (30:1); she does not pray to the Lord (30:2); she trusts Egypt and its horses rather than the Lord (30:2, 16); she carries her riches there (30:6); she rejects her prophets and seers and desires them to prophesy "smooth things" and lies (30:10); and she despises God's word (30:12). Note the Lord's command to Isaiah to record this prophecy in a book so that future generations, including our own, will learn that Judah was "a rebellious people" (30:8-9).

Isa. 30:1-17

Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; and that poured out a libation, 1 but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin: (30:1) That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt! (30:2) Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. (30:3) For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes. (30:4) They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor be an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach. (30:5) The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a people that shall not profit them. (30:6) For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit still. (30:7) Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever: (30:8) That this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord: (30:9) Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits: (30:10) Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us. (30:11) Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon: (30:12) Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant. (30:13) And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit. (30:14) For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel; In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not. (30:15) But ye said, No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift. (30:16) One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill. (30:17)

Notes and Commentary
