Isa. 31 may be divided into two parts. Part one, 31:1-3, prophesies woe unto all who rely on the arm of flesh rather than on God. Specifically, Judah had relied on Egypt's military powers for deliverance rather than trusting in God, but the woe applies to us if we rely on our armies, weapons of war, or other means of temporal deliverance, or security, rather than on our God.

Part two, 31:4-9, speaks mainly to us today. If we, who are part of Zion, will cast away our wickedness as one casts away false gods, then the Lord will defend Zion. He will be like a mighty lion, "roaring on his prey" (31:4), or like a bird, flying protectively over her nestlings to preserve them; he will use his mighty sword to protect Zion.

Isa. 31:1-9

Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord! (31:1) Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity. (31:2) Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is [helped] 1 shall fall down, and they all shall fail together. (31:3) For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof. (31:4) As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve it. (31:5) Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted. (31:6) For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin. (31:7) Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall be discomfited. (31:8) And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. (31:9)

Notes and Commentary
