The troubles and sorrows allotted to Israel, or Judah (32:9-14), will continue until the restoration of the gospel in the last days, when the Lord pours out his Spirit on his people. At this time the Lord will remove the curse from the earth (D&C 61:17), so that wildernesses and deserts will become fruitful fields, or bounteous sources of food. Also accompanying the outpouring of the Spirit will be increased spirituality among the inhabitants of Zion—Isaiah specifically mentions righteousness and peace.

We should be comforted by Isaiah's prophecy that as the crops and homes of the wicked are being flattened, Zion's inhabitants will dwell securely in peace.

Isa. 32:9-20

Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech. (32:9) Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come. (32:10) Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. (32:11) [Beat upon your breasts] 3 for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine. (32:12) Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city: (32:13) Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left [desolate]; 4 the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks; (32:14) Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. (32:15) Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field. (32:16) And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. (32:17) And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places; (32:18) When it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place. (32:19) Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass. (32:20)

Notes and Commentary
