Isaiah prophesies to all the peoples of the earth, as signaled by his use of the words nations, people, the earth, and the world in 34:1. His message is plain: the Lord is angry with the nations of the earth and their armies; therefore, he is going to destroy them at his second coming. Isaiah's words regarding the destruction are vivid and descriptive— utterly destroyed, slaughter, slain, carcases, blood, filled with blood, sacrifice, and soaked with blood. In addition, Isaiah's terminology recalls animal sacrifice at the Lord's temple: slaughter, blood, fat, blood of lambs and goats, and fat of the kidneys of rams. The Lord is going to destroy the nations as if they were sacrificial animals.

Isaiah's symbolism is clear to us: those who accept the Savior's atoning sacrifice will be delivered from destruction, but those who reject his atonement will be slaughtered, as were the sacrificial animals of his temple. During all this slaughter, Jehovah will "uphold Zion's cause" (NIV 34:8) and protect his Saints.

Isa. 34:1-8

Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it. (34:1) For the [wrath] 1 of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. (34:2) Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood. (34:3) And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree. (34:4) For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. (34:5) The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. (34:6) And the [wild oxen] 2 shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the [mighty ones]; 3 and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness. (34:7) For it is the day of the Lord's vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion. (34:8)

Notes and Commentary
