With the restoration of the gospel, the righteous of latter-day Israel, which includes the Lamanites, is no longer comparable to a wilderness or desert but is like the garden of God, or Eden (see commentary on 27:10; see also D&C 33:5). Zion["blossom[s] abundantly" (35:2), thanks to the abundance of "waters," "streams," and "springs of water" (35:6-7)—all of which refer symbolically to Jesus Christ and the great life-giving blessings associated with him and his gospel.

Modern revelation adds light to this chapter of Isaiah: "But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains" (D&C 49:24-25). The revelation places Jacob in the "wilderness," a term also used in Isa. 35, and we learn that Jacob and Zion shall "flourish" and the Lamanites shall "blossom." The words flourish and blossom suggest that Jacob, Zion, and the Lamanites are like plants or flowers.

D&C 49 presents a host of teachings about what Zion will be like in the last days:

It will be a place of rejoicing, joy, gladness, singing, and glory (D&C 49:1-2, 10)

Inhabitants of Zion will "see the glory of the Lord" (D&C 49:2)

Inhabitants of Zion will strengthen one another spiritually (D&C 49:3-4)

God will open the eyes of the blind and the ears of the deaf (D&C 49:5)

The waters of life will flow abundantly (D&C 49:6-7)

The "way of holiness" will be in Zion (D&C 49:8)

The "way of holiness" will be off limits to the "unclean" and enemies of Zion (D&C 49:8-9)

The "way of holiness" will be for the "redeemed" and "ransomed of the Lord" (D&C 49:9-10)

Those who "come to Zion" will experience "everlasting joy," and "sorrow and sighing shall flee away" (D&C 49:10).

We also read some, but not all, of Isaiah's statements literally, seeing in our time the deserts of both Utah and Israel responding to the Lord's blessing the land. The great irrigation systems and man-made water systems enable places that were once wastelands to become farming communities; hence, the desert and the wilderness are blossoming as a rose.

Isa. 35:1-10

The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. (35:1) It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God. (35:2) Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. (35:3) Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he will come and save you. (35:4) Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. (35:5) Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert. (35:6) And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the [resort of jackals], 1 where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes. (35:7) And [a] highway shall be there; [for] a way [shall be cast up] and it shall be called The way of holiness; [T]he unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be [cast up] for those [who are clean, and] the wayfaring men, though [they are accounted] 2 fools, shall not err therein. (35:8) No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there: (35:9) And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. (35:10)

Notes and Commentary
