After providing King Ahaz with a sign (the Immanuel prophecy), Isaiah prophesies that Assyria will invade Israel. Ahaz had been worried about the two kings (Rezin and Pekah) who were threatening to invade his land and kingdom, but, according to Isaiah, Ahaz should have been more concerned with the Assyrian army's impending invasion. Inasmuch as Ahaz had rejected the Lord and lacked faith in him (7:10-14), the Lord set the king of Assyria against Ahaz.

Isaiah prophesies that Assyria's occupation would cover the entire land (7:18- 19). Assyria's intent was to humiliate and strip the land's inhabitants of their dignity (7:20), make them poverty-stricken, and deport them from the land (7:21-22). Because of the desolating nature of warfare, the vineyards would become neglected and overrun with thorns and briers (7:23-24), and the farmlands that had once been cultivated (digged with the hoe) would also be abandoned and become a pastureland for cattle and sheep (7:25). Ahaz could have had freedom for his people, but he ignored the Lord's sign.

Isa. 7:17-25

The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria. (7:17) And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall [whistle] 17 for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. (7:18) And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes. (7:19) In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, 18 by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard. (7:20) And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep; (7:21) And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk 19 they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land. (7:22) And it shall come to pass in that day, [Every place which has a thousand vines worth a thousand pieces of silver will become thorns and briers] 20 (7:23) With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns. (7:24) And on all hills that shall be digged with the [hoe], 21 [you will no longer go there for] 22 fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of [sheep]. 23 (7:25)

Notes and Commentary
