Isaiah contrasts the greatness of the Lord with the nothingness of mankind. The Lord has power to create the heavens (40:12), possesses all knowledge, wisdom, and understanding, and no man can instruct him (40:14); he is greater than all his creations and has no equal (40:20). When contrasted with God, the nations of the earth are as insignificant as a single drop of water in a bucket, a few particles of dust (40:15-17), or small grasshoppers. Even the great princes and judges of the earth are nothing (40:23) compared to God, who has power to add to his creations as easily as a person opens the curtains in his home (40:22). Isaiah uses ten rhetorical questions as a teaching tool in this section; five of them begin with the words who or whom.

Isa. 40:12-25

Who hath measured the waters [of the sea] 6 in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? (40:12) Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counselor hath taught him? (40:13) With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and [showed] 7 to him the way of understanding? (40:14) Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. (40:15) And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering. (40:16) All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. (40:17) To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? (40:18) The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains. (40:19) He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved. (40:20) Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth? (40:21) It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in: (40:22) That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity. (40:23) Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble. (40:24) To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy One. (40:25)

Notes and Commentary
