Isaiah's prophetic promises to Israel are wonderful, and they have application to us, of whom the Lord has said, "ye are the children of Israel" (D&C 103:17). Isaiah tells us that, as part of Israel,

We are God's servants (41:8-9);

We are his chosen people (41:8-9);

God has called us from the chief men of the earth (41:9);

We are to fear not, for God will strengthen, help, and uphold us (41:10);

Those who are against us will be ashamed and confounded and will perish (41:11);

They who war against us will be "as nothing, and as a thing of nought" (41:12);

While holding our right hand, God will say, "Fear not; I will help thee" (41:13);

God will mold us into powerful, unique instruments, enabling us to perform our work (41:15-16);

When our poor and needy (speaking of all of us) seek water, God will provide more than enough for us. He says, "I will open rivers . . . and fountains . . . and . . . springs of water" (41:18). Such are the great promises unto us, who are of the house of Israel.

Isa. 41:1-20

Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment. (41:1) Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. (41:2) He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his feet. (41:3) Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the Lord, the first, and with the last; I am he. (41:4) The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came. (41:5) They helped every one his neighbor; and every one said to his brother, Be of good courage. (41:6) So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved. (41:7) But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend. (41:8) Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away. (41:9) Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. (41:10) Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall perish. (41:11) Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought. (41:12) For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee. (41:13) Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. (41:14) Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff. (41:15) Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel. (41:16) When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. (41:17) I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water. (41:18) I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree together: (41:19) That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it. (41:20)

Notes and Commentary
