The Lord challenges the false gods and graven images that the people have created for themselves to prophesy and foretell the future. He asks the false gods to relate a few historical facts, and he invites them to perform any kind of act—a good act or even an evil act. The Lord issues these challenges so that the people who created these graven images may see if their images are indeed gods, possessing powers and life within themselves. The false gods, of course, are unable to respond, because they are nothing more than "wind and confusion." Whoever makes a graven image is an "abomination" and "vanity."

Isa. 41:21-29

Produce your cause, saith the Lord; bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob . (41:21) Let them bring them forth, and [show] 2 us what shall happen: let them [show] the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come. (41:22) [Show] the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together. (41:23) Behold, ye are of nothing, 3 and your work of nought: an abomination is he that chooseth you. (41:24) I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall [tread] 4 upon princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treadeth clay. (41:25) Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that [showeth], 5 yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that heareth your words . (41:26) The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings. (41:27) For I beheld, and there was no man; even among [men], 6 and there was no counselor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word. (41:28) Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their molten images are wind and confusion. (41:29)

Notes and Commentary
