Isa. 42:10-12 is a command for all the earth's inhabitants and creatures to praise the Lord with a new song. The phrases "end of the earth," "the sea," "the isles," "the wilderness," "the cities," "the villages," "the rock," "the mountains," and "the islands" indicate that the earth's inhabitants are universally invited to sing praises to the Lord. Isa. 42:13-17 describes God as a mighty warrior who will destroy the wicked, especially those who pronounce to their graven images that "ye are our gods." Note the active role God plays in their destruction, for the personal pronoun I, referring to the Lord, is found eleven times. Isa. 42:16 is an interjection about the spiritually blind. We, the house of Israel, are the blind (JST 42:19-23) whom God leads down paths, and out of darkness into the light.

Isa. 42:10-17

Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. (42:10) Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains. (42:11) Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the islands. (42:12) The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies. (42:13) I have long time 5 [held] my peace; I have been still, and refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and devour at once. (42:14) I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools. (42:15) And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them. (42:16) They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods. (42:17)

Notes and Commentary
