Isaiah illustrates the foolishness of those who worship false gods. Such are extremely vain, and one day they will be ashamed for their abominations. Those who cut down a tree and use one piece of the wood for cooking and another piece to fashion a god "have not known nor understood: . . . they cannot see . . . they cannot understand" (44:18). They will not find salvation (44:20).

Although Isaiah speaks specifically of idols made from wood, he refers to false gods of any type, including money, worldly possessions, and power.

Isa. 44:9-20

They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and [the things in which they delight] 4 shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed. (44:9) Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing? (44:10) Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together. (44:11) The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint. (44:12) The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house. (44:13) He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it. (44:14) Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto. (44:15) He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire: (44:16) And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god. (44:17) They have not known nor understood: for [they have] 5 shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand. (44:18) And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? (44:19) He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? (44:20)

Notes and Commentary
