The Lord who created all things (44:24) addresses Cyrus (who has not yet been born), calling him by name (45:4) and appointing him to serve as a deliverer of captive Israel (45:1-2). Cyrus was a type of Christ, the preeminent Anointed One who delivered us from our captivity of sin and death. The Lord prepared the way for Cyrus to conquer Babylon by opening doors and making rough places smooth (45:1-2). In the same way, the Lord will open doors and prepare the way for us to come to Zion. The result of the Lord's power in all these cases (the sending forth of Cyrus, the coming of Christ, and the establishment of Zion) is that all the world may know that Jehovah is the true God, greater than all others (45:5-6).

Isa. 44:24-28; 45:1

Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself; (44:24) That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish; (44:25) That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof: (44:26) That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers: (44:27) That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. (44:28) Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have [strengthened], 7 to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; 8 and the gates shall not be shut; (45:1) I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut [asunder] 9 the bars of iron: (45:2) And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel. (45:3) For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me. (45:4) I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me: (45:5) That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the Lord, and there is none else. (45:6)

Notes and Commentary
