This passage introduces us to a servant of the Lord who has been called "from the womb" (49:1, 5), or from premortality. He has been hid and prepared of the Lord (49:2) and is promised glory (49:3). But the servant is discouraged, saying, "I have labored in vain" (49:4). The Lord reminds him of his mission and his promises: he is to help gather Israel and is to be a light to the Gentiles (49:6). Men despise the servant and nations abhor him, but kings and princes will yet give him respect and honor (49:7; the identity of this servant is discussed in the commentary on 49:1).

President Wilford Woodruff said of Isaiah 49: "The revelations that are in the Bible, the predictions of the Patriarchs and Prophets who saw by vision and revelation the last dispensation and fullness of times, plainly tell us what is to come to pass. The 49th chapter of Isaiah is having its fulfillment." 1

Isa. 49:1-7

[Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Israel.] 2 Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord hath called me from the womb; from the [womb] 3 of my mother hath he made mention of my name. (49:1) And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me; (49:2) And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. (49:3) Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: . . . 4 surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. (49:4) And now, saith the Lord that formed me from the womb [that I should] 5 be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him— Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. (49:5) And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob , and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth. (49:6) Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, . . . his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the[nation[s] abhorreth, to . . . servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful. . . . 6 (49:7)

Notes and Commentary
