Isa. 49:8-12 describes the time of the gathering of Israel from her long dispersal. The gathering will take two forms: first, descendants of Abraham (both literal and adoptive) throughout the world will hear the gospel message and will enter into the Abrahamic covenant through baptism. Second, the covenant people (members of the Church and the Jews) will eventually gather to New and Old Jerusalem.

The gathering will come when the Lord hears the cries of scattered Israel (49:8). In that day ("a day of salvation"; 49:8) he will help them return to their land of promise, both spiritually and temporally. That day began with the opening of the last dispensation. Israel will receive again her ancient inheritance of land, which has become "desolate" because of the wars and judgments of the last days (49:8).

Israel has been in a form of spiritual prison ("darkness") because of the loss of the truth; her people have also often been in physical bondage to foreign nations (49:9). But on her return, they will go forth in the care of the Lord ("feed in the ways, . . . not hunger nor thirst: . . . he that hath mercy on them shall lead them"; 49:9-10). In gathering to Zion, Israel will receive of living water and the bread of life ("not hunger nor thirst," "springs of water"; 49:10). Israel will be led by the Lord ("he . . . shall lead them";["[he] shall . . . guide them"; 49:10). Her people will receive the blessings of the temple ("high places," "mountains," "highways shall be exalted"; 49:9, 11).

The covenant people will be gathered from all parts of the earth: "from far," "from the north," "from the west," "from the land of Sinim" (49:12).

Isa. 49:8-12

Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, [O isles of the sea,] 9 and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee [my servant] for a covenant of the people, 10 to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; (49:8) That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that [sit] in darkness, [Show] yourselves. 11 They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places. (49:9) They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor [the] 12 sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. (49:10) And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted. (49:11) [And then, O house of Israel,] 13 behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. (49:12)

Notes and Commentary
