In the gathering, the Lord will provide loving caretakers to help Israel on her way. "The Gentiles . . . shall bring thy sons in their arms, . . . and kings shall be thy nursing fathers" (49:22-23). These people of power, rather than requiring that Israel bow down to them, "shall bow down" to Israel, giving great respect and honor to the returning children of Israel (49:23). These gentiles and kings and queens will "know that I am the Lord" (49:23) and that returning Israel is on the Lord's errand. Even those who are "captives" will come (49:24). The Lord will take them away from their captors, and he will "contend with him that contendeth with thee" (49:25). Captives might be those in bondage to political systems, to false religions, or to sin.

Apparently during this same time there will be great and devastating civil wars on the earth (49:26). As a result of God's judgments, all the earth will know that Jehovah is the Savior (49:26).

Isa. 49:22-26

Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. (49:22) And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their [ace[s][toward[s] 22 the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. (49:23) [For] shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful[captive[s] delivered? 23 (49:24) But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for [the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people. For thus saith the Lord:] . . . I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children. 24 (49:25) And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and 25 they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. (49:26)

Notes and Commentary
