Isa. 51 is a call to those who "follow after righteousness" (51:1). The call is repeated again and again: "Hearken" (51:1), "Look" (51:1, 2), "Hearken" (51:4), "Lift up your eyes" (51:6), and, again, "Hearken" (51:7).

The call reminds the righteous of their origins (Abraham and Sarah) and the blessings they received (51:1-2). Even as Abraham and Sarah received promises when fulfillment seemed beyond hope, so will the Lord fulfill his promises to comfort Zion (51:3). He will change the area of Palestine physically (51:3), and he will give the people a spirit of joy and gladness (51:3). The headnote to this chapter in the LDS edition of the Bible clearly places these events in the last days.

In the last days, then, Zion will be established and blessed (51:3). God's law will go forth from her (51:4), and his righteousness will dwell there (51:5). His judg- ment will punish the wicked and bless the righteous (51:4-5). When Christ comes, ushering in the Millennium, the heavens and the earth as we know them will be destroyed, as will the wicked, but the Lord's promises to the faithful will never end (51:6).

A recurring theme is the idea of righteousness and salvation. These two words appear eight times in this passage. In verses 1 and 7 the Lord indicates that he is speaking to those who seek righteousness. In verses 5, 6, and 8 he says that his righteousness is near, that it will not be abolished, and that it lasts forever (2 Ne. 1:19; Alma 26:8). Likewise, he tells us that his salvation has gone forth, that it is forever, and that it lasts from generation to generation (51:5, 6, 8). That seems to be a reminder of the principle of grace: our righteousness is insufficient, but if we will turn to the Lord, we can partake of his righteousness, which enables us to attain the blessings we seek (Rom. 10:3-4; 1 Cor. 1:27-31; Philip. 3:8-9).

Righteousness means to choose the good and godly way of life, to follow our God in all things. Salvation refers to deliverance from our enemies. In fact, deliverance from all our enemies is the very definition of salvation, according to the Prophet Joseph Smith. 1

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has commented on verses 4 to 6 of this passage: "We hear a divine voice acclaim: 'Hearken unto me, my people,' and the Latter-day Saints are the Lord's people, 'and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.' Thanks be to God, that law now has come; it is the fulness of his everlasting gospel; by it he will judge the world, and it now stands as a light for all men. 'My righteousness is near.' The millennial day is almost upon us. 'My salvation is gone forth.' The gospel is being preached to prepare a people for the coming day. . . . Hence, 'Lift up your eyes to the heavens,' O ye saints of the Most High, 'and look upon the earth beneath.' Read the signs of the times, the signs now being shown forth in the heavens above and in the earth beneath. 'For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner.' This old world shall die; there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; it will be a millennial earth. And 'my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished,' saith the Lord (Isa. 51:4-6)." 2

Isa. 51:1-8

Hearken [unto] me, ye that follow after righteousness, . . . Look unto the rock [from] whence ye [were] 3 hewn, and to the hole of the pit [from] whence ye are digged. (51:1) Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah, [she] that bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him. 4 (51:2) For the Lord shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. (51:3) Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light [for] 5 the people. (51:4) My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust. (51:5) Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished. (51:6) Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart [I have written] 6 my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. (51:7) For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation. (51:8)

Notes and Commentary
