The preceding passage began with Israel calling on the Lord to awaken and fulfill his promises. In this passage, the Lord calls on Jerusalem, or the people of Israel, to wake from their spiritual slumber and turn from the sins that have brought the Lord's fierce anger (51:17). The people have become so wicked that there is "none to guide her among all [her] sons" (51:18). But the Lord will send two sons to help her: two prophets will be raised up unto the Jews at the last day (51:19). They will come in a time of "desolation and destruction" by "famine and the sword" (51:19). Though all others among the Jews have failed her (51:20), these two will act in great power (51:10).

Israel has become drunken by partaking of the Lord's punishment for her sins, but the Lord will remove the cup of his fury from her, sparing her people in his mercy (51:22). That same cup will be given to "them that afflict thee" (51:23).

Again the Lord calls Jerusalem to awaken, to return to priesthood power ("thy strength") and temple covenants ("beautiful garments") and temple worthiness ("no more . . . the uncircumcised and the unclean"; 52:1). She is invited to arise from the dust and to sit down in a position of glory (52:2).

The Book of Mormon, in 2 Ne. 8, combines the first two verses of Isa. 52 with the entirety of Isa. 51. Isa. 52:1-2 is quoted or paraphrased in three places in the Book of Mormon: by Jacob in 2 Ne. 8:24-25, by the Savior in 3 Ne. 20:36-37, and by Moroni in Moro. 10:31. Jesus explained that the fulfillment of these verses would come after the Jews were gathered to Jerusalem in the last days.

After reading Isa. 51 and 52:1-2, Jacob said, "And now, my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel—That he has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise. Behold, my beloved brethren, I speak unto you these things that ye may rejoice, and lift up your heads forever, because of the blessings which the Lord God shall bestow upon your children" (2 Ne. 9:1-3).

Isa. 51:17-23; 52:1

Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling . . . wrung . . . out— 1 (51:17) [And] . . . none to guide her among all the sons . . . she hath brought forth; neither . . . that taketh her by the hand, of all the sons . . . she hath brought up. 2 (51:18) These two [sons] are come unto thee; [they] shall be sorry for thee[—thy] desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword [—and] by whom shall I comfort thee? 3 (51:19) Thy sons have fainted, [save these two], 4 they lie at the head of all the[streets[;] as a wild bull in a net[,] they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. (51:20) Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, [and] 5 not with wine: (51:21) Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord and thy God . . . pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, . . . 6 the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again. (51:22) But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; [who] 7 have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over. (51:23) Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. (52:1) Shake thyself from the dust; arise, . . . 8 sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. (52:2)

Notes and Commentary
