The headnote to this chapter in the LDS edition of the Bible says, "Israel shall be gathered in mercy and tenderness." This passage is indeed one of tenderness and comfort. "Fear not," the Lord says to Israel (54:4). She shall not be confounded; she shall not be brought to shame; in her blessings she will even forget the shame of her past (54:4). "For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee," the Lord says (54:7).

Like others, this passage is filled with references to Israel as a wife, clearly calling the Lord her "husband" (54:5). The Lord notes that she is a widow who will no longer remember her reproach (54:4), a woman who had been forsaken (54:6), a wife of youth who was refused (54:6). Though Israel has suffered much, the Lord will restore to her all blessings and will bring her unto himself.

Marriage represents the most intimate, most joyful, most fulfilling relationship on earth. That is the kind of relationship the Lord is inviting us to join with him. The union of the Saints in a Zion society (in which they are of one heart and one mind; Moses 7:18; John 17:11, 22) and the turning of the Saints' hearts to the Lord make such a relationship with the Lord possible. These blessings come through the Atonement (at-one-ment) of Christ, which was performed so that we might repent and return to God, becoming one with him as Christ is one with him (John 17:21, 23; 3 Ne. 19:23, 29).

To illustrate how serious he is about this covenant, the Lord reminds Israel of his promise after the great flood of Noah. Just as he promised that never again would there be such a flood, in the same way he promises that his anger against Israel will pass (54:9) and that then he will have mercy (54:8, 10). Even though the mountains and hills shall be moved from their seemingly everlasting foundations, the Lord will continue in his kindness (mentioned twice; 54:8, 10) and the "covenant" of his people (54:10).

Isa. 54:4-10

Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy [youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy] 4 widowhood any more. (54:4) For thy maker, . . . [thy] husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel—the God of the whole earth shall he be called. 5 (54:5) For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. (54:6) For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee. (54:7) In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. (54:8) For this, . . . the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee. . . . 6 (54:9) For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my [people] 7 be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. (54:10)

Notes and Commentary
