The ancient and abhorrent practice of temple prostitution, a practice engaged in even by the Jews, is described in this passage from Isa. 57. This sinful practice was triply offensive to the Lord: it brought people into both immorality and idolatry, and it sometimes also involved human sacrifice. In doing so, of course, it took them far from their God.

Though temple prostitution is a thing of the past, among those who profess Christ there exists another form of spiritual adultery that is also damning. The scriptures make it clear that Christ is the bridegroom and that the Church is the bride. When the bride turns her affections from the Lord to someone or something that will lead her away from Christ, she is committing a form of spiritual adultery that will keep her from God and his blessings. For other powerful descriptions of spiritual adultery, see Ezek. 16:1-63 and 23:1-49.

Isa. 57:3-13a

But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. (57:3) Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood, (57:4) Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks? (57:5) Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these? (57:6) Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice. (57:7) Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it. (57:8) And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell. 1 (57:9) Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand; therefore thou wast not grieved. (57:10) And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not? (57:11) I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not profit thee. (57:12) When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them: (57:13a)

Notes and Commentary
