As the headnote to Isa. 58 in the LDS edition of the Bible reads, 58:1-2 gives us the "true law of the fast, with its attendant blessings." That fasting is more than going without food and drink for a period of time is made unmistakably clear.

The passage opens with the Lord instructing Isaiah to proclaim the sins of the house of Israel (58:1), the people of the covenant both then and now, with boldness. They appear to be righteous, the Lord observes, being prayerful and obeying the ordinances of the gospel (58:2). Yet, as we soon learn, their righteousness is that of outward obedience only and not of the heart.

Israel asks why the Lord has not blessed them for their sacrifice in fasting (58:3). The Lord answers that in their fasting they have not turned to him. They continue to seek pleasure and do business (58:3). They care more for the show of fasting—to afflict their soul, to bow the head, to sit on sackcloth and ashes (58:5)—than to attend to the true purposes of the fast: to help themselves and others to repent, to find respite from the emotional burdens they carry, and to help others with their problems and afflictions (58:6, 9-10). True fasting involves sharing with the hungry, the poor, and the naked, including needy members of one's own family (58:7, 10).

Those who obey this law are promised great blessings, including spiritual light (58:8); physical health (58:8); increased righteousness (58:8); answers to prayer (58:9); continual guidance from the Lord (58:11); a plenitude of spiritual food and water, representing the full blessings of the Atonement, even when others lack (58:11); and a restoration of their lands of inheritance (58:12). This passage parallels 1:10-20, in which the Lord rebukes the people for outward obedience without a true yielding of the heart.

Isa. 58:1-12

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and [show] my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. (58:1) Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to God. (58:2) Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours. (58:3) Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high. (58:4) Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? (58:5) Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? (58:6) Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh? (58:7) Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy [rear guard]. 1 (58:8) Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity; (58:9) And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday: (58:10) And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. (58:11) And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in. (58:12)

Notes and Commentary
