Chapter 59 begins with a stern condemnation of Israel's sinful state. Their iniquities have separated them from God (59:2). They are so sinful that every part of their being is corrupted: hands, fingers, lips, tongue, feet, even their very thoughts (59:3, 7). Isaiah emphasizes this sinfulness again and again, using such words as iniquities (or iniquity, repeated four times), sins, defiled with blood, lies (repeated once), perverseness, vanity, mischief, violence, evil, innocent blood, wasting, destruction, crooked paths. The people care nothing for justice, truth, peace, or judgment. They are compared to such vile things as the cockatrice's eggs, spider's webs, and vipers (59:5). Their sins will turn to their own destruction, the Lord says (59:7), and they know no peace (59:8).

Isa. 59:5-7 illustrates the justice of God: Those who sin (eat cockatrices', or serpents', eggs) bring punishment and destruction upon their own heads (die), and all their evil efforts will bring them nothing good or profitable (see Job 8:14).

Paul paraphrases some of these verses in Rom. 3:12-18: "There is none that doeth good, no, not one. Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips: Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: Their feet are swift to shed blood: Destruction and misery are in their ways: And the way of peace have they not known: There is no fear of God before their eyes." Unfortunately, what Isaiah and Paul saw in their days, we can see in our own— even some who once were of the covenant have forgotten their God and have turned to wickedness.

Victor Ludlow observes: "In chapters 59 and 60, Isaiah describes a complete transformation of Israel as she moves from wickedness to righteousness through a sequence of changes: sin (59:1-8), repentance (59:9-15a), deliverance (59:15b-21), gathering (60:1-9), rebuilding (60:10-13), prosperity (60:14-18), and the presence of the Lord (60:19-22). . . . Isaiah portrays a pattern of progression as Israel rises from the depths of spiritual death to eternal life in God's presence." 1

Isa. 59:1-8

Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: (59:1) But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. (59:2) For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness. (59:3) None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. (59:4) They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper. (59:5) Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. (59:6) Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths. (59:7) The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace. (59:8)

Notes and Commentary
