The Lord beholds the great wickedness described in the previous passage, and he is much displeased (59:15). (The Jerusalem Bible reads "indignant" and the New American Bible "aggrieved.") Even worse, there is no one to make intercession for the few righteous in Zion (59:16). The Lord himself therefore brings salvation, sustained by the power of his own righteousness (59:16-17).

But in going forth as Savior, he goes also as Judge, bringing vengeance upon the unrepentant (59:17), both at the time of the Second Coming and in all ages. He will bring punishments according to their deeds (59:18), and all the wicked of the earth will know of his judgments and shall fear (59:19). No enemy of Zion shall stand, though they come in great multitudes, for the Lord will rise up against them (59:19).

Then he will come to his people in Zion and to all those of the house of Jacob who have repentant hearts (59:20). This coming can properly be seen as the Second Coming; it can also be understood to be the coming of the Lord to the hearts of the faithful of all ages. When the Lord visits the faithful, he brings his covenant.

Finally, the Lord promises that his Spirit and his truths will continue with his anointed servant and the seed of the servant forever (59:21).

Isaiah 59:15b-21

and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment. (59:15b) And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained him. (59:16) For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke. (59:17) According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence. (59:18) So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. (59:19) And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. (59:20) As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. (59:21)

Notes and Commentary
