This passage is a beautiful psalm of the Lord's loving-kindness, great goodness, and mercy to the repentant (63:7). Isaiah notes that the Lord claims faithful Israel as his people and his children. He was not only a father but a Savior (63:8). He bore their afflictions; he redeemed them "in his love and in his pity"; he carried them in their time of need (63:9). "But they rebelled," making God their enemy, "and he fought against them" (63:10). Then they remembered his goodness to the people in the time of Moses. He had led them (an idea repeated three times in 63:11-13) and blessed them with his Spirit (63:14), and, by implication, so will he do again.

Isa. 63:7-14

I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses. (63:7) For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Saviour. (63:8) In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. (63:9) But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them. (63:10) Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within him? (63:11) That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name? (63:12) That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble? (63:13) As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. (63:14)

Notes and Commentary
