Israel deserves destruction, yet because she has a few righteous people, the Lord will "not destroy them all" (65:8). This response is a direct answer to Isaiah's plea in 63:17. The Lord will provide an inheritance for his elect (65:9), and a safe place for the righteous (65:10). Yet the Lord will send judgments upon the wicked, who chose their own way rather than the things the Lord delighted in (65:12). Because of Israel's wickedness, the Lord threatens to slay her people and make his covenant with another people (65:15).

The Lord contrasts the blessings of the righteous ("my servants") with the punishments of the wicked: the righteous will eat while the wicked go hungry; the righteous will drink while the wicked thirst; the righteous will rejoice while the wicked will be ashamed; the righteous will sing in joy while the wicked will cry in sorrow (65:13-14). These blessings and cursings have both temporal and spiritual applications: for example, the wicked will go hungry for the bread of life and thirsty for the living waters brought by Christ.

Isa. 65:8-16

Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants' sakes, that I may not destroy them all. (65:8) And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob , and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there. (65:9) And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me. (65:10) But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain, 5 that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the drink offering unto that number. (65:11) Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter: because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not. (65:12) Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: (65:13) Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. (65:14) And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name: (65:15) That he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes. (65:16)

Notes and Commentary
