David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

President David O. McKay

The life of President David O. McKay is distinguished by a singular embodiment of the highest ideals—both spiritual and educational—which are espoused by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and its people.

He was born September 8, 1873 at Huntsville, Utah, the first son of David and Jennette Evans McKay, and through them received the rich cultural heritage of his Scottish and Welsh forebears. His early life was spent on the family farm in Huntsville where he developed a love of the outdoors, of animals and of sports which always characterized him.

In 1897 he was graduated from the University of Utah as president and valedictorian of his class, and entered directly upon a two-year mission in Great Britain. On his return he became a member of the faculty of Weber Stake Academy at Ogden (later Weber College), and less than three years later, at the age of 29, he became its principal. There his rich talents as teacher and administrator enriched the lives of the many students and associates who came under his influence.

Four years later, in 1906, he was ordained a member of the Quorum of the Twelve and became also a member of the General Superintendency of the Deseret Sunday School Union and a member of the Church Board of Education. He continued as a member of the Board of Trustees of Weber Academy, and later served as Church Commissioner of Education.

President McKay was one of the greatest missionaries of the Church. In 1920-21 he made a world tour of Church missions, during which he dedicated the land of China for the preaching of the Gospel. The following year he became president of the European Mission, and opened the Armenian Mission in 1924. In later years he also visited missions of the Church in Europe, South America and South Africa.

In 1934 he was sustained as second counselor to President Heber J. Grant in the First Presidency of the Church, and served in this position for eleven years. He served also in the same capacity during the presidency of George Albert Smith from 1945 to 1951. On April 9, 1951 he was sustained as President of the Church.

President McKay was an inspiring leader in education throughout his life. In addition to his service on the Church Board of Education and as Church Commissioner of Education from 1919 to 1921, he served as a member of the Board of Regents of the University of Utah, as president of the Board of Trustees of Utah State Agricultural College, and as a member and president of the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University. In recognition of his great service and leadership there have been conferred upon him honorary doctorate degrees from Brigham Young University, Utah State Agricultural College, University of Utah and Temple University.

President McKay married Emma Ray Riggs on January 2, 1901. They have four sons and two daughters.

He died January 18, 1970, and she died a few months later on November 14.
