David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The Abundant Life in a Selfish World

I approach this subject with the belief that young people would like to live the abundant life. You want to live and have a good time, and not be deceived by an improper way of getting that good time. Is that not true?

And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. . .

I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

I pray not that thou shouldst take them out of the world, but that thou shouldst keep them from the evil.

(John 17:11-14-15.)

You may add the phrase, "of the world," or take the revised interpretation— "that thou shouldst keep them from the evil one."

Thus, in perhaps the most impressive prayer ever offered, Jesus prayed for his disciples on the night that he faced Gethsemane. Nor did he plead for his disciples alone, but, as he said, "I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their (the disciples') word." (John 17:2.)

There is our first point tonight. In this text is a clear implication of the divine purpose for man's being in this mortal probation. This purpose is expressly stated in the Book of Abraham by the eternal Father to his fellow intelligences as follows: ". . . We will make an earth whereon these (organized intelligences) may dwell. And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abr. 3:24-25.)

And so our place in this world is divinely appointed. We are not to be out of it. Christ himself prayed that we should not be taken out of it. Remember the phrase "but that thou shouldst keep them from the evil."

Tonight we have listened to some of the problems which young men and young women face while sojourning in this state of mortality. Let me summarize them:

First:Church ideals and Sunday sports;Second:Choosing companions;Third:Observing the Word of Wisdom;Fourth:Does active membership in the Church inhibit or enhance one's freedom in development?Fifth:The value of chastity in a world of lowering moral standards;Sixth:"In the world but not of the world;"Seventh:The value of doing right "though none might see me;"Eighth:Getting back on the moral and spiritual highway.

Now, before commenting upon each of these specifically, I think it is well to consider some basic facts of life, which, when more clearly understood, may prove helpful directives in these and other difficulties which we meet in daily vicissitudes. There will be no time tonight to elaborate on these. I am going to give them to you because I think you will accept them, but we want those who are skeptical also to accept them. If you doubt them, go to your teachers, and they will prove that they are right.

I. Man a Dual Being

First, man is a dual being, and his life a plan of God. That is the first fundamental fact to keep in mind. Man has a natural body and a spiritual body. In declaring this fact the scriptures are very explicit: "And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul." (Abr. 5:7.)

Man's body, therefore, is but the tabernacle in which his spirit dwells. Too many, far too many, are prone to regard the body as the man, and consequently direct their efforts to the gratifying of the body's pleasures, its appetites, its whims, its desires, its passions. Too few recognize that the real man is an immortal spirit, which "intelligence or the light of truth," animated as an individual entity before the body was begotten, and that this spiritual entity with all its distinguishing traits will continue after the body ceases to respond to its earthly environment. Said the Savior: "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world; again, I leave the world, and go to my Father. (John 16:28.)

As Christ's pre-existent spirit animated a body of flesh and bones, so does the pre-existent spirit of every human being born into this world. Will you keep that in mind as the first basic truth of life.

The question, then, is: which will give the more abundant life—pampering our physical nature, or developing our spiritual selves? Is not that the real problem?

II. Man Has His Free Agency

The second fundamental fact is that man has his free agency. "For the power is in men wherein they are agents unto themselves." (D&C 58:28.)

All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligences also; otherwise there is no existence.

Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light.

And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation.

For man is spirit. The elements are eternal and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple."

(D&C 93:30-35.)

I will conclude that thought by quoting the following:

You are the person that has to decide Whether you'll do it or toss it aside. You are the person who makes up your mind Whether you'll lead or will linger behind. Whether you'll try for the goal that's far Or just be contented to stay where you are. Take it or leave it. Here's something to do! Just think it over—It's all up to you! Nobody here will compel you to rise; No one will force you to open your eyes; No one will answer for you yes or no, Whether to stay there or whether to go; Life is a game, but it's you who must say, Whether as cheat or as sportsman you'll play. Fate may betray you, but you settle first Whether to live to your best or your worst. So, whatever it is you are wanting to be, Remember, to fashion the choice you are free. Kindly or selfish, or gentle or strong, Keeping the right way or taking the wrong, Careless of honor or guarding your pride, All these are questions which you must decide. Yours the selection, whichever you do; The thing men call character's all up to you.

III. Indulgence

The third basic fact to keep in mind is indulgence, and I think there is not one of you here who can accept this from experience. Indulgence in appetites and desires of the physical man satisfy but for the moment, and may lead to unhappiness, misery, and possible degradation; spiritual achievements give "joy not to be repented of."

In his epistle to the Galatians, Paul specifically enumerates the "works of the flesh," as he calls them, and the "fruits of the spirit." Note this classification: The works of the flesh are manifest as these: "Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, enmity, strife, jealousies, factions, divisions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance; against such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the passions and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit." (Gal. 5:19-25.)

IV. Spiritual Progress Demands Effort

From the forty days' fast on the Mount of Temptation to the moment on the cross when he cried in triumph: "It is finished!", Christ's life was a divine example of subduing and overcoming. Full of significance are his words spoken in his farewell address to his disciples: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.)

"Moral law"—I am quoting now from a scientist who has glimpsed these eternal truths I have named—just glimpsed them, I think,—but on this he is right—"Moral law imposes disinterestedness; it orders that which is disagreeable, hard, and painful. Its requirements often revolt the flesh whose sole ambition is to persist and to enjoy. It demands the throttling of selfish sentiments for the sake of something which is still obscure to those who do not have faith, but which is even more powerful than the instinct of self-preservation: human dignity. The profound awareness of this dignity poses a highly moral existence and paves the way to spirituality. And the greatest miracle is that this cruel law has won the universal respect of man who sometimes uses his intelligence to combat it, thus affirming its reality.

"The joys it procures compensate for the sacrifices it demands. The sentiment of duty accomplished is accompanied by a kind of total satisfaction which alone gives true peace of soul. The moral man—in olden days one would have said the virtuous man—spreads happiness and good will around him, or, if happiness is impossible, the resignation which takes its place."

There are thousands, millions of men and women who have high standards, and we do not have to yield to the few who fail.

Now, having in mind these four fundamental facts of life—the dual nature of man—his freedom of choice and his responsibility therefor—indulgence contrary to one's conscience leaves heaviness of heart and unhappiness while spiritual achievements always give joy—spiritual progress demands effort—let us consider these eight difficulties:

First Problem: The Sabbath Day. Is it better to cherish Church ideals on Sunday, or indulge in Sunday sports? This is simply a question of physical pleasure or spiritual development, and in that we should keep in mind the following: first, it is a day of rest, essential to the true development and strength of the body, and that is a principle which we should publish more generally abroad and practice. A second purpose for keeping holy the Sabbath Day is mentioned in the first sentence of modern revelation: "That thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world." That is a glorious sentence. You will find it in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Third, keeping the Sabbath Day holy is a law of God, resounding through the ages from Mount Sinai. You cannot transgress the law of God without circumscribing your spirit.

Finally, our sabbath, the first day of the week, commemorates the greatest event in all history—Christ's resurrection, and his visit as a resurrected being to his assembled apostles.

Now if you want to indulge in bodily exercises and amusements, you cannot do it on the Sabbath Day with impunity.

The Second Problem: Choosing Companions. Having in mind our basic truths, this question is a simple one—Whether you will choose companions who appeal to your baser nature, or those who inspire you always to be at your best.

Recently, I was thrilled and thankful when I heard one of your number say that she felt she would have to give up her sweetheart. She likes him, and he likes her, but lately he has chosen the way of the world. He likes a cigaret; he speaks disparagingly of the ideals of the Church. Fortunately, she is wise enough to observe that tendency, and she has "given him up." I say with all my heart: God bless her, because she knows that companionship leads to love. It is from such companionship that you find your companion for the future. If she joins her life with his, her ideals are going to be lowered; and she would rather take a little suffering now than much suffering later.

Choose good companions, and find among them those with whom you would like to go through life and eternity.

Third Problem: Observing the Word of Wisdom. Obedience to the Word of Wisdom develops greater spiritual power, that spiritual power which comes from resistance. Of the virtue of self-control, consider the following:

The soul that is worth the honor of earth,

Is the soul that resists desire.

And this for you students:

What tho on campus I excell A champ in meet and fight, If trained, efficient, still I can't Control an appetite. What tho exemptions write my name High on the honor-roll, Electives, solids fail me if I learn no self-control. What tho I graduate and soar And life is good to me, My heart shall write me failure 'till I learn SELF MASTERY.

It is better for you in youth to say, "No, thank you," when invited to indulge in things which create an appetite for themselves. Be master, not a slave. Look around you and you will see the slaves to appetite—unfortunately now, largely among women—slaves! Where is the spiritual power in these future mothers?

Fourth Problem: Does Active Membership in the Church Inhibit or Enhance One's Freedom and Development? Can you think of any organization in the world in which you can serve more effectively in an organized way than in the Church of Jesus Christ? Now I mention service and character because those are the only two things which we can take with us in a few years when we leave this world.

The question is: what have you made of yourself—your character; and what service have you rendered to others? Do you remember that question given by some man whom I cannot name?

Supposing today were your last day on earth, The last mile of the journey you've trod; After all of your struggles how much are you worth How much can you take home to God? Don't count as possessions your silver and gold, Tomorrow you leave these behind, And all that is yours to have and to hold; Is the service you've given mankind.

Fifth Problem: Chastity. The dominant evil in the world today is unchastity. I repeat what appeared over the signature of President Joseph F. Smith while he was living: "No more loathsome cancer disfigures the body and soul of society today than the frightful affliction of sexual sin. It vitiates the very fountains of life and bequeaths its foul effects to the yet unborn as a legacy of death."

He who is unchaste in young manhood is untrue to a trust given to him by the parents of the girl, and she who is unchaste in maidenhood is untrue to her future husband, and lays the foundation of unhappiness in the home, suspicion, and discord. Do not worry about these teachers who say something about inhibitions. Just keep in mind this eternal truth that chastity is a virtue to be prized as one of life's noblest achievements. It contributes to the virility of manhood. It is the crowning virtue of womanhood, and every red-blooded man knows that is true. It is a chief contributing factor to a happy home; it is the source of strength and perpetuity of the nation.

Sixth Problem: In the World but not of the World. There is no loss of prestige in maintaining in a dignified way your standards. I thought of a great illustration in literature wherein a Jewish maiden won the respect even of a profligate.

Read the story of Rebecca, that beautiful character in Sir Walter Scott's "Ivanhoe," who was the prisoner of Brian de Bois-Guilbert. He had chosen her for base reasons. Others of his crowd chose the old father to rob him of his wealth. When Brian de Bois-Guilbert came in to take charge of his prize, Rebecca "had already unclasped two costly bracelets and a collar, which she hastened to proffer to the supposed outlaw, concluding naturally to gratify his avarice was to bespeak his favor." "Take these," she said, "and be merciful to me and my aged father! These ornaments are of value, yet they are trifling to what he would bestow, to obtain our dismissal from this castle, free and uninjured."

"Fair flower," replied the outlaw, "These pearls are orient, but they yield in whiteness to your teeth; the diamonds are brilliant, but they cannot match your eyes; and ever since I have taken up this wild trade, I have made a vow to prefer beauty to wealth."

"Thou art no outlaw," said Rebecca; "No outlaw had refused such offers. . . Thou art a Norman—a Norman, noble perhaps in birth—Oh be so in thy actions, and cast off this fearful masque of outrage and violence!"

"I am not an outlaw, then, fair rose of Sharon..And I am one who will be more prompt to hang thy neck and arms with pearls and diamonds, which so well become them, than to deprive thee of these ornaments."

"What would'st thou have of me," said Rebecca, "if not my wealth?—We can have nought in common between us—you are a Christian—I am a Jewess—our union were contrary to the laws alike of the church and the synagogue."

"It were so, indeed," replied Brian de Bois-Guilbert, laughing: "wed with a Jewess?—not if she were the Queen of Sheba!"

And then Rebecca knew his purpose. She threw open the latticed window, and an instant later stood on the verge of the parapet, with not the slightest screen between her and the tremendous depth below, and exclaimed: "Remain where thou art, proud Templar, or at thy choice, advance!—one foot nearer, and I plunge myself from the precipice; my body shall be crushed out of the very form of humanity upon the stones of that court-yard, ere it become the victim of thy brutality!"

As she spoke this, she clasped her hands and extended them towards Heaven, as if imploring mercy on her soul before she made the final plunge. The Templar hesitated, and a resolution which had never yielded to pity or disgrace, gave way to his admiration of her fortitude. "Come down," he said, "Rash girl—I swear by earth, and sea, and sky, I will offer thee no offence."

And the reprobate for the first time in his life was taught respect for womanhood.

You can be in this world and "not of the world." Keep your chastity above everything else.

Seventh Problem: The Value of Doing Right though None Might See Me. I will conclude with this addition:

Sow a thought, reap an act Sow an act, reap a habit Sow a habit, reap a character, Sow a character, reap an eternal destiny.

"Tell me what you think about when you do not have to think and I will tell you what you are."

Temptation does not come to those who have not thought of it before. Keep your thoughts clean, and it will be easy to resist temptations as they come.

Eighth Problem: Getting Back on the Moral and Spiritual Highway. I, too, have mentioned the prodigal son who first "came to himself" before he turned his face homeward. Come back home, back to the path of virtue, but sense your own evil, and remember that there might be many who have been hurt on your way down.

When a man was asked how he could help those he had injured, particularly in slander, a good, wise old man took a sack of feathers, scattered them, and then he said: "Now, try to gather them up."

He said: "Oh, I cannot!"

That is just it. Let us be careful that we have not wounded people, and hurt them as we have been going down selfishly on the road of indulgence.

Young people: Is it the body you are going to serve and be a slave, or is it the spirit you are going to develop, and live happily in this life and in the world to come?

"I pray not that thou shouldst take them out of the world, but that thou shouldst keep them from the evil."
