David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

One Safe Guide for Humanity

This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:11-12.)

In these sublime and impressive words, Peter, the chief Apostle of our Lord testified before the Sanhedrin and through these rulers to the entire nation that only in Jesus Christ lies the hope of men.

This testimony was given in the presence of Annas and Caiaphas, high priests, John and Alexander, and others who had shortly before that condemned Jesus to the cross. These rulers had admitted the reality of a great miracle. The important man whom Peter had healed through the power of Christ was standing before them. Said they, that indeed a notable miracle "hath been done by them is manifest for all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it." "By what power, or by what name, have ye done this?" they demanded of the Apostles. Boldly Peter answered: "Be it known unto you all and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole."

Today, as never before, the purport of this message should be heeded.

We are living in one of the extraordinary periods of the world's history—perhaps the most epoch-making period of all times. There is ample evidence on every hand that we are witnessing one of those tidal waves of human thought and emotion which periodically sweep over the world and change the destiny of the human race. It is a time that demands clear thinking and sound judgment.

Whether we are willing to admit it or not this is a revolutionary period. There is social and political upheaval. Thoroughly tested, well-tried principles are being thrown into discard. "Long accepted social theories," writes Charles Foster Kent, "have suddenly been rejected, and new ones are being adopted. Many of the moral standards of our fathers are being set aside in theory as well as in practice. The rising generation has no fear and little respect for elders. The elders, recognizing what a wreck they have made of civilization, question their own infallibility. Religious dogmas long regarded as the cornerstones of religion and the Church are being disproved or supplanted by the discoveries of modern science.

"It is not strange that the majority of the men and women in this world are unhappy because they feel the foundations beneath them are tottering."

At a noon-day luncheon given in Salt Lake City recently, the president of a national organization spoke of liberties and rights already lost, and appealed to the people to preserve those remaining. An experienced United States Congressman, characterized as the best lawyer in Congress, recently said: "There isn't a sensible person in this room now who can be certain that he can leave to his children the heritage of the privilege of being free."

The world needs men, true men who cannot be bought or sold, Men who have scorned to violate the truth—genuine gold.

Changes in Progress in Discovery of Science

Changes and advancement in scientific discovery and invention have been much more marked and rapid than in the political realm.

For example, "people among whom Jesus lived never dreamed of a railroad, of a steamboat, of an automobile; could not have pictured by the wildest stretch of imagination the airplane or the radio. People in that day never saw a factory, a drill or a sulky plow. The only combined harvester that garnered wheat then was a man and a sickle."

It is said that in "the democracy of ancient Greece, the Stentor had a voice "as powerful as fifty voices of other men" but in our modern democracy, the candidate for high office whose voice is amplified and broadcast by mechanical means, can pour his promises or persuasion into the ears of millions without troubling them to rise from their easy chairs." The printing press, the railway, the steamship, the airplane, the telegraph, the telephone, the radio, and now the atomic bomb have put a power in the hands of man more potent for his progress or for his destruction than imagination can conceive. This vast increase of physical power becomes sinister and evil when put in the hands of men actuated by low ideals and evil motives.

Notwithstanding all our achievements, social unrest was never more pronounced than it is today. The difficult problems that arise between capital and labor are still unsolved. The evils of the slum and of the brothel are still with us.

The burden of taxes and the proper distribution of wealth are questions perplexing the wisest minds. Truly, we are living in an age of shifting opinions, of swiftly changing human relations. Man's wisdom is baffled. Obviously, there never was a greater need for anchorage to fixed principles, and never-changing truths.

Men are in need of a safe pilot to serve as a guide over the troubled and turbulent waters through which we are now sailing.

Men Must Change Motives and Ideals

If we would have a better world, it is evident that men must change their motives. Hatred and jealousy, envy, and selfishness must be replaced by wholesome, kindly thoughts and emotions. "Right thoughts and feelings if persistently kept in the forefront inevitably lead to right actions."

Ideals are stimulants to progress. Without them man would degenerate, and civilization would "cream and mantle like a standing pool." Through hope, ideals, and aspirations, God inspires men to move upward and onward toward the higher and better life.

Moral Ideals and Spiritual Teachings

The world needs fundamentals, eternal verities that never change. It needs to adopt the teachings of the man into whose hands the soldiers drove the iron spikes, "the only world-conqueror who came with clean hands," from whom down through the centuries have come these assuring words: "I am the light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life."

In the words of J. William Hudson, Professor of Philosophy, University of Missouri, "If there is to be social and political regeneration in the republic and in the rest of the world, it must be by tremendous regeneration of moral ideals."

Faith in God and Reverence for Sacred Things

One of the fundamental conditions contributive to a person's right thinking and acting is a reverence for God. A growing disbelief among the masses of mankind in a Supreme Being is a principal source of crime.

When God becomes the center of our being, "we become conscious of a new aim in life." To nourish and delight the body, as all animals do, is no longer a chief end of mortal existence. Spiritual attainment, not physical possessions, becomes the chief goal. God is not viewed from the standpoint of what we may get from him, but what we may give to him. Man serves God best by serving his children.

In an address delivered to the medical graduates of the Edinburgh University, Sir Alexander Ralph Simpson, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, said:

I do not know in what mood of pessimism I might have stood before you today had it not been that ere the dew of youth had dried from off me, I made friends with the sinless Son of Man who is the world head and the stream that vitalizes all advance in civilization and who claims to be the first and the last and is the life forever more and has the keys of death and the unseen. My experience compels me to own that claim for to me he has established a vivid and vivifying correspondence with our supersensuous environment. He has made us see that at the heart of things there is a Father's heart. He has made us know that in the complex play of circumstances, the reins of progress are in the hands of a circumstant who makes all things work together for our good.

Recently I made the remark that never before in the history of the world has there been such need as today of spiritual awakening. Not that man is more depraved, not that he is less religious, but that he has in his grasp such seemingly unlimited mechanized power. If you put bombs into the hands of an inexperienced child, he is likely to blow himself to pieces. To a degree, that is just what we are witnessing today in the world. In the hands of undeveloped, spiritually unresponsive people has been placed the power of explosives, the radio, the airplane, the submarine, all the concentrated power of electricity, and now the breaking up of the atom. Unless there is a spiritual awakening, civilization is threatened. The carnal-minded in the world are causing heartaches and threatening the extinction of the race.

A spiritual awakening in the hearts of millions of men and women would bring about a changed world. I am hopeful that the dawning of that day is not far distant. My faith in the ultimate triumph of the Gospel of Jesus Christ assures me that a spiritual awakening must come. To bring this about is the responsibility of the youth of the Church in whom I have confidence and place my hope.

Sacredness of Personality

Central in Christ's teachings is the guiding principle of Love; and comprehended in it is the divine ideal of the sacredness of personality. A proper conception of this principle will ameliorate many of the present ills of society, and contribute to the benefit and happiness of all human beings. It would bring into active operation the Golden Rule—"Do unto others as you would have others do unto you."

Marriage

Another divine ideal included in His plan is the supreme importance of marriage in the development of the individual and of society. Commenting upon Jesus' teaching regarding this principle, Charles Kent declares:

The wisdom of his conclusion is confirmed by modern sociology, which recognizes in the family the historic and actual basis of all stable society. Today the prevailing disregard of the rights and duties of the family is demonstrating anew their supreme importance. Leaders in modern thought are beginning to see clearly that the only final solution of our greatest political, social and economic problems must come through the faithful and efficient training of the individual in the home. The shame of our divorce courts and of our modern social system is slowly but surely preparing the present generation to listen attentively to Jesus' strenuous teachings regarding marriage.

Unfortunately, modern life is disintegrating the very foundation of the home. Clubs, intemperance, birth-control are insidious but vicious enemies of congenial family life. The evil of divorce, particularly here in the United States, is rampant. According to latest statistics, one out of every three marriages is wrecked on the shoals of divorce. One nation has assumed the right to take complete charge of the children soon after they are born, with the idea that they belong to the State. The fathers and mothers are merely agents with little or no responsibility of rearing the children after they have been brought into the world.

To build a happy fireside clime For weans and for wife That's the true pathos and Sublime o' human life.

It's worthy ideal for every young man during his premarital life to be loyal to his future wife; and for every young woman to be worthy of pure motherhood.

Loyalty

An eternal principle associated with the home is loyalty. "A father who can be trusted, a husband who can be believed, a man who can be relied upon, a daughter who can be depended upon—these are the jewels of home."

A Sense of Obligation

"Live and let live" is an old adage. "Live and help live" is a better one.

Selfishness is a principal cause of all our troubles, and the chief instigator of war. A true sense of our relationship to others and even a faint willingness to contribute to their happiness will help to overcome this almost universal evil of selfishness and envy.

Man cannot live by himself alone All that we send into the hearts of others Comes back into our own.

Noted men and women of the world who have lifted the world up and pushed it forward to higher ideals are those who are willing to sacrifice themselves for others and for principle.

The dominant motive in man and in nations is still self-preservation, self-advancement, self-comfort without consideration for the welfare of others, material achievements, accumulation of money, accentuation of power at the subjugation, even the enslavement of the individual. From the root of selfishness spring all the pestilential vices that disrupt the harmony of human relationships. Envy, hatred, greed, bigotry, the exercising of unrighteous dominion in governing men and crushing them, unrestrained passion, ungoverned appetites, drunkeness and debauchery are debasing evils that banish happiness and peace from the hearts of men and create disunity and strife in communities and nations throughout the world. These are enemies to be conquered in the better future. You may call it a Utopian dream, if you will, but selfishness must be subdued before mankind can experience peace. No peace or freedom can come to this world so long as men live only for themselves. Self-preservation is the first law of nature, but it is not a law of spiritual growth. He who lets selfishness and his passions rule him binds his soul in slavery, but he who, in the majesty of spiritual strength, uses his physical tendencies and yearnings, and his possessions to serve purposes higher than personal indulgence and comfort, takes the first step toward the happy and useful life. This truth was taught not only "in the beginning" when the Gospel was first revealed to man, but also when Jesus began his earthly ministry. On the Mount of Temptation was enacted the first scene in Christ's earthly drama of the abundant life. There he resisted the challenge to gratify his appetite; he turned aside the appeal to his vanity and pride; he scorned the bribe of worldly wealth and power as in spiritual victory he said to the Tempter: "Get thee hence!" Only thus by the brilliant triumph of the spirit over the flesh can we hope for a better world.

Human Nature Must Be Changed

Our young men accepted the challenge and met in deadly conflict dictatorship and inhuman aggression. They won a glorious victory, but many will fight no more. It is our task to carry on!

Down through the ages men have retreated before the formidable enemies we now face; and thinkers, and some philosophers declare hopelessly that these enemies cannot be conquered, except only by changing human nature, and that, they insist, cannot be done.

I believe with the English writer, Beverly Nichols, that it can be done, and that "human nature can be changed, here and now.

"Human nature has been changed in the past.

"Human nature must be changed on an enormous scale in the future, unless the world is to be drowned in its own blood.

"And only Christ can change it. . .

"Twelve men did quite a lot to change the world nineteen hundred years ago. Twelve simple men, with only the wind to bear them over the seas, with only a few pence in their pockets, and a shining faith in their hearts. They fell far short of their ideal, their words were twisted and mocked, and false temples were built over their bones, in praise of a Christ they would have rejected. And yet, by the light of their inspiration, many of the world's loveliest things were created, and many of the world's finest minds inspired.

"If twelve men did that, nineteen hundred years ago, what might not twelve men do today? For God has now given us the power of whispering across the space, of transmitting our thoughts from one end of the earth to another. What shall we whisper—what shall we think? That is the question!"

Need of a Guiding Light

In the incident depicted by our text, Peter courageously declares what we shall think, what we shall declare:—that "There is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." Moulders of a better future need the assurance that Christ is the unfailing guide.

Summary and Conclusion

In the United Nations are assembled men of different political views and of varying opinions as to the best form of government. No matter what their political differences may be if they would but apply fundamental Christian principles the objectives of this great organization for peace would be attained. For example, consider how contributive to the ending of war would be the application of individuals and nations of just two of the divine injunctions relating to arbitration and mutual happiness. "Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou has gained thy brother.

"But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established." (Matt. 18:15, 16.)

Though man may not overcome selfishness entirely, if, as conflicts arise, he would but subdue it sufficiently to submit to Christ's principle of arbitration, brute force, as manifested in world conflict would cease.

Again, Jesus taught that men and women fail to live truly, and really amount to nothing unless they have spirituality. The spiritual force underlies everything, and without it nothing worthwhile can be accomplished.

Spiritual needs can be met only by spiritual means. All government, laws, methods and organizations are of no value unless men and women are filled with truth, righteousness, and mercy. Material things have no power to raise the sunken spirit. Gravitation, electricity, and steam are great forces, but they are all powerless to change the motives of men and women. The wealth of a Rockefeller cannot heal a broken heart, and the wisdom of all our universities cannot turn into the paths of righteousness a wayward soul. Men can be born again only through religion.

Whether it is better to walk along the easy road of selfishness and indulgence than to strive through self-mastery and service for the realm of spirituality you must decide. "Whether it is better to serve God than man, judge ye."

"But as for us we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."

In the words of John Oxenham:

God grant us wisdom in these coming days, . . . To pledge our souls with nobler, loftier life, To win the world to his fair sanctities, To bind the nations in a pact of peace. And free the soul of life for finer loyalties. Not since Christ died upon his lonely cross, Has time such prospect held of life's new birth; Not since the world of chaos first was born Has man so clearly visaged hope of a new earth. Not of our own might can we hope to rise Above the ruts and soilures of the past, But, with his help who did the first earth build, With hearts courageous we may fairer build this last.
