David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The All-Important Quest

And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What seek ye? They said, Master, where dwellest thou? (John 1:37, 38.)

These two disciples sought Jesus upon the testimony of John, the Baptist, who, the day before had said: "Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world."

We can only conjecture how clearly or deeply they sensed the fact that in thus seeking the Son of Man they were taking the first step toward eternal life, but this we do know, that the Savior has given the divine assurance that "This is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent."

Man's success or failure, happiness or misery depend upon what he seeks and what he chooses. What a man is, what a nation is, may largely be determined by his or its dominant quest. It is a tragic thing to carry through life a low concept of it.

The thing a man does practically believe, the thing a man does practically lay to heart, and know for certain concerning his vital relations to this mysterious Universe, and his duty and destiny there, that is in all cases the primary thing for him, and creatively determines all the rest. This is his religion; or it may be his mere skepticism and no religion: the manner it is in which he feels himself to be spiritually related to the Unseen World or No World; and I say, if you tell me what that is, you tell me to a very great extent what the man is what the kind of things he will do is!

(Carlyle.)

The disciples' answer to the question, "What seek ye?" gives a key to man's highest and noblest quest: "Master, where dwellest thou?" saying in effect,—we desire to know thee, and thy teachings. Later, Andrew testified to his brother, Cephas: "We have found the Messias, which being interpreted is the Christ."

"If thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul." (Deut. 4:29.)

This, then, is the all-important quest—to seek God and Jesus Christ, to know whom is eternal life.

Life, and freedom to shape that life, are two of the most precious gifts to man. Most men cherish these gifts and possess an innate longing to achieve higher and better things—to rise above the sordid and the low, and through obedience to divine law to experience the joys that come with being in harmony with a Supreme Being. True, there are some who, because of despondency and failure, or because of sinful indulgence, seek in desperation to end their earthly existence; but normal persons, who sense the value of moral and spiritual laws, such as kindness, generosity, consideration for others, reverence for all things sacred, and other divine attributes which contribute to nobility of character, with joy and gratitude can say with Coleridge, "O God, how glorious it is to live." With expanding vision they realize the meaning of the divine saying, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (P of GP 4:39.)

How May We Know Him?

The messages given in this conference have directly and indirectly answered that question. Jesus expressed it clearly when, on one occasion, while attending the Feast of the Tabernacles, he declared to the Jews who marvelled at his preaching, "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17.) In his sermon on the Mount he expressed the same thought in these words: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.)

His Will

These statements of the Savior lead us to the next important step in knowing our Father in Heaven and his Son. What is the Lord's will? His will is summarized in the memorable reply that Christ gave to the lawyer who asked him the question, which is the great commandment in the law. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. 22:37.) Regarding the will of God, the apostle Peter particularized, when on the Day of Pentecost, with one accord the people asked him and the rest of the apostles: "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" "Repent," answered Peter, "and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God will call." (Acts 2:37-39.)

Repent means to feel regret, contrition, or compunction for what one has done or omitted to do. It means to change one's mind with regard to past or intended action and conduct on account of regret or dissatisfaction. It means to conquer selfishness, greed, jealousy, faultfinding, and slander; to control one's temper. It means to rise above the sordid things which pure nature would prompt us to do to gratify our appetites and passions, and to enter into the higher or spiritual realm. Thus we become, in the words of Peter, "Partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust." Then, beside this, giving all diligence, Peter admonishes to add "to faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ." (2 Pet. 1:4-8.)

These, then, are the sign posts along life's highway, which if followed, will lead any man who will do the Lord's will to know his Son the Redeemer of the world, to know whom is eternal life. And while we are gaining this knowledge, which leads to immortality, we find the greatest joy in mortality that can be experienced by the human soul.

The best of all men are they who realize in daily life their luminous hours and transmute their ideals into conduct and character. These are the soul-architects who build their thoughts and deeds into a plan, who travel forward, not aimlessly but toward a destination, who sail not anywhither, but toward a port, who steer, not by the clouds, but by the fixed stars. High in the scale of manhood those who ceaselessly aspire toward life's great Exemplar.

This great Exemplar is Jesus Christ who among all leaders in history, has wielded the greatest influence upon the human family. Wherein lies his greatness—he defeated the lawyer in argument, healed the sick where medicine failed, inspired the greatest music ever written, filled hundreds of thousands of libraries with books, inspired missionaries to go to the darkest depths of Africa; yet, in none of the realms in which other men and women have won renown was he considered great. "In the realm of character, he was supreme."

Today the world's greatest need is for men of integrity, men of honor, men whose word is as good as their bond, leaders of Nations who will consider international agreements sacred. Men whose impelling desire is to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. All the happiness that comes with spiritual gifts may be his—"love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." Friendship, love, communion with the Infinite—all these, and a thousand other blessings, which God gives him free of charge, are his.

Earth gets its price For what earth gives us,. . . 'Tis heaven alone that is given away 'Tis only God may be had for the asking. (Lowell)

The only thing which places man above the beasts of the field is his possession of spiritual gifts. Man's earthly existence is but a test as to whether he will concentrate his efforts, his mind, his soul upon things which contribute to the comfort and gratification of his physical instincts and passions, or whether he will make as his life's end and purpose the acquisition of spiritual qualities.

Willingness to Serve

Our lives are wrapped up with the lives of others, and we are happiest as we contribute to their happiness. "Whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 16:25.) This paradoxical saying of the Savior contains the crowning element of the upright character. Here we touch the one important phase of true Christianity. Selfishness is subdued, in which greed and avarice must be subordinated to higher principles of helpfulness, or kindliness. "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."

Choosing the right with unwavering determination, resisting temptations "from within and from without," cheerfulness in the face of difficulties and perplexities, reverence for God and respect for your fellow-men, willingness to assist in the establishment of the Kingdom of God—these, though you might miss some of the emoluments of the world, will bring peace and happiness to your soul, and through obedience to the principles and ordinances of the Gospel, bring immortality and eternal life.

As sure as you can tune in on the radio and hear voices from afar, so sure am I that God is our Father, and that the soul of man can commune with him through the Holy Spirit. So sure am I that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world, through whom and only through whom may mankind find happiness and peace. So sure am I that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith and the authority to represent God on earth is again given to men.
