David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Home and Church as Factors in Character Building

With the importance in mind of training youth, I have chosen the theme, "The Home and the Church as Factors in Character Building." As a text I give you that old, old saying, "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it." Train the child early in life the way he should go. It is the responsibility of parents and leaders to show youth that way.

We train by thoughts. There is no one great thing which we can give a child which will determine his future any more than there was any one great thing which the rich young ruler could do to obtain eternal life, but there are many little things. As a child grows physically by eating regularly at intervals, by breathing fresh air constantly, by resting at stated intervals, so character is built by little things, by daily contacts, by an influence here, a fact of truth there.

Youth! Young men and young women facing their eternal destiny! What can we do to make them happy? What can we say and do to make them worthy citizens of our republic, faithful members of the Church of Jesus Christ? That is the question.

"The world is passing through troublous times. The young people today think of nothing but themselves. They have no reverence for parents or old age. They talk as if they alone know everything. As for girls, they are forward, immodest, and unwomanly in speech, behavior, and dress."

Possibly some of you will say, or at least will think, that that is a pretty severe arraignment of our young people of today. Others of you will consider it a real denunciation. Well, all of you will be surprised when I tell you that what I have just read was written about young people who lived six hundred and seventy-two years ago! That makes you feel better, doesn't it? It was written in the year 1274 after Christ. I cited it merely to bring to our attention the fact that we are prone to think that young folks today are worse than they used to be and that they are heading for perdition as never before.

Another purpose that I have in mind is that we might look with charity upon our young folks, try to enter into their lives and gain their confidence, then we shall find they are not entirely bad. This is a fact to which we must not close our eyes.

Destructive to character is the fact that there is rampant in the intellectual world a disregard for fundamentals, particularly the truths of religion. Of course, people have met such conditions before in the world, but if they exist now we had better face them and see if we can remedy them.

There appeared in the Sunday School Times an article commenting upon the lawlessness in the United States since 1850. The writer had in mind the fact that we have digressed if not entirely departed from the religious ideals as set forth in the Bible. He gives us his view as follows:

"In 1850 the character and culture of the American people demanded the respect of the entire world. European parents sent their sons and daughters to our institutions that they might imbibe this holy atmosphere. The Sabbath was nationally recognized and observed. The churches were well attended. Divorces were rare. Juvenile courts were unknown.

"Today America is one of the most lawless of nations. . .

"What has happened to change this Christian concord of 1850 into this criminal chaos?

"Eighty years ago Americans were still being reared in public schools that included religious instruction. The great "New England Primer," which for more than a hundred and fifty years had been the text book of the American schools, was just passing into discard. Eighty-seven percent of the contents of this remarkable book—which had built the sturdy character of fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers—was Bible. But from that time on the book of books ceased to be an important factor in public instruction."

Then he treats historically the fight that was waged against teaching of the Bible in the public schools as a result of which the teaching of the Bible was eliminated.

"The result of this long, drawn-out school controversy was that both sides lost. Catholics lost their subsidies and were forced to support their own schools. Protestants lost the public teaching of their religion. Public school pupils lost the moral restraint that religion alone can impart. Churches lost many who would have become faithful members. The state found its tax burdens increased and its citizenship degenerating. The sad, sickening consequence of this Godless education can be studied today in the juvenile delinquents who throng our courts and fill our prisons."

"But the real tragedy in America is not that we have permitted the Bible to slip out of our public schools, but that we have so openly neglected to teach it in either the home or the Church. We lament the fact that Bolshevistic and Modernistic teachers have entered our colleges and other institutions of higher learning and misled our youth, when we should weep over our earlier failure to implant the word of God in the heads of our boys and girls. One of our leading educators recently said: `That the Bible no longer holds the place it once did in the home is a proposition that hardly needs proof.' Even before the World War a prominent writer declared that family worship was so rare as to be almost phenomenal when found."

Recently I had great pleasure in training a well-bred colt. He has a good disposition, clean, well-rounded eye, was well proportioned, and all in all, a choice equine possession. Under the saddle he was as willing, responsive, and cooperative as a horse could be. He and my dog "Scotty" were real companions. I liked the way he would go up to something of which he was afraid. He had confidence that if he would do as I bade him he would not be injured.

But "Dandy" resented restraint. He was ill-contented when tied, and would nibble at the tie-rope until he was free. He would not run away, just wanted to be free. Thinking other horses felt the same, he would proceed to untie their ropes. He hated to be confined in the pasture, and if he could find a place in the fence where there was only smooth wire, he would paw the wire carefully with his feet until he could step over to freedom. More than once my neighbors were kind enough to put him back in the field. He learned even to push open the gate. Though his depredations were provoking and sometimes expensive, I admired his intelligence and ingenuity.

But his curiosity and desire to explore the neighborhood led him and me into trouble. Once on the highway he was hit by an automobile, resulting in a demolished machine, injury to the horse, and slight, though not serious, injury to the driver.

Recovering from that, and still impelled with a feeling of wanderlust, he inspected the fence throughout the entire boundary. He even found the gates wired. So, for a while we thought we had "Dandy" secure in the pasture.

One day, however, somebody left the gate unwired. Detecting this "Dandy" unlatched it, took "Nig," his companion, with him, and together they visited the neighbor's field. They went to an old house used for storage. "Dandy's" curiosity prompted him to push open the door. Just as he had surmised, there was a sack of grain. What a find! Yes, and what a tragedy! The grain was poisoned bait for rodents! In a few minutes "Dandy" and "Nig" were in spasmodic pain, and shortly both were dead.

How like "Dandy" are many of our youth! They are not bad: they do not even intend to do wrong, but they are impulsive, full of life, full of curiosity, and long to do something. They, too, are restive under restraint, but if they are kept busy, guided carefully and rightly, they prove to be responsive and capable; but if left to wander unguided, they all too frequently find themselves in the environment of temptation and too often are entangled in the snares of evil.

To change men and nations, we must change and direct their way of thinking. "Train up a child in the way he should go." That is our duty. The home is the most potent influence in this training. Sunday Schools, Mutuals, Primaries, Relief Societies are only supplemental. No social, educational or service group could effectively supplant the home as an effective force in making men out of boys and women out of girls. In the words of former President Hoover: "After we have determined every scientific fact, after we have erected every public safeguard, after we have constructed every edifice for education or training or hospitalization or play, yet all these things are but a tithe of the physical, moral, and spiritual gifts which motherhood gives and home confers. None of these things carry that affection, that devotion of soul, which is the greatest endowment from mothers."

I know what you are thinking now—that it is from the broken homes that these wanderers come. I know. And that they also come from homes in which motherhood has been debased. I know that, too. The other day a welfare worker brought a little boy and his sister into my home and said the mother was down in Bingham. Two little waifs—father in the army, and mother wallowing in the gutter. I know when we are speaking of homes that there are broken homes, but let us not magnify them. As Latter-day Saints it is our duty to present homes that are ideal. That is why I am mentioning this matter.

No man or child is happy in doing wrong. Nature herself teaches us that our actions are bound within certain limits. But, like the horse, we want to break away from those limits and go to the dangers beyond them, and boys and girls should sense that. Growth and happiness are found within certain restricted areas, beyond which lie dangerous and injurious indulgences. There is pleasure and health in eating; but pain and sickness in gormandizing. There is pleasure in moderate exercise; pain in excessive exertion. In all things, nature says, "thus far shalt thou go and no farther."

The home is the best place in the world to teach the child self-restraint, to give him happiness in self-control, and respect for the rights of others.

Unhappiness in the child's life, as in the adult life, springs largely from non-conformity to natural and social laws. The home is the best place in which to develop obedience, which nature and society will later demand. "A person's individuality is best safe-guarded and developed through conformity with social conventions; if he has learned the rules of the same he may hope to modify them, but until he has learned them his attempts at modification will be amateurish. If these rules are never learned, then personal individuality is cramped, and his happiness constricted."

So many of our youth today like to break away from conventions. They think their parents are old-fashioned. What a great lesson to learn that you are perfectly free to do as you please so long as you do not please to trespass upon the rights of somebody else. My heart aches this morning because one who was pretty close to me failed—violated conventions in childhood—later broke through the fence of consideration and decency—found the poison grain of unbelief, and now languishes in spiritual apathy and decay.

It is my opinion, and my opinion is confirmed by experience, that the best time for the child to learn these rules of conformity is between the ages of three and five. I made that statement on another occasion, and someone who reported it put it up between thirteen and fifteen. I mean three and five. If the mother does not get control of the child during those ages, she will find great difficulty in getting control later. It seems to me, then, easy to understand how the home contributes to the happiness of the child, first, by teaching obedience. I do not mean to push and drag or confine—just let the little child be perfectly free to develop until he goes beyond the bounds of safety. Then let him feel the gentle but firm hand of restraint.

Once Sister McKay and I saw this rule effectively illustrated in a zoo in Los Angeles. For the first time in our lives we saw a little baby monkey just learning to toddle. The mother was taking care of it and feeding it. We were interested first in seeing the mother pat the little babe, and try to get it to go to sleep. But the little fellow broke away from the mother and began to climb up the cage. The mother apparently paid no attention and let it climb until it got up to danger. Then she reached up, brought it back, and let it play within the bounds of safety. I thought from nature that was one of the best lessons in control of childhood I had ever seen—the little one was given freedom until the danger point was reached, and then he was gently restrained. Thus, we see the first contribution of the home to the happiness of the child is to impress him with the fact that there are bounds beyond which he cannot go with safety; second, to teach him to be considerate of the rights of others; third, to have him feel that home is a place where confidence and consolations are exchanged; and, fourth, to have him cherish the thought that home is a haven of seclusion and rest from the worries and perplexities of life.

Beaconsfield was right when he said: "The best security for civilization is the dwelling, and that upon properly appointed and becoming dwellings depends more than anything else the improvement of mankind. Such dwellings are the nursery of all domestic virtues, and without a becoming home, the exercise of those virtues is impossible."

But, as already intimated, there are broken homes from which children go rambling into strange fields and have no will power to resist the evil. And there are children from well-directed homes who break away—they find the gate unlocked and away they go to unrestrained indulgence. Many of these come to you Sunday School instructors, so you have to take the place of parent as well as teacher and guide.

The function of the Sunday School is to foster religious education. To inculcate moral and religious ideals in the lives of children was the dominant motive in the mind of Robert Raikes of Gloucester, England, when he organized the first Sunday School at the close of the year 1781, when he took boys and girls off the street ostensibly to teach them to read and write. The real purpose, however, was to let them see that there is a spiritual world in this old physical world; that there is a spiritual happiness that exceeds the pleasures of indulgence of appetites and passions.

The first Sunday School here in the West was held Sunday, December 9, 1859, in the home of Elder Richard Ballantyne. His motive for organizing it was to give the children the privilege of gospel teaching. There were 30 pupils enrolled and the number grew to 50 during the first year. Here is a glimpse of the virility of Mormonism. Many thousands of men and women devoting fifty-two Sundays every year, and hours of study during each week, for the betterment of children and youth, "training them to virtue; habituating them to industry, activity, and spirituality; making them consider every vice as shameful and unmanly; firing them with ambition to be useful; making them disdain to be destitute of any useful knowledge, and leading them into the joy of the Christ-life, into the friendship of God and the guidance of his Holy Spirit."

There is not a home in the Church, not an individual that may not and should not come within the radiance of one or more of these unselfish teachers. But the dimness or brightness, in other words, the worth of each school upon the boys and girls and upon the community depends, first, upon the character, preparation, and devotion of the officers and teachers; and, secondly, upon the loyalty of the members and their desire and ability to uphold the standards and ideals of the school. These two efficiency-determining elements are fostered by successful class work, and successful class work is dependent upon personality, preparation, presentation, and prayer.

Never before in the history of our country was the state in greater need of young men and young women who cherish the higher life in preference to the sordid, the selfish, and the obscene. What the opinions of the youth are today regarding life and its objectives will determine what the moral standard of the nation will be tomorrow. "The coming generation," says Mr. Babson, the statistician, "can see in a minute more than the former generation could see in a week. The coming generation can out-hear and out-travel the former generation. Horse-power is expanded beyond all dreams, but what about manpower, what about spiritual power, and the power of judgment, discretion and self-control? Unless there is a development of character equal to this enlargement of physical forces there is sure trouble ahead. Years ago an intoxicated man might tip a buggy over, but commonly the old horse would bring him home. Today a driver under the influence of liquor maims and kills; tomorrow, therefore, is something to ponder over. Without moral progress in pace with physical progress the airplane will merely make dissipation more disastrous, immorality more widespread, and crime more efficient. As one result has been to put hell on wheels, the airplane will put hell on wings unless righteousness too is speeded up. On the development of character depends whether the airplane shall bring prosperity or calamity." And that may be applied now to the splitting of the atom.

Schools and churches should radiate the fact that there are in life certain fundamentals which never change, and which are essential to the happiness of every human soul. Some of these fundamentals are:

"He prayeth best who loveth best All things—both great and small— For the dear God who loveth us, He made and loveth all."

It is wicked to torment and torture a dumb thing.

We should appeal to children in Sunday School and Primary, and to youth in Mutual to be reverent when they come into the house of God. We can ask them to speak of his name in reverence. When we pray we say, "Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name." That is a fundamental which we must not disregard.

If children have never prayed to God in their home, then the Sunday School has the responsibility to teach the existence of that Being; that he is near to us if we can approach him properly, and that there is a wall between us if we defy him and are irreverent. That is why our class room should be more orderly. Busy, humming with industry and thought, yes, but reverent.

It is a good thing for boys and girls to learn that they can go to God in prayer. You students in the university will learn, as students in every school should learn, when you have difficulties that you can receive help and guidance if you seek it in sincerity. Perhaps you will arise as some of us did in youth and feel that your prayers are not answered, but some day you will realize the fact that God did answer your prayers just as a wise parent would have done. That is one of the greatest possessions of youth to feel that you can go to our Father and pour out your heart to him. Associated with faith in a Father in heaven is the fundamental fact that God has revealed the Gospel of Jesus Christ in this day to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"It is not the will of your Father that one of these little ones should perish."

Today, youth is prone to ignore conventions, and follow without restraint what the fiery blood of passion prompts. They must be taught that there comes a tomorrow in which the wild expenditures of youth must inevitably be paid. Love is a most vital factor in a man's or a woman's life. To trifle with it by forming philandering habits might contribute to unhappiness and tragedy in married life. It is unfortunate if a girl gets the reputation of being "everybody's sweetheart," or if a boy be looked upon as one who would disregardingly stain a woman's character to gratify his own passionate desires.

No doubt you are teaching this subject indirectly in your Sunday School classes. I think we shall have to teach it more personally. I have mentioned it here, because it is the duty of parents even more than the duty of teachers and officers to get the confidence of their boys and girls so that those boys and girls will give the teachers their confidence. And you will find that that which motivates them most effectively touches this spring of love. The boy will tell you what he heard in the public school by a teacher who himself is probably unchaste. If so, the teacher's mind is poisoned. From such a polluted source, too, often comes encouragement for boys to follow indulgence rather than restraint. Boys, it is not indulgence but morality while you are in your youthful period that will develop your manhood. Girls, it is not the loss of your virtue, but maidenly modesty that will win the love of a man whose love you prize. Young man, your greatest responsibility is to keep the spring of life unpolluted. Do not believe it when some rake tells you that you will weaken your character if you inhibit a desire. Wise teachers can and will explain how nature will take care of that surplus energy through the channels of intellectual and physical activity.

I mention this as one responsibility of the teacher, because sometimes we parents find difficulty in discussing these confidential problems with our boys. Parents should be sufficiently companionable with their boys and girls as to merit their children's confidence. Be companions with them. When parents shirk this duty perhaps you teachers can succeed where parents fail. Teach the boys that it is chastity during youth that gives vigor, strength, and virility of manhood. Teach the girls that chastity is the crown of beautiful womanhood. When young men and young women learn that, and join hands in holy matrimony with a love that entwines their hearts, it is the memory of a virtuous life that contributes to the happiness of the home—not the memory of philandering or the suspicions of one or the other's having been unfaithful in youth. Instead, a memory that they came together as God would have them, prepared to go through life as parents worthy of pure children. It is chastity, not prostitution that contributes to the perpetuity and virility of the race.

"Train a child in the way he should go"—a worthy admonition to parents and teachers for all time!

"One day Jean Val Jean saw some country folks very busy pulling up nettles; he looked at the heap of plants, uprooted, and already wilted, and said: `This is dead; but it would be well if we knew how to put it to some use. When the nettle is young the leaves make excellent greens; when it is old it has filaments and fibers like hemp and flax. Cloth made from the nettle is worth as much as that made from hemp. Chopped up, the nettle is good for poultry; pounded, it is good for horned cattle. The seed of the nettle mixed with the fodder of animals gives a luster to their skin; the root mixed with salt produces a beautiful yellow dye. It makes, moreover, excellent hay, as it can be cut twice in a season. And what does the nettle need? Very little soil, no care, no culture, except that the seeds fall as fast as they ripen, and it is difficult to gather them; that is all. If we would take a little pain the nettle would be useful; we neglect it and it becomes harmful. Then we kill it. How much men are like the nettle!' After a short silence, he added: `My friends, remember this, that there are no bad herbs, and no bad men; there are only bad cultivators!'"

I quote this from Les Miserables to impress us all with the responsibility of guiding children and youth. The Sunday School and other auxiliaries offer excellent opportunities so to do. A responsibility of parents is to see that the boys and girls are put in the environment of these meetings.

"He stood at the cross-roads all alone The sunlight in his face; He had no thought for the world unknown He was set for a manly race, But the roads stretched east and the roads stretched west, And the lad knew not which road was best. So he chose the road that led him down, And he lost the race and the victor's crown, He was caught at last in an angry snare; Because no one stood at the cross-roads there To show him the better road. Another day at the self same place, A boy with high hopes stood; He, too, was set for a manly race, He was seeking the things that were good; But one was there who the roads did know And that one showed him which way to go. So he turned from the road that would lead him down, And he won the race and the victor's crown. He walks today the highway fair Because one stood at the cross-roads there To show him the better road."

God inspire us to stand at the cross roads and lead youth onward and upward along the way of truth and integrity into the presence of God, I pray.
