David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Responsibility of Choice

We men are just a little neglectful in expressing appreciation of what our wives do. Nearly always trouble in the home stems from the man—not always, I find, in disappointment. I grew to manhood thinking that that was the case, and generally speaking, it is. Be that as it may, many of us are like the Scotchman who lost his wife. While he was mourning her departure, his neighbor came in and praised the virtues of the departed wife—a beautiful woman, her noble character, what a good wife and neighbor she was, etc. The bereaved husband listened, and finally said, "Aye, Tammas she was a noble woman. Janet was a guid neebor. She was aye a guid, true wifey tae me, and I cam near tellin her sae aince or twice."

Now, I wish to leave a message, particularly for these young boys and girls. As preliminary to it, I shall read three passages as follows:

From the Book of Moses:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying— Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor. . .

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I the Lord God, had given him, . . . I caused that he should be cast down. (Moses 4:1, 3)

And the second is this:

And I, the Lord God, took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it.

And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,

But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. (Moses 3:15-17.)

Third:

And it came to pass that after I, the Lord God, had driven them out, that Adam began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow, as I the Lord had commanded him. And Eve, also, his wife, did labor with him.

And Adam knew his wife, and she bare unto him sons and daughters, and they began to multiply and to replenish the earth.

And from that time forth, the sons and daughters of Adam began to divide two and two in the land, and to till the land, to tend flocks, and they also begat sons and daughters.

And Adam and Eve, his wife, called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence.

And he gave them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord. (Moses 5:1-5.)

Our purpose of building this house is to aid these young men and young women and all who would enter here to make the proper choice in life. Those three passages demonstrate three fundamentals in life. First, that the Lord considered man's free agency, his right to choose, so vital that he permitted what is referred to as a war in heaven; so vital that those who were with him in the spirit world had their choice to follow the dictator, known as the Evil One.

The world today does not comprehend the significance of that divine gift to the individual. It is inherent as the intelligence which has never been created nor can be. That is fundamental, young men. Hold to it when you get distracted in school studying about the origin of humanity and other things.

The second was the privilege that those first parents had to take upon themselves mortality. You may choose, but remember, if you choose to take upon youselves that mortality referred to as The Fall, then you shut yourselves out from his presence and you "shall surely die."

Adam and Eve chose to take upon themselves mortality, and they were banished from his presence. They were driven from the Garden, and in their "humiliation," their judgment, or their memory was taken from them.

Now, imagine, young men and young women, in what condition were those first people when they were placed upon this earth to gain their livelihood by the sweat of their brow, not remembering as the years passed, their spiritual state in the Garden. I picture them subject to the earth. If their bodies became cold, it was the sun that warmed them. If their throats became thirsty, it was a stream that quenched that thirst. If they wished to have a soft bed, it was a skin or the leaves of the trees that furnished it. They would hear the thunder and lightning. The most luscious piece of meat would come from the animals. In a word, the earth produced that which satisfied their wants and needs and the mysteries of nature would stir their souls.

They were, as other animals, subsisting upon what the earth gave them, and if, in that condition, 10, 15, 20, 100, 500 years passed, if no voice had come from "toward the garden," what condition would they have been in? They would naturally be grateful for the sun, for the moon and the stars that gave light by night: for the streams, and other gifts of nature. The Book of Moses says that under that condition some of them became "carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature."

There is a passage in the Bible which says, "By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of yourselves. It is a gift of God."

There are several good explanations of that, but to me here is one of the best illustrations of the grace of God to man. Adam heard the voice of God "toward the garden." And the Lord gave him commandments, and said: "Offer unto me (unto God) the firstlings of your flocks," and by inference we conclude "the best that you raise in the garden and the field." See what that means in developing spirituality? The first of the flock is the most luscious, the most tender, the best fleece.

Selfishness, the animal nature, would say, "I want that," but God, knowing that the highest purpose of man is to develop the spirit within him, said, "Give the firstlings to God, thinking not of self, but of something higher." What a sublime purpose! What an essential purpose! It was as if the Lord said:

You who live in the earth need the experience to know good from evil, and to live not for yourself but for God. Whatever you do, do in his name. Therein is glimpsed the whole purpose of life.

Goethe, the great writer, says, "Life is a quarry, out of which we are to mold and chisel and complete a character."

Another writer says truly:

"If I could get the ear of every young man but for one word it would be this: Make the most and best of yourself. There is no tragedy like a wasted life, a life failing of its true end, and turned to a false end."

How great a pity that we should not feel for what end we were born into this world until just as we are about to leave it. The principle of choice comes to us in childhood. We have it through young manhood and young womanhood. We have it through adulthood. We have it to the end of our days—the principle of free agency, to choose the right or to choose the wrong, and today many men and women seeking happiness, which is a principal aim in life, choose to remain in the animal world and suffer the consequences.

The principle of choice came to Adam and Eve, and to Cain and Abel. Let me refer to the account of those first two boys. They too heard the doctrine, "you bring for sacrifice the firstlings of your flock." They too heard "Bring the best product the earth gives." And one of those boys gave the firstlings of his flock, and gladly gave it. But the other kept the best to himself.

When the Lord rewarded Abel, on natural principles, Cain became jealous. He became so envious that in anger he slew his brother. God asked Cain, "Where is thy brother" "Am I my brother's keeper?" answered the guilty man sullenly. Said the Lord, "If thou doest well, wilt thou not be accepted, and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door."

Thus briefly were eternal principles, promulgated in the first stages of man on earth, and applicable today.

The choice is given, whether we live in the physical world as other animals, or whether we use what earth offers us as a means of living in the spiritual world that will lead us back into the presence of God.

This means specifically:

Whether we choose selfishness, or whether we will deny ourselves for the good of others. "For inasmuch as ye do it unto the least of these, ye have done it unto me."

Whether we will cherish indulgence of appetite, passion, or whether we will develop restraint and self-control.

Whether we choose licentiousness, or chastity.

Whether we will encourage hate, or develop love.

Whether practice cruelty, or kindness.

Whether be cynical, or sanguine—hopeful.

Whether we be traitorous—disloyal to those who love us, to our country, to the Church or to God—or whether we will be loyal.

Whether we be deceitful, or honest, "Our word our bond."

Whether a slanderous or a controlled tongue.

You see something which you do not like. You can find fault if you wish, and have the satisfaction of feeling you have said something which makes you superior, or you can control your tongue and say nothing. If you would be happy, learn to think and to speak well of others among loved ones and close associates. Has somebody offended you in the Church? You may hold resentment if you wish, say nothing to him, and let resentment canker your soul. If you do, you will be the one who will be injured, not the one who you think has injured you. You will feel better and be far happier to follow the divine injunction: "If you have aught against your brother, go to him." No matter what problem you face in your daily life, always remember:

You are the person who has to decide Whether you'll do it or toss it aside. You are the person who makes up your mind Whether you'll lead or will linger behind. Whether you'll try for the goal that's far Or just be contented to stay where you are. Whatever it is you are wanting to be, Remember, to fashion the choice you are free. Kindly or selfish, or gentle or strong, Keeping the right way or taking the wrong, Careless of honor or guarding your pride, All these are questions which you must decide. Yours the selection, whichever you do; The thing men call character's all up to you.

I mention this fundamental principle of choice which goes back to our pre-existent state because I think it is one of the most vital facing the world today, and particularly members of The Church of Jesus Christ.

I do not know that there was ever a time in the history of mankind when the evil one seemed so determined to strike at this fundamental virtue of free agency.

But thank heaven, there is innate in man a feeling that will rebel against tyranny. It has manifested itself throughout the ages. For example in the days of King John—men who resented dictatorship gathered at Runny-meade and made the king sign a paper that a man has the right to be tried by his peers, and that the individual is not a mere pawn in the hands of a dictator. A few hundred years afterward, came the Declaration of Independence, and then the Constitution of the United States, fundamental in which is the right of the individual to worship God, to speak as he feels, own his property, to take care of his family—his home, his castle.

I love the Gospel of Jesus Christ. I love the freedom it vouchsafes to the individual. I know that our Father in Heaven is just as close to us today as he was when his voice came out of the Garden to Adam and Eve and gave certain commandments by which Adam could come back into his presence. You and I are descendants of that first man, and the same principles that were taught to him are now taught to us.

Know this that every soul is free, To choose his life, and what he'll be; For this eternal truth is given That God will force no man to Heaven. He'll call, persuade, direct aright, And bless with wisdom, love and light— In nameless ways be good and kind, But never force the human mind. Freedom and reason make us men; Take these away, what are we then? Mere animals and just as well The beasts may think of heaven or hell.

That is my message today, boys. The responsibility of choice. When you are tempted to drink spiritous liquor to have "a good time," remember that in such indulgence you are yielding to the baser part of yourself. Again some young men and young women think that indulgence in passion will give a good time. Pleasures yes, but not happiness. Fruit eaten before it is ripe will sour on the stomach. Some may think, "I can take advantage of that man. I will cheat him, and I will just add to my store." Well the man who robs is more greatly injured than the man who was robbed. It is an eternal law, for the law of compensation and retribution are eternally active in this world.

If you will be happy obey the principles of the Gospel. Let that happiness come from within. "Nae treasures, nor pleasures, could make us happy lang; the heart ay's the part ay that makes us right or wrang."

May the appreciation expressed be in each heart, but, above all, may we express gratitude today for the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and may each one feel as never before, to declare with Peter when he faced those dictators who wanted him to deny the Savior and his divinity, "For there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved."

Though we are living in perilous times, you and I can rejoice, because the gospel is among men. The Church is established in this free country, never more to be thrown down or given to another people. Nations may rise, and nations may destroy each other in strife, but this gospel is here to stay, and we must preach it and proclaim it, that peace may come for it is only through obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ that peace will come permanently upon the earth.
