David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Building of Character

Yes, I am indeed very happy. I am going to mention one or two things that have contributed to that happiness. First, I am glad to have the company of President (William H.) Reeder and President (Henry A.) Smith. President Reeder has been the president of a stake, president of the New England Mission; and President Smith is now in the presidency of the Pioneer Stake. The companionship of these two men with the two sisters made our drive up here most delightful. Coming up through the canyon and snow-capped hills on either side, the full moon made us all young again, until we reached Woodruff; then we encountered fog. It was not very thick, however, just about the same as it was a year ago when we came up; so we will have no trouble.

Then the welcome we got here from the president of your stake and President Johnson, and, as we entered the banquet hall, the hum of voices, six hundred young people, in cordiality and joviality, not in rudeness, but just the hum of voices of youth, pleased me most exceedingly.

But there was something that pleased me even more, and I am sure it did our companions. As soon as President Johnson moved down the aisle, all talking ceased, and there was perfect order. Perhaps many of you did not notice it, but that was very significant. It told us what your attitude is toward this gathering, and I was happy.

There is another thing that pleased me very much, and I should like to express it in the presence of your presidency, high council, bishopric of your wards and all others associated with them. I have learned through President Williams that there was a basketball practice tonight. That is pretty important when you are contesting with other schools or other counties and school districts, and that would take some of the young men away from this gathering. There was also a band practice in the public schools. That would have taken some others away, and those who have this gathering in charge were desirous of having present at least majority of the young people of the stake.

I am informed that when President Williams approached your county superintendent, a nonmember of the Church, the latter replied: "President Williams, it isn't often you make a request of the directors of the school board and principal. Let me assure you that there will be no school activity tonight which will interfere with your assembly." I wish to thank that gentleman, in your presence, for his spirit of cordiality and support, which is most commendable.

But what pleases us most of all is the service rendered by your mothers, you sisters, in cooking those twenty-seven turkeys which were carved by President Peart, and so eagerly enjoyed by 600 of us, and served so carefully, expeditiously, by our mothers. We seldom tell them by words how much we love them. I think tonight it would be fitting for us, in appreciation of what they have done in serving that banquet, to rise and remain standing in quiet for about thirty seconds. . . Thank you. Mothers, that is for you.

I am happy now to have an opportunity to "How do you do," and to thank you for the tribute you paid to our party tonight. Nobody suggested that you rise when the President of the Church was introduced, but you did it voluntarily. That was to the position, not to the man, and I hope you will always have that reverence of spirit for the priesthood throughout the Church. It means much.

Just what I can say to you tonight as a message that you will remember, I am not quite sure. I know what I have in mind, but just how to present it is the problem. May I continue to have your attention, your deferential attitude, for a few moments while I try to say what I believe will be a helpful suggestion to all.

Thirty years ago, President Hugh J. Cannon and I stood in the sculptor's yard in Florence, Italy. Around in that yard were unbroken, irregular pieces of granite from which the sculptor was going to cut out some vision which he saw in his mind. We did not pay much attention to those rude stones, scattered around in the yard, in the midst of which stood a magnificent figure, which is now famed in the world, and it was, of course, at that time.

That figure was carved over 400 years ago from pieces of stone which were just as crude as those which we saw around in the yard. Inside the museum were other carved statues. That huge statue was entitled "David," picturing David of old. It stands today in the Florence Museum, unfinished, but in our crude judgment we could not see but what it was perfectly finished.

I make that as a setting in your minds that you keep that in mind as I read these lines:

Chisel in hand stood a sculptor boy, With his marble blocks before him, His eye lit up with a gleam of joy When his life dream passed before him. He carved it well on the shapeless stone With many a sharp incision. That angel dream he made his own, His own, that angel vision. Sculptors of life are we With our goals uncarved before us, Waiting the time when at God's command Our life dream shall pass o'er us. If we carve it well on the shapeless stone With many a sharp incision, That angel dream we make our own, Our own, that angel vision.

If you had stood, each or any of you, in that yard thirty years ago, and a man had placed in your hands a chisel and a hammer, would any of you have dared to take that shapeless block and carve a human image out of it? You could not do it. If he had placed before you a canvass and mixed the paints, and put in your hands a brush, would you have undertaken to paint on that canvass the picture of an ideal soul? No. You would say to the first, "I am not a sculptor." To the second, "I am not a painter. I cannot do it."

Well, each of you tonight is doing just that thing, everyone of us carving a soul. Is it going to be a deformed one, or is it going to be something admirable and beautiful for time and throughout eternity?

You answer. Yours is the responsibility. Nobody else can carve it for you. Your parents may guide, your teachers may help with suggestions, but each one of you has the responsibility to carve that ideal character, and your tools are ideas, what you are thinking about. The thought in your mind at this moment is shaping your character, contributing, almost indefinitely, it is true, to the lineaments of your face, so that those who can read character can see what the thoughts have shaped in you.

He was right who said:

Sow a thought, reap an act; Sow an act, reap a habit; Sow a habit, reap a character; Sow a character, reap an eternal destiny.

With whatever thoughts you have, almost your outward expression will be shaped. Some or all of you girls wish to be beautiful, and we see a lot of beautiful girls here in this audience, and handsome young men. Some of you who wish you could be more beautiful, and, girl-like, feel regretful that you are not beautiful, should know this, that some of the most beautiful characters in the world have changed their very features by their inward thoughts. They have cherished noble ideals. They have cultivated cheerfulness. They radiate cheer wherever they go.

I recall now my youth, which is seemingly a long way off in years, but not very far in memory, the girls in our crowd; one particularly whom I remember with tenderness, appreciation, had no beautiful features. You would not call her beautiful from the standpoint of her eyes, symmetry of features, but her radiance, her cheerfulness, made her beautiful, and we all sought her company.

Ideals are the tools by which you are going to shape your lives. What subordinate things one seeks will have less bearing upon the formation of one's character, and upon the direction of one's life than does the paramount thought of the mind, the dominant wish upon your heart.

With these few words of introduction I am going to tell you the story of three men. One cherished the ideas of pleasure. He did not care whether that pleasure was found by dancing, sleigh-riding, and all other legitimate pleasures of youth—and they are glorious—or whether he had to indulge in passion and stimulate his appetite with nicotine or strong drink.

He was a brilliant youth, not much older than some of you here tonight when he cherished those thoughts. He was a neat dresser, pleasant companion in society, a good dancer, but his thoughts went along that line toward the good time he was going to have. That was the dominant thought.

I think every young man should have a good time. I think every young girl is entitled to joy, and you get that in conference and association such as you have here tonight. May the Lord bless these brethren who have brought this about for your company, and our mothers, again. I believe in it. I believe in sociality. I believe in the drama, in the concert, in the dance hall, but not in the "honey-bug"—that is the extreme.

Well, this young man determined that if he could not get enough stimulant in the nicotine, he would take something else. The bishop thought he could go on a mission. You recognize that I am telling you a true story. His parents wanted him to go. They had been converts in England. This was an only son, and they were proud of him.

When the call came, he accepted it, and I first met him in Scotland when I was an unmarried man, presiding over the Scottish Conference. He came with a young man from Rock Springs, who later became a patriarch in this stake—John Young.

John Young was then a young man, and he was a bashful young man, as you who remember him know. This young man, whom I will call Jim, was not bashful. He was debonair and haughty. I heard of him from the president of the European Mission, who telephoned from Liverpool, saying: "We are sending this young man up to you. He doesn't seem to be missionary material. We are just leaving," said President Platte D. Lyman, "for Europe, but please take this young man and report when we come back."

Well, he did not enter into the spirit of the mission. He did not want to pray. He came to me and said, "Please do not call on me to pray." We went down to Sunday School the morning after he arrived, and he said, "Don't ask me to speak today." I promised that we would not. He was a problem.

Monday morning we asked him to say the prayer, and he stumbled for a few moments, then he said, "I can't do it." Unbelievable, almost! He said, "I am going home!"

I said, "Oh, well, you are homesick. We all felt that way when we came. You come with me. The other brethren can go out tracting, and you come with me."

I took him down to Sister Nelson's and Sister Lang's, good Scotch women who could drive the blues from any boy, but he was still despondent. He was as restless as, in the old familiar comparison, a fish out of water.

Then I took him down to the Arcade in Glasgow, where he could see almost everything. I thought we could get him interested in the business things—sightseeing. But when we came out of the Arcade he was still determined to go home. By that time, I turned to him and said, "Why do you want to go home?"

"Well, I'd rather go home than be sent home."

"What do you mean?"

Then he told me. He opened his heart and took me back to the little town here in Utah, back to the dance halls, back to the socials, in the saloons, and then made a confession.

I said, "How did you get to be called on a mission?"

"I lied to my bishop."

"Why did you do that?"

"Well, I thought I would come as far as Philadelphia, then go back home. When I got to Philadelphia, I thought I would cross the ocean, go to Liverpool, and then go home. But," he said, "I am out of my element. I am sure of it now more than ever."

I turned to him and said, "You may go home, and sail on the City of Rome next Friday. Go home. Ask your bishop's forgiveness. Marry the girl whom you have wronged, and give her an honorable name, and when you have made it right with your bishop and with that girl who trusted you, prove yourself worthy and come over and fulfill this mission, or you will never make a success."

He was on the City of Rome when she sailed from Glasgow the following Friday. I heard from one of the elders who returned home with him that he did not maintain the standards. He went to the bar and disgraced the other members of the Church by his drinking and his acting.

He was still the seeker of pleasure, nothing higher than the pleasure of a physical sensation, a pleasure which any beast of the field can enjoy. The high things in literature, the sacred things of religion did not appeal to him. Just the physical sensation. And when men or women, not only young people, but older men or women, are satisfied with that physical pleasure, they are on the low plane of the animal.

And when a nation rejects the things of God as one nation is doing today—several nations now—you may rest assured that that nation and the others are sinking down to the level of the animal world.

We advanced the money to take him home, of course, and he promised to return it. Eighteen months after that, when I was released, he had not returned it. So one day when they had an educational convention in that city, I went up to perform my part on the program, and, remembering that this was his town, that he had not paid back that sum, and the Church was held responsible for it, I thought I would call at his home.

A lovely woman answered the door, past middle age, but a motherly countenance, and somewhat bent. I said, "I have called to see Jim, whom I met in Scotland about eighteen months ago. My name is David O. McKay."

"Oh, come in!" She caught my hand. "Won't you please see him? He was always a good boy to me."

I said, "Is he married?"

"No."

Not enough honor to keep his promise! "Well, my train leaves at four o'clock. If you can reach him, will you please tell him that I would like to see him at the station?"

"Oh, I will try to get him. I want you to see him."

He did not come. He thought too much of what that road of pleasure would give to him. I could see from what that mother felt as the tears rolled down her cheeks, that he had not done a thing which we had asked him to do.

I did not hear any more about him until one day when I was teaching in the Academy, I read in the Ogden Standard Examiner an account of a saloon brawl up in that town, in which one man was seriously wounded, and he later died. The names were given, among which was this "Jim." Evidently he had not pulled the trigger that wounded the boy in the drunken brawl, but he was among those arrested for it.

I remember telling the students the story this far in our devotional exercises that morning. I said, "This is the story to date. He is up there in jail this morning. You may choose to go down that road of pleasure, and make it your dominant thought if you wish. You may violate the rules of morality, become unchaste as he if you wish, but that is where it leads.

So I thought I had closed the story, until one day, I am not sure whether it was after one of my visits up here to Evanston, or to Tooele, I do not know which it was, but I was walking from the station in Ogden where we then lived, up Twenty-fifth Street. The saloons were open, and the hangers-around were there—the saloons were not supposed to have been open, but those who had gone down that road were lounging around and could sneak in at the side door.

I thought I heard my name called. We had a fight on in temperance in Ogden at that time—Judge Reeder will remember. Heber Scowcroft was running for mayor, and some of those saloon hangers-on had threatened us for attempting to take away their liberty. That was before prohibition days. So I paid no attention to him. I thought it was one of those.

Then I heard footsteps behind me, and I turned and recognized him—his blood-shot eyes, slovenly suit, his pale, flushed face, not only flushed, but sallow, told the story, and he said, "Do you remember me?"

I said, "Yes, I remember you. Are you married?"

"Yes."

"Did you marry the girl you wronged?"

"No."

"Where is your mother?"

"She is dead."

I did not say it. I did not have heart enough. But I thought, "Yes, and you hastened her death." For I remembered the scene at her doorway several years before.

He said, "Can you give me fifty cents for a bed?"

I said, "No, but I'll go up here and speak to the owner, and tell him to make arrangements for you." I knew he would take that fifty cents for a drink.

The next day in school I said, "I have another chapter on the life of Jim, the pleasure seeker," and I thought that was the last. But one night when I came home, several months after that, Sister McKay handed me the paper, and I read of a man who had been taking a little three-year-old boy through the saloons in Ogden, and he was arrested and put in jail, and the wife was sent for to take the little boy home.

I said to Sister McKay, "I believe that is Jim." The name was wrong. "I am going to call up Chief Browning and see if I can have the privilege of going to the jail and check up."

Chief Browning did not hesitate. He took me in and unlocked the door, and there with two or three other prisoners sitting around what seemed to me a pipe up through the middle of the cell, sat Jim. I was right. I called him, and he came shamefacedly. I put my hand through the bars and shook his hand, and I said, "Well, it has come to this!"

He said, "Well, the paper was wrong, my boy is five years old."

"Oh," I said, "what does the age mean? Dragging a little boy through saloons!" I said, "Would you like to get out of this?"

"Yes, I would."

"Would you go home?"

"Yes, I would."

"Will you try to straighten up?"

"Yes," Oh, they will make any promise!

I said, "Well, we'll see." And the first thing I did was to call up his wife to see whether she wanted him home. I got on the long distance and called her. Her mother answered.

I said, "I just called up to see whether you want Jim to come home. I think Chief Browning will let him out on parole. I got permission for him to come home."

"Well, I will talk to Mary. But I wouldn't have him come home—the reprobate!" That was the wife's mother. Mary came, and I said:

"Would you like to have him come home?"

"Yes, please!"

Oh, these trusting wives! What they will endure for their babies' sake!

That is the last chapter, boys and girls, that I know of. What became of him I cannot tell. That was years ago. I have told you the story, illustrative of what one can carve if he cherishes as the dominant feature indulgence in appetite and passion. I have not exaggerated it, and it is not an exceptional case. For half a century I have watched it, since I taught the boys and girls in Weber Academy, and you can read the story every day in your own towns.

Choose it if you will, but you are carving your character as surely as that great artist, Michelangelo, chiseled out of that shapeless rock the statue which has become so famous.

The other story is not a personal one, but it is the story of one who turned his back on indulgence and pleasure and sin of physical nature, but who determined he would make his fortune in life in making money. It became his god—the dominant thought now, we are thinking, and this story is told by one of the master writers in English literature. I will have to just touch the high spots, and that is all that is necessary, because you students have already read the story of Silas Marner, a fine young man of noble character, and a lovely young girl, beautiful and trusting, for whom life seemed gloriously happy.

But some money was stolen, and in that day they drew lots to see whether a man was guilty or innocent. Silas Marner was innocent, but when they drew lots he was found guilty, though he knew in his heart he was innocent. His girl turned against him, and he turned his back upon the minister and upon society, and left town. His heart became bitter, but there was one thing he could do, though he was just a humble weaver. He could make his money and he could store it. So day by day he threw his shuttle, wove the rug, went out into the town and sold it, and came back with his schillings and his pounds, which he put in a sack and hid under a board in the floor.

He soon became rather ostracized from society. He was looked upon as a peculiar fellow—a miser. He would come home at night after peddling the products of his loom, and count his gold which he had accumulated, and feed upon it, taking only scanty meals, then hide it back and cover the board. Sometimes he would hide it under his pillow and sleep on it.

One afternoon he came back with added pounds and schillings, and after eating his scanty meal he lifted the board to glut once more in counting his gold, which had become his life. To his surprise, there was nothing but the dirt which met his hand. Eagerly he threw his hand in again, and then the other hand, pulling up the board, but the money was gone. He rushed over to his bed, lifted the pillow, threw down the blanket, but it was gone.

His life was gone. He had made it his life, and with a cry he rushed out, leaving the door open, rushed over to the Public House and said, "I've been robbed! I've been robbed!" The men became frightened. They thought he had gone mad. Of course, he was sort of a recluse anyhow. They laughed at him and scoffed at him, but the sheriff or constable followed him, and wanted to know why, and said, "I'll come over later. I'll be there in an hour."

Silas staggered back to his home. Then he realized that he had left the door open, and the light from the fireplace was glittering, and in front of it was a little child about three years old, a golden-haired girl. The story tells us how the mother had suffered just before she reached that house, and the little babe, after the mother had swooned, seeing the light, had crept in there and was sitting before the fire.

Silas, seeing the golden hair, almost clutched at it. It reminded him of his gold, though it was just a little living baby that had come into his life, the first time since he had turned his back upon society. He took the babe and called in a neighbor the next morning, who said, "Well, you can't keep it."

"Yes," he said, "I want to keep it."

She said, "I will come over and take care of it." But the neighbors said, "You can't. He is a wild man."

But the neighbor knew better, and Silas was permitted to keep that little girl. Day by day he continued to throw the shuttle of the loom. Day by day he took the product out into the town and sold it. He accumulated his schillings and his pounds, but this time he could use it for the benefit of another, a little child, who, with the assistance of a kind neighbor, grew and was taken into school. Silas paid for her education. She led him back to society, back to his friends, back to his God.

The dominant thought of acquiring wealth was supplanted by the dominant thought to use that which he had gained for the blessing of somebody else.

I have cited that second story to say that there are those in the world who make the dominant thought the acquisition of wealth, which is a noble purpose unless it is made a selfish one, when as the piles grow the character shrinks.

The third story you will find in the Bible. He was a student, a lawyer, an interpreter of the philosophies. As a young man he sat at the feet of Gamaliel, a noted philosopher in philosophic history. He graduated, and when he was still a young man, he heard about some Christians, about a Christ who pretended to perform miracles, and he went to the chief priests in Jerusalem and said, "Authorize me to arrest every person in this city who believes that way." "That way" is the way he put it.

They deputized him, and he played havoc with the Church in Jerusalem until every member of the Church knew that Saul of Tarsus was their enemy. When they arrested Stephen and took him outside the wall—they will show you to this day where they stood him up against the wall outside of Jerusalem—and the Jews stoned him to death. Saul of Tarsus, though he did not throw stones, stood by and held the cloaks of those who stoned that humble man to death.

Then, after he played havoc with the Church in Jerusalem, he heard about an organization up in Damascus, and he started with his associates up there to destroy that. Just before they reached the city, they stopped for a noon siesta. If they had a camel, he was lying down chewing his cud, and there at the oasis they stood, when a light brighter than the sun appeared. Saul seemed to have been stricken blind by it, but he heard a voice saying: "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?"

And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.

A changed man, still a brilliant lawyer, still steeped in philosophy, but a vision had come to him, a new vision. The world needed a new ideal, not in philosophy, not wealth, not passion, but a new vision, the development of the spirit to come back into the presence of the Christ.

And later, though he was a Roman citizen, they put him in stocks, which means, as you know, that they had his arms and legs parallel. And in the darkness of the dungeon, he and Silas sang praises to God. No punishment could deprive them of the happiness which that testimony of the truth gave them. He was killed in Jerusalem, as you will see in this great play that is coming here—"Quo Vadis"—a pretty good presentation. You should all see it. It shows Peter and Paul, and the great power of Rome, the greatest power on earth at the time, which was overthrown by the truth that is in men's hearts.

I have not time to go further. There are your three stories. I come back now to ask you, "Which are you going to carve?" You are the carver. Will you have as your dominant thought indulgence in tobacco, whiskey, unchastity? You know the road. You know what the statue is you are going to carve. It will be your own. You will have chiseled it.

Or are you going to be free and say, "I am going to make money?" You can. In this great, free country, you can make it. And he is worse than an infidel who does not make and take care of his family. Note what I say, though using it for the benefit of others. That is good. God help you in that, but do not turn your back upon society nor upon your Church when you are doing it. That is where Silas Marner made his mistake, and he had to come back into the church, and to the little ones, before he realized happiness.

Or, finally, you can choose the ideal of the Christ, the only name—boys and girls, remember this if you forget everything else I have said—"the only name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved."

I bear you my testimony that that is the happy life. I know it. Enjoy your sleigh-rides, surely. Enjoy your dances within proper bounds, yes, and be happy in it. Enjoy one another's company in socials, yes. Why, youth longs for it. Youth is entitled to it.

You may think we are old fogies, but we are not very far from youth when we enjoyed all these things, and we enjoy them now. Like to ride horses? Yes. But, remember, in all that pleasure, there are certain bounds. Within that circle, that pleasure is legitimate. It is contributive to character building, but if you go beyond the bounds, it becomes a scar, defacing the character you are forming. Study that all through your lives, and you will see that most of your problems are caused by going beyond the bounds of prudence.

If you love that sweet girl, then that is the most sacred feeling in life; but if you prostitute it, it becomes the vilest thing in life for her and you. Hunger is good—a legitimate appetite—but if you gormandize, nature will punish you. Do you see?

We have a long way to go tonight, so I will conclude with just this statement:

You are the person that has to decide Whether you'll do it or toss it aside. You are the person who makes up your mind Whether you'll lead or will linger behind. Whether you'll try for the goal that's afar Or just be contented to stay where you are. Take it or leave it. Here's something to do! Just think it over—It's all up to you! What do you wish? To be known as a shirk, Known as a good man who's willing to work, Scorned as a loafer, or praised by your chief, Rich man or poor man or beggar or thief? Eager or earnest or dull through the day? Honest or crooked? It's you who must say! You must decide in the face of the test Whether you'll shirk or give it your best. Nobody here will compel you to rise; No one will force you to open your eyes; No one will answer for you, yes or no, Whether to stay there or whether to go; Life is a game, but it's you who must say Whether as cheat or as sportsman you'll play. Fate may betray you, but you settle first Whether to live to your best or your worst. So, whatever it is you are wanting to be, Remember, to fashion the choice you are free. Kindly or selfish, or gentle or strong, Keeping the right way or taking the wrong, Careless of honor or guarding your pride, All these are questions which you must decide. Yours the selection, whichever you do; The thing men call character's all up to you. —Edgar A. Guest
