David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Faith Triumphant

The most ominous threat to the peace and happiness of mankind in this the twentieth century is not the probable misuse of the atomic bomb, but the dwindling in men's hearts of faith in God. "Epochs of faith are epochs of fruitfulness; but epochs of unbelief, however glittering, are barren of all permanent good."

The scriptures tell us that "without faith it is impossible to please God," that through faith prophets and men of old "subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong."

It was faith that braved Columbus to sail on and on into the unknown horizon until he discovered a new land. It was faith that brought to America the "Mayflower," freighted with the destinies of a continent. It was faith that impelled President Brigham Young and the Utah Pioneers to establish permanent settlements in an unforbidding, defiant western desert.

Faith is more potent in human endeavor even than judgment or experience. Let me illustrate: One hundred years ago today a group of men with a 900-mile prairie trail behind them, were hacking their way through underbrush on a mountain trail and prying loose boulders that rolled with an echoing crash into the bottom of the ravine below. Trudging slowly and wearily up this ravine moved a caravan of covered wagons. The advance company of Utah Pioneers were nearing the summit of "Big Mountain," from which they would obtain their first glimpse of the Great Salt Lake Basin. In the western fringe of that basin lay the "Dead Sea of America" shimmering in the sunlight more like a threatening omen than a promise of prosperity.

If that barren, seemingly unproductive valley could be made fruitful, could become the center of a western empire, it would most surely be one of the most striking examples in history of faith triumphant over human judgment and experience.

Of the great pioneers of history, Brigham Young is given place among the foremost. But suppose he had failed, as men who knew western America better than he thought he would. What a tragedy would have befallen thousands—what severe censure history would have heaped upon such a foolhardy leader!

Picture his situation a century ago. Upon him rested the responsibility to supply food and shelter for the 152 persons who composed that first company seeking a home in a desert land, and the season so far advanced that there was little or no hope that crops planted would mature. Besides these 152 persons, there were thousands of others who had left their homes in Nauvoo after the martyrdom of their prophet who were following their leader to this hoped-for place of refuge and peace. Approximately 2000 were at Mt. Pisgah (Union County) Iowa, 145 miles from the west bank of the Mississippi River.

There was another colony at Garden Grove (Decatur County), Iowa, 126 miles east of Council Bluffs.

Six thousand others were at Winter Quarters on the banks of the Missouri River, six miles from Omaha.

Ten thousand people already on the march towards the Great Basin, which gave scant assurance that even a small colony could gain subsistence. All told, there were 40,000 Mormons between the British Isles and Emigration Canyon, Utah who, with confidence in a great leader, were moving toward some unknown refuge yet to be designated.

The judgment of the scout and of the trapper regarding the chances of survival was against settlement. Major Morris Harris, for example, said, among other discouraging facts about the Great Salt Lake Valley: "It is sandy and destitute of timber and vegetation except for the wild sagebrush." Captain James Bridger thought it imprudent to bring a large population into the Great Basin until it was ascertained that grain could be raised. He offered to give a thousand dollars for the first ear of corn ripened in the basin. "I have been here 20 years," he said, "and have tried it in vain over and over again."

At Green River, Samuel Brannan, who established a colony where San Francisco now stands, met the pioneers and gave a glowing description of climate and productivity of the soil in sunny California.

Notwithstanding these warnings of the desolation of the country, and the plea to go on to more productive climes, there was that assurance in President Young's mind which had greater influence upon him than the trapper's experience of unproductivity and of monthly frosts, and more influential than the glowing description of the California coast.

Greater than human judgment, towering above man's experience, was the great leader's trust in God. In referring to this faith which had guided him, he said: "As I viewed a portion of Salt Lake Valley, the spirit of light rested upon me and moved over the valley, and I felt that there the Saints would find protection and safety," an apt illustration of the lines of Dryden—

"Dim as the borrowed rays of moon and stars too lonely, weary wandering travelers, Is reason to the soul; and as on high those rolling fires discover but the sky, Not light us here, so Reason's glimmering ray was lent not to assure our doubtful way, But lead us upward to a brighter day. And as those nightly tapers disappear, When day's bright lord ascends our hemisphere, So pale grows Reason at Religion's sight, So dies and so dissolves in supernatural light."

The unwavering faith of that dauntless band in a divine Providence—that invisible power which "makes the discords of the present harmonies of the future," lives on imperishably. Their undying fortitude and heroism have been and will continue to be a guiding and an encouraging light to all who read their simple but incomparable story.

Ideality, Faith an Impelling Force

I have made reference to this epoch in pioneer history not only to pay slight deference to the brave men and women whose migration westward contributed so much to the development and progress of the western United States, but also to emphasize the superior power of faith as a motivating force in human endeavor. Men die, but principles live on. Ideality is ever the true source of inspiration and progress.

Discouraging Trends in Modern Society

Anybody who thoughtfully observes the trend of this modern world cannot fail to have noticed a revolt among people generally against what they consider old-fashioned conventions and moral standards, against restraints and inhibitions. Modesty among women, for example, is almost a lost virtue; chivalry among men toward the opposite sex is seldom manifest. Marriage is looked upon by too many not as a sacrament, but as a contract to be cancelled at pleasure. The responsibility of family life, too frequently shirked by parents, is ominously being shifted to the state. Hitler's denunciation of the Ten Commandments, his reversion to the law of the jungle, the denial of the existence of God by Russian leaders, the rejecting of Christ by Communists and other anti-Christians seem to justify the claim that there is a weakening of faith in God, in Jesus Christ, his Son, and in the moral order.

Faith Will Dispel Threatening Clouds

Faith is the eternal light that will dispel these threatening clouds. With all my soul I cry with Emerson:

O my brothers, God exists. There is a soul at the center of nature and over the will of every man, so that none of us can wrong the universe. It has so infused its strong enchantment into nature that we prosper when we accept its advice, and when we struggle to wound its creatures our hands are glued to our sides, or they beat our own breasts. The whole course of things goes to teach us faith. We need only obey. There is guidance for each of us and by lowly listening we shall hear the right word. . . Place yourself in the middle of the stream of power and wisdom which animates all whom it floats, and you are without effort impelled to truth, to right and a perfect contentment. Then you put all gain-sayers in the wrong. Then you are the world, the measure of right, of truth, of beauty. If we would not be mar-plots with our miserable interferences, the work, the society, letters, arts, science, religion of men would go on far better than now, and the heaven predicted from the beginning of the world, and still predicted from the bottom of the heart, would organize itself, as do now the rose and the air and the sun.

And again this great thinker continues:

The end of all political struggle is to establish morality as the basis of all legislation. It is not free institutions, it is not a republic, it is not a democracy that is the end—no, but only the means. Morality is the object of government. We want a state of things in which crime shall not pay. This is the consolation on which we rest in the darkness of the future and the afflictions of today, that the government of the world is moral, and does forever destroy what is not.

The economic progress of our country during the past century has been phenomenal. So also has been her influence politically among the nations. Today America is reputedly the only nation in the world "capable of sustaining western civilization."

Opposed to her is Russia, which has renounced faith in God and in his overruling power in the universe.

The threatened impending clash between these two nations is more than a test of political supremacy, more than a fight between capitalism and communism—it is the ever-contending conflict between faith in God and in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and disbelief in the philosophy of Christian ideals. Faith in man is the power that leads to brotherhood; faith in God, the ladder by which men climb toward perfection. Faith is strength; doubt, weakness and disintegration.

There can be no question about the outcome of the anticipated ominous clash, which we earnestly hope and pray will never come between these two great nations of conflicting ideals, if the inhabitants of America will but keep their faith in the Lord of heaven and earth, and in the principles of peace taught by his Son on the shores of Galilee two thousand years ago. Upon this is the promise of possession of this land and prosperity therein based:

"Behold," says the Prophet, "this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ."

The guiding light in our time, as in Pioneer days and always, is faith in God and in the ultimate establishment of the brotherhood of man through the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

"God was and is and e'er shall be, Christ lived and loved—and loves us still And man goes forward, proud and free, God's present purposes to fulfill."
