David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The Demands of Freedom

"Is life so dear, or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery?"

In so declaiming before the Continental Congress, Patrick Henry expressed the feelings of many colonists in whose breasts were arising feelings of revolt against the long series of oppressions that began when the British government passed and attempted to enforce the unfair Navigation Acts. When, in 1760, George the Third came to the throne "oppression followed oppression, insult was heaped upon insult, injustice was added to injustice, until the elemental power of intelligence, character, and feeling in the Americans was ready to burst forth like a volcano." This twenty-two-year-old King, "dull, uneducated, intolerant, bigoted, and finally crazy," arrogated to himself the thought that the common man existed only to contribute to his comfort, and that the American colonies could be used as a revenue-producing means to pay off his accumulated war debts.

In his arrogance, George the Third gave the world an excellent example of the evils of one man dictatorship.

The Continental Congress

In September, 1744, the Continental Congress was called to meet in Philadelphia "to deliberate upon wise and proper measures for the recovery of their just rights and liberties; and the restoration of union and harmony between Great Britain and the colonies, most ardently desired by all good men."

The Second Continental Congress met in May, 1775, within a month after the battles of Lexington and Concord. It was during the second Continental Congress that the Declaration of Independence was formulated and passed. The following are the circumstances:

June 11, 1776, a committee was appointed to prepare the Declaration of Independence. The members of this committee were Mr. Thomas Jefferson, Mr. J. Adams, Mr. Benjamin Franklin, Mr. Shearman, and Mr. R. R. Livingston. Of this committee (Thomas Jefferson writes in a letter to Mr. Madison): "The committee of five met. No such thing as a sub-committee was proposed, but they unanimously pressed on myself alone to undertake the draught. I consented; I drew it; but before I reported it to the committee I communicated it separately to Dr. Franklin and Mr. Adams requesting their corrections."

Thomas Jefferson was then a young man of thirty-three from Virginia. "He was a tall, charming, red-headed, lawyer; a horseman, a scientist, a philosopher, a man of wealth and social position; an aristocrat-democrat. He was one of America's truly great men—one of our greatest." John Adams said he was chosen to write the Declaration, because "he had a reputation for literature, science and a happy talent of composition. Writings of his were handed about remarkable for the peculiar felicity of expression."

Upon receiving his assignment, Jefferson retired to the second floor of his lodgings at the corner of Seventh and Market Streets, Philadelphia, and without consulting a book or pamphlet wrote, in a half day's time, our great national symbol. The rough draft may be seen now in the Library of Congress. There are many corrections in it, words crossed out, and words written in. It is filled with interlinings, and marginal notes. Most of these emendations are in the handwriting of Jefferson himself. The draft was reported to Congress on June 28. It was laid on the table until July 1. On that day it was debated and adopted by the committee of the whole. On the 2nd of July the resolution that "These colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states," was adopted by Congress, but not the declaration as drafted by Jefferson. Jefferson's draft was considered again on July 3, and finally adopted on July 4, 1776, and was signed later—56 names being appended.

The spirit pervading that old city, pending the adoption, is represented in the poem about the old liberty bell.

There was tumult in the city In that quaint old quaker town. And the streets were rife with people Pacing restless up and down. People gathering at the corners Where they whispered each to each. And the sweat stood on their temples With the earnestness of speech.

The Declaration of Independence, A Summation of a Struggle Throughout the Ages

The inscription on the Liberty Bell itself "proclaim liberty throughout the land to all inhabitants thereof," is a biblical quotation, relating to the most extraordinary of all civil institutions, giving all prisoners and captives their liberties. Slaves were freed and debtors were absolved. Freedom is an essential element in happiness and rejoicing. This struggle seemed to achieve a high degree of success in the boasted democracy of Greece, and in the proud Roman Empire when "the masses in Rome had votes but lacked bread. It could be amused and distracted by shows and gladiatorial contests, and their cries stilled by the corn dole, but Caesar and Pompey saw to it that only those who voted as they directed should receive the dole."

The struggle gained impetus when King John in 1215 was compelled to sign the Magna Charta, but the complete flowering of this glorious plant of liberty occurred with the Declaration of Independence, followed by the establishment of the Constitution of the United States, the charter for the highest and best political government against which we find tirades and tempests raging.

Freedom Vouchsafed in These Two Noble Documents

Freedom of mind, freedom of soul, freedom of body, freedom from poverty, are vouchsafed to the individual. In other words, freedom to think and to speak as one desires; second, freedom to worship God according to the dictates of one's conscience; third, freedom from dominance of any man whether of wealth, political power, or religious. Fourth, the right to hold property.

Demands of Freedom

A few years ago these freedoms were challenged. A man in Europe, probably at first motivated by worthy ideals, had his ego inflated until he believed he would outdo Napoleon and become another world conquerer. He denounced democracy and individual liberty as a mockery and a failure. At terrific cost his madness was subdued, and in that subjection we see one of the first demands of freedom—loyalty, and self-sacrifice.

Illustration—A White House Garden Party

If you have been in Washington about five weeks ago, you might have beheld nearly a thousand disabled war veterans being entertained by the president of the United States. Some had arms and legs missing, some were walking on crutches and others moved about in wheelchairs. These were representatives of several hundred thousand others who five years ago were as sound and unmaimed as you and I.

Others Who Sleep in Foreign Soil

At that time fourteen hundred and fifty young men in Utah, filled with the animation of youth, looked with happy anticipation to a brilliant future. Our country, knowing that the liberties of mankind were threatened, called these young men to the colors. They answered, and gave their lives that freedom might survive. An honor list of the state's war dead and missing, published June 27, 1946, disclosed that Utah lost more than her share of armed personnel during World War II. Of the ten million men and women who saw army service during the conflict, three hundred and nine thousand paid the supreme sacrifice.

The New Age

The atomic bombs that burst over Hiroshima and Nagasaki and caused the death of 150,000 people, ushered in a new age, and loosed a force which, if improperly controlled, threatens civilization itself. Things are different from what they were five years ago. Conditions here in our own country seem to indicate to these returned veterans that some of the freedoms for which they have been fighting, and for which their comrades gave their lives, have already been lost. The bomb that burst over Hiroshima destroyed more than houses, land, and human lives—it shattered moorings of defense to which nations have clung for centuries, and ushered the world into a new era. Whether we are willing to admit it or not, this is a revolutionary period. There is social and political upheaval. Thoroughly tested, well-tried principles are being thrown into discard. "Long accepted social theories have suddenly been rejected, and new ones are being adopted," so writes Charles Foster Kent. Many of the moral standards of our fathers are being set aside in theory as well as in practice. The rising generation has no fear and little respect for elders. The elders, recognizing what a wreck they have made of civilization, question their own infallibility. Religious dogmas long regarded as the cornerstones of religion and the Church are being disproved or supplanted by the discoveries of modern science.

"It is not strange that the majority of the men and women in this war-shattered world are unhappy because they feel the foundations beneath them are tottering."

At a noon-day luncheon given in Salt Lake City recently the president of a national organization spoke of liberties and rights already lost, and appealed to the people to preserve those remaining. An experienced United States Congressman, characterized as the best lawyer in Congress, recently said: "There isn't a sensible person in this room now who can be certain that he can leave to his children the heritage and privilege of being free."

Democracy demands adherence to moral standards. Thomas Jefferson was right when he expressed the idea that "the moral sense is as much a part of our Constitution as that of feeling, seeing, or hearing, as a wise Creator must have seen to be necessary in an animal destined to live in society." "I sincerely believe," he continued, "in a general existence of a moral instinct. I think it is the brightest gem with which the human character is studded, and the want of it is more degrading than the most hideous of bodily deformities."

The father of our country, speaking upon this same theme, said: "There is no truth more thoroughly established than there exists in the economy and course of nature, an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness; between duty and advantage; between the genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy and the sordid rewards of public prosperity and policy; since we ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of heaven can never be expected on a Nation that disregards the external rules of order and right which Heaven itself has ordained." (Inaug. Address 1789)

Self-government implies a sense of obligation to one's fellows. Today men face a vital issue on government. First, whether the interests of the State come before those of men; or, whether the State exists for the protection of the individual and for his welfare and happiness.

It is the individual who is happy, not the state; and freedom is a fundamental factor in the individual man's happiness.

I AM THE UNITED STATES

by Benjamin Decasseres

For 150 years all the peoples of the earth have held me as a hope in their eyes.

Every revolution in the last 150 years that had for its aim more freedom has modeled its law on my Constitution. From the four corners of the earth people of all colors, religions and races have set sail to make their home under the folds of Old Glory.

In 150 years I have raised the level of wages and living to the highest point ever attained in all historic time.

I have given more persons opportunities to raise themselves under my individualistic capitalistic-free enterprise system, from menial to commanding positions than any other nation in the world, past or present.

I have guaranteed to each and all, native and foreign, free speech, a free pen, freedom of religion, and trial by jury.

I have abolished slavery and succored the victims of flood, famine, and earthquake everywhere on earth.

I have given the world the greatest symbol for all time of revolt against oppression—George Washington.

I have given the world the greatest expounder of individualistic democracy and personal freedom in the history of mankind—Thomas Jefferson.

I have given the world the greatest symbol of a liberator of an enslaved people, and the most humane ruler in time of civil war that history records—Abraham Lincoln.

I have given the world in a Congress, a Supreme Court, and an Executive—the best-balanced governmental set-up in history.

I have made the words liberty and America synonymous.

No call from an oppressed people has ever gone unanswered by me.

When I have made mistakes—and I have made some great ones—I have admitted them finally and tried to rectify whatever injustice may have flowed from them.

My mighty rivers, my towering mountains, my prairies, my forests, and my oceans have been open to travel for all my people without police permits or a spy system.

I was born in Philadelphia on July 4, 1776.

I gave the world its model Constitution on September 17, 1787.

I froze, shoeless, in the snow at Valley Forge.

I hung on by a hair for my life at Gettysburg.

I freed Europe and myself from the deadly menace of Prussian Militarism in 1917-18.

Today I lift myself to my full proud height and proclaim that I who froze at Valley Forge and battled for my life at Gettysburg shall lay in the dust those enemies who again seek to enslave me. For—I am Democracy in Action!

I AM THE UNITED STATES.
