David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Conditions of Happiness

A number of years ago, a group of friends, and I were about to enter the temple at Cardston when an automobile stopped at the west gate. None of us recognized the travelers—a man, his wife, and two children, if I remember rightly. They came toward us, and then he introduced himself as a minister from Iowa.

He said, "We have just driven through Utah, and the first building that impressed us was the temple at St. George. We came north and we saw the Manti Temple, a beautiful structure. We continued further north, and visited the Temple Grounds and the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. Everybody around there seemed to radiate joy, and we heard the congregation sing `Come, Come Ye Saints.' Now in Canada we see this temple. There is something among the people whom we have met from St. George to Canada which has impressed us greatly. It is the happiness you seem to radiate. I am going to teach my congregation to sing that song, `Come, Come ye Saints.'"

He was impressed with something which to him was indefinable. We are a happy people. "Man is that he might have joy," not what an enemy accused us of doing—living for physical comforts and pleasures. He is wide of the mark. That man had in mind pleasure, not joy. There is a difference between pleasure and joy. Any living thing in the animal world can experience pleasure, but that may be only temporary. A sensual or physical pleasure—may be experienced but for a moment and followed by pain. Not so with joy. Joy is an element of the soul. So is happiness.

The significance of pleasure is well expressed by the poet Burns in these words:

Pleasures are like poppies spread, You seize the flower, its bloom is shed: Or like the snowfall in the river, A moment white—then melts forever; Or like the borealis race, That flits ere you can point their place; Or like the rainbow's lovely form, Evanishing amid the storm.

Pleasure is not the purpose of man's existence. Joy is. "Happiness," says the Prophet Joseph Smith, "is the object and design of our existence and will be the end thereof if we pursue the path that leads to it, and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. But we cannot keep all the commandments without first knowing them, and we cannot expect to know all or more than we now know unless we comply with or keep those we have already received."

In that statement there is found the first condition of happiness. Virtue, living righteously. Therein the prophet gives the very key of the soul in its enjoyment of happiness. Happiness is not something which comes from without. Generally speaking, this is a pleasure seeking, not a joy experiencing world. In that loneliness to which Sister McKay referred, the people sought pleasure in entertainment and outward things. With such, the soul is never satisfied. But one who forgets pleasure in seeking the good of others will find happiness, which must come from within.

The first condition of happiness is a clear conscience. No man who does wrong or who is unvirtuous will be happy. No unvirtuous woman can ever be happy unless she fully repents. Uprightness of character, honesty in dealing with our fellow men, honor bright, your word as good as your bond; then when your head touches your pillow at night and you contemplate your actions during the day you sleep with a good conscience.

Daniel Webster said, "Weighed against conscience, the world itself is but a bubble, for God himself is in conscience lending it authority."

Happiness is the end and design of life, for man is that he might have joy; but I repeat, it doesn't come from without.

It's no in titles, nor in rank; It's no in wealth like London bank, To purchase peace and rest, It's no in makin' muckle mair; It's no in books, it's no in lear, To make you truly blest; If happiness hae not her seat And centre in the breast We maye be wise, or rich, or great But never can be blest: Nae treasures, nor pleasures, Could make us happy lang; The heart ay's the part ay That makes us right or wrang.

A Sense of Freedom

The second factor I name as contributing to happiness is a sense of freedom. It is sweet to contemplate that word. It is glorious to think of the liberties that we enjoy as citizens of this great republic. We love to look back to the heroes who offered their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor in defense of individual liberty. We like to repeat what Patrick Henry said, "Is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it Almighty God. I know not what course others may take, but as for me, give me liberty or give me death."

We love to think of the heroes and the heroic actions of the pioneers who crossed the plains, the first group of which, on July 22, 1847, were camped in Emigration Canyon. On this day also, some of the Vanguard entered Salt Lake Valley. Forty thousand members of the Church between Great Britain and the barren waste that would someday be their home! What a mighty responsibility rested upon their leader, President Brigham Young! With a testimony in their hearts of the truth, they were inspired also with a sense of freedom to worship God according to the dictates of their conscience. A consciousness of individual initiative, the right to think, the right to plan without hinderance of anybody else as long as they did not interfere with that same right to others! Happiness? There is no happiness without it. There are men dying today in defense of it, and they will die in the future in defense of it, because it is a God-given gift. Cherish it and thwart the efforts of enemies in our midst who would deprive us of that individual liberty.

"God is endeavoring to make men like himself. To do this he must first make them free." The philosopher who wrote those words got a glimpse of an eternal gospel truth. Man can choose the highest good, or choose the lower good, and fall short of what he was intended to be.

Know this that every soul is free, To choose his life, and what he'll be; For this eternal truth is given, That God will force no man to heaven.

I leave this second fundamental to happiness with the admonition to you men and women to be true to the Constitution of the United States, to the Bill of Rights. Do not let any theories of immigrants or misguided politicians induce you to do anything that will deprive us of our liberties as vouchsafed by that immortal document.

Confidence of Self-Mastery

A third contributing factor to happiness I name as, The Confidence of Self-Mastery. No one wishes to be a slave to other human beings, no one willingly bows down to a dictator. But some are slaves to themselves, to their appetites, and passions. They are not free. They have deprived themselves of freedom and of individual liberty. Instead of being kings and masters of self they are slaves.

That is one reason why the Lord has given us the Word of Wisdom, one reason why he has told us to control our passions, to control anger, not to speak evil of one another, but to control that tendency of human nature to slander, or to rejoice in a brother's faults.

Emerson touches that human frailty by saying, "an accident cannot happen in the street but the bystanders will be animated with the faint hope that the victim may die." Rise above that feeling. Control it.

Any physiology book will tell you how nicotine may harm the body, particularly how injurious is its effect upon the young. Science demonstrates that; but there is a greater reason why young people especially should not indulge in cigarette smoking or in habit forming drinks—because as children of God they should not be slaves to an appetite.

I heard today of a man who would like to join the Church and he is going to as soon as he can overcome that habit of smoking. Sure, he can overcome it. He can do as Brother Tracy did, the first man with whom I went teaching. I heard him tell Harvey Brown, "I put my pipe upon the shelf, and I said, `I'll never touch it again.'" Then he added, "I never have."

From an excellent book written by Charles Wagner, author of "The Simple Life" I quote the following:

He who lives to eat, drink, sleep, dress, take his walk, in short, who lives to pamper himself all that he can, be it the courtier basking in the sun, the drunken laborer, the commoner serving his belly, the woman absorbed in her toilette, the profligate of low estate or high, or simply the ordinary pleasure-lover, be he obedient to material needs, that man or woman is on the downward way of desire, and the descent is fatal. Those who follow it obey the same law as a body on an inclined plane. Dupes of an illusion forever repeated, they think, "Oh, just a few steps more, the last, toward the thing down there that we covet. Then we'll halt." But the velocity they gain sweeps them on and the further they go the less able they are to resist it.

Here is the secret of the unrest, the madness of many of our contemporaries, having condemned their will to the service of their appetites, they suffer the penalty. They are delivered up to violent passions, which devour flesh, crush their bones, suck their blood, and can not be sated.

No, this is not a lofty moral denunciation. I have been listening to what life says, and have recorded as I have heard them, some of the truths that resound in every square.

Has drunkenness, inventive as it is of new drinks, found the means of quenching thirst? No, not at all. It might rather be called the art of making thirst inextinguishable.

Listen, young men and young women:

Frank libertinage—does it deaden the sting of the senses? No, it envenoms it, converts natural desire into a morbid obsession, and makes it a dominant passion. Let your needs rule you, pamper them, and you will see them multiply like insects in the sun. The more you give them, the more they demand. He is senseless who seeks for happiness in material prosperity alone.

Our needs, in place of the servants that they should be, have become a turbulent and seditious crowd, a legion of tyrants in miniature. A man enslaved to his needs may best be compared to a bear with a ring in its nose that is led about and made to dance at will. The likeness is not flattering, but you will grant that it is true.

Resist the devil and he will flee from you. Court him, and you will soon have shackles, not on your wrists, but on your soul.

Happiness consists in mastering evil tendencies, not in indulging them, and the gospel of Jesus Christ enables us to master those evil tendencies. I know that as I know that I am looking into your eyes tonight.

Health

A fourth condition of happiness is health. We may be comparatively happy about it. I have seen cheerful, radiant people who have not enjoyed good health, but their joy and radiance result from patient endurance. A kind Providence seems to reward them.

To most of us who must be actively performing our duties good health is essential to success and happiness. And thank heaven obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ contributes to both. It is glorious, glorious, to have the body respond to what the active spirit within would like it to perform. Compliance with the Word of Wisdom, contribute to health and vigor of body and mind.

When Orlando, in "As You Like It," was banished by his unscrupulous brother, his old servant, Adam, who had attended him from babyhood, proffered to go with him, saying, "Let me be your servant: Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty."

Then he gave as a reason, "For in my youth I never did apply hot and rebellious liquors in my blood, nor did not with unbashful forehead woo the means of weakness and debility; therefore, my age is as a lusty winter, frosty, but kindly."

Work

Next to health as a means of giving happiness I think I would name work. That is why Latter-day Saints are so happy. They have so much to do they have not time to think of their troubles, but better than that, they are thinking of others. They are not seeking happiness, but when they give others joy, happiness is their reward.

For example, I have seen young girls who have spent the entire day serving people on Old Folks' Day: seeking the comfort and happiness of somebody else. I remember on one occasion when one of those young ladies came home in the evening she suddenly realized she was weary, threw herself on the cot and said, "My, I am tired, but do you know this has been one of the happiest days of my life." She had found joy in work that gave joy to others.

Learn to like your work. Learn to say "This is my work, my glory, not my doom." God has blessed us with the privilege of working. When he said, "Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow," he gave a blessing. Men and women have so accepted it. Too much leisure is dangerous. Work is a divine gift.

Enjoyment of Nature

Another contributing factor to happiness is to be able to enjoy the gifts of nature. I saw that last evening when we were driven to an eminence from which we beheld the beauty of Hood River Valley—with Mt. Hood in the south and Mt. Adams one hundred miles toward the north. Extending toward the foothills were orchards so heavily laden with pears that the branches of the trees were sagging. Already orchardists are putting props under them to sustain the increasing weight of an abundant crop.

One of the brethren said, "In the springtime when you look over that valley and see the blossoms in pink and white it is an inspiration." Appreciation of the beauty of nature! The poorest man living can enjoy that because God gives all his blessings free. "'Tis heaven alone can be had for the asking."

Everybody can enjoy a glorious sunset. You would have to pay a great sum for a painting by a skilled artist. Only the wealthy can afford it, but almost any evening we can look at a brilliant western sky and each one of us can say, "That's mine."

Too few of us appreciate what this means. Helen Keller, blind, deaf, speechless when she was a young girl up to seven years of age, has become reputedly one of the seven greatest women in the world. This is what she wrote about the glories and beauty of nature.

Recently I asked a friend who had just returned from a long walk in the woods what she had observed. "Oh, nothing in particular," was the reply. How is it possible, I asked myself, to walk for an hour through the woods and see nothing worthy of note? I who cannot see, find hundreds of things to interest me through mere touch. I feel the delicate symmetry of a leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about the smooth skin of a silver birch, or the rough shaggy bark of a pine. In the spring I touch the branches of trees hopefully in search of a bud, the first sign of awakening nature after her winter's sleep. Occasionally, if I am very fortunate, I place my hand gently upon a small tree and feel the happy quiver of a bird in full song. At times my heart cries out with longing to see all these things with physical eyes, but if I can get so much pleasure from mere touch, how much more beauty must be revealed by sight, and I have imagined what I should most like to see if I were granted the use of my eyes even for just three days.

On my first day I should want to see the people whose kindness and companionship have made my life worth living. Now I can only see through my fingertips the outline of a face. I can detect laughter, sorrow and many other obvious emotions. I know my friends from the feel of their faces, but their inner nature, revealed by the subtleties of expression, the quiver of a muscle, or the flutter of a hand I cannot know.

So many people, I fear, grasp only casually the outward features of a face as I can do and let it go at that.

On the first day, could I see with my physical eyes, I should call to me all my dear friends and look long into their faces, imprinting upon my mind the outward evidence of the beauty that is within them.

The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling miracles by which night is transformed into day.

I should behold the magnificent panorama of light with which the sun awakens the sleeping earth. The morning of the third day I should again greet the dawn, anxious to discover new delights, new revelations of beauty. Today, the business life, the city becomes my destination.

First I stand at a busy corner, merely looking at people, trying by sight of them to understand something of their daily lives. I see smiles and I am happy; I see serious determination, and I am proud; I see suffering, and I am compassionate.

I am sure if any of you face the fate of eternal darkness you would use your eyes as never before. Everything you saw would become dear to you. Your eyes would touch and embrace every object that came within your range of vision. Then at last you would really see, and a new world of beauty would open itself to you.

I who am blind and deaf can give a word to those of you who can see: Use your eyes as if tomorrow you would be stricken blind. And hear the music of voices, the song of birds, the mighty strains of an orchestra, as if you would be stricken deaf tomorrow. Touch each object as if tomorrow your sense of touch would fail. Smell the perfume of flowers, taste with relish each morsel as if tomorrow you could never smell and taste again. Glory in all the facts of pleasure and beauty which the world reveals to you. But of all the senses, I am sure that sight is the most delightful.

In Serving Others We Best Serve the Lord

In conclusion, there is one more thing needful for joy to which man is entitled, and it is the greatest of all. It is the service we render mankind.

One writer confirms this thought as follows:

Supposing today were your last day on earth, The last mile of the journey you've trod; After all of your struggles, how much are you worth? How much can you take home to God? Don't count as possessions your silver and gold, Tomorrow you leave these behind; And all that is yours, to have and to hold, Is the service you've rendered mankind.

Though those lines emphasize the value of service they do not tell all the truth. There is something else we can take home to God, in achieving which we find true happiness, and that is character—what you have made of yourself during this mortal existence. Character—it may be weak, it may be strong. You must decide, but whatever you make it during the 20, 30, 50, 70, 80, 100 years that you spend here will be what you take back there. Character and the service you have rendered will determine your position and place in the next world.

The poet Robert Browning has Paracelsus say to his old friend, "Festus, There was a time when I was happy; the secret of life was in that happiness." "When, when was that?" asks Festus, "All I hope that answer will decide." And the old dying philosopher answered, "When but the time I vowed myself to man." Festus murmured: "Great God, thy judgments are inscrutable." Paracelsus continued: "There is an answer to the passionate longings of the heart for fullness, and I knew it, and the answer is this: Live in all things outside yourself by love, and you will have joy. That is the life of God; It ought to be our life. In him it is accomplished and perfect; but in all created things it is a lesson learned slowly and through difficulty."

Let us in life distinguish between the joy that the Prophet had in mind when he said, "Man is that he might have joy," and the pleasure that the world is seeking by indulging in appetites and passions, vainly hoping to find happiness. Happiness springs from within.

"He that would save his life shall lose it, but he that will lose his life for my sake shall find it."
