David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The Gospel—The Source of Salvation

My mind has gone back many years to my first visit to the Emery Stake. I was driven over the same road on which we travelled today in about thirty-five minutes from Price. It took us over a day when the president of the stake, with a fine team of brown horses and a white-top, drove us from Price to Castle Dale. That was my first visit. I remember he had a long neck yoke, the first I had ever seen. I said, "What's the idea?" But I soon found out. It was so the horses could travel out of the beaten path, and keep the wheels out of the wagon rut.

When Paul wrote to the Romans, he said, among other things, "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every man that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

"For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith."

And so with you I say, "We are not ashamed of the gospel of Christ." I am looking upon a segment of the Church of Christ who share the responsibility of preaching this gospel to all the world, for we are part of a world-wide organization. This gospel is not confined to Utah, nor Idaho, nor Wyoming, nor California, nor the United States, nor just to Europe, but it is the power of God to salvation to all who believe, and you and I must share part of the responsibility of declaring it to all the world.

For a few moments I should like to call your attention to what the gospel is and why we have it, what its purpose is. Paul says that it is the power of God unto salvation. Salvation from what? Tell me, you young folks, from what does the world need to be saved?

For a few moments let us consider from what this old world should be saved.

I. From Dominating Animal Instincts.

The world needs to be saved first from the dominating influence of animal instincts, of passions, of appetites. Is it not true, after all, that men generally are pretty close to the animal world? What is the propelling influence of animal life? Self-preservation, the first law of nature!

Animals fight for existence. They will strike down any other animal that tries to take away from them any piece of food that they might have. You see the struggle throughout nature, the hawk chasing the robin, the magpie trying to rob the nest of a little bird. You see it even in the blades of grass—the weeds choking out the profitable grains and flowers, and in life you see man striking down his neighbor, prompted by that same law of nature.

In nations you see the same law in operation when one nation becomes overcrowded and desires to reach out and take possession of a weaker nation, as Mussolini did a few years ago, merely because he was strong enough to crush Ethiopia.

You see it in the communists, reaching out to take possession of the world and to crush what they call capitalism. And, mark my word, underneath the peace talks going on at this very moment, there will be dominant a desire to maintain national supremacy. The world needs saving from the dominance of selfishness, and individuals need saving from that same dominance of appetites and passions.

Homes today that are being broken by suits of divorce have at the base of their trouble the dominance, the enslaving power, if you wish, of individual passions. It may be anger, either the husband or wife flying into fits of rage because of some little insignificant thing instead of controlling his passion. Or it may be the dominance of the animal desire for gratification, causing perhaps unhappiness and misery.

What is your church doing toward remedying such conditions? Well, there are a few little simple rules. You call them simple, but at the base of those little simple principles lies the means of subduing and conquering these animal instincts.

Take, for example, the Word of Wisdom. Basic in that simple though sublime revelation are principles that apply directly to the theme to which I am referring this afternoon.

By indulging in nicotine, strong drinks or anything else that creates an appetite for itself, you are likely to become a slave to appetite. Do you want to be master of yourself, a free man, a free woman, or do you wish to be a slave?

In nature, animals are dominated by the physical desire of indulgence, of which man should be master.

Again consider the marriage covenant. Fundamental in the eternity of the marriage covenant you will find the principle of mastery over your baser instincts. No man who has felt the spirit of the gospel can violate his covenant with impunity. He recognizes as sacred those same ties in his neighbor's household, and he does not violate the sanctity of that household by yielding to any primitive yearnings.

Young men and young women, do you see something glorious in that? There is not a young man and there is not a young woman in this audience who is not looking forward to the building of a happy home. All right then, you choose a mate who is striving to save himself or herself through the power of Christ, the saving power of the gospel, from the dominant passion of animal life.

That is just one glimpse of what Paul had in mind when he said the gospel is the power of God unto salvation. He could say it is the power of God unto happiness, which the Prophet Joseph said is the purpose of our existence here on earth.

In the daily application of conquering animal instincts and passions, remember this:

It is easy enough to be virtuous When nothing tempts you to stray, When without or within no voice of sin Is burning your soul away. But it's only a negative virtue Until it's tried by fire, And the soul that's worth the honor of earth Is the soul that resists desire. By the cynic the sad and the fallen. Who had no strength for the strife The world's highway is cumbered today They made up the item of life. But the virtue that conquers passion The sadness that rides in a smile It is these that are worth the honor of earth And you'll find them but once in a while.

You will all agree, I am sure, that the world needs to be saved from the dominance, the dictatorship of our inward passions.

II. Saved from Ignorance of Human and Divine Relationship

What is the second thing from which the world needs to be saved? It needs to saved from ignorance of its relationship to God. In their lack of knowledge of the existence of Deity, many men agnostically say, "I don't know." Others, and bombastically, say, "There is no God. Life came on earth by chance and developed man through evolutionary operations of ten or fifteen millions or billions of years." Paul, James, Cephas, and John, Joseph Smith and a host of others know and so have testified that we are sons and daughters of our father in heaven. He is our God, and Jesus Christ came to the world to prove that great truth.

From the very beginning he established our relationship with Deity, and we are his sons and daughters. Oh, what that truth means to young people, particularly, who in moments of discouragement wonder what they are going to do and how they are going to live, to be inspired with the idea that they are truly of divine origin. Being of divine heritage, there is no limit to their achievement.

Abraham Lincoln was inspired by that thought when lanky, poor, and motherless, a young boy, he read by the firelight the life of Washington and other books that were believed by him to be honest and honorable.

Joseph Smith, a humble boy, felt a divinity within him. And that is the inspiration that comes to any young man or young woman who senses his or her relation to our Father in heaven.

The Church is established to eradicate from the minds of men and women, in all the world, ignorance of their relationship to this divine Being. Mormonism declares that they are sons and daughters of our Father in heaven.

Admire the goodness of Almighty God. He riches gave, the intellectual strength to few, Nor now commands to be nor rich nor learned, Nor promises reward of peace to these. On all he moral worth bestowed, And moral tribute asks from all, And who that could not pay, Who, born so poor, of intellect so mean as not to know What seemed the best and knowing might not do. And he who acted thus (that is, chose what seemed right) He who acted thus fulfilled the law eternal And its promises reaped in peace. Who sought else, (chose what didn't seem to be right) Who sought else, sought mellow grapes beneath the icy Pole, Sought blooming roses on the cheek of death, Sought substance in a world of fleeting shades.

Are we agreed that the gospel is here to save men from that feeling that they are nothing, that they have come by chance, to teach to them the divinity of the human soul and its eternal nature?

III. Saved From Physical Suffering

The world needs saving from unnecessary hunger and suffering. There is no need of people to be hungry, of little children starving to death in a world of plenty. I say there is no need of it.

For example, in 1921 Brother Hugh J. Cannon and I, while traveling by train from Peiking, China, to Tientsin, saw little children at the stations pleading with the passengers for "baksheesh." Their little arms were just as thin, seemingly, as one of my fingers, their faces drawn and emaciated. You remember in 1921 there was a famine in China. In November of 1920 there appeared in our public press the statement that 40 million Chinese would starve to death.

We had called on the United States minister in Peiking, who said, "No, not forty million, but there will be fifteen million starve to death this year unless other nations cooperatively supply food for these starving people." At that time the nations did cooperate. Japan sent rice, United States shipped wheat, France cooperated and so did England. We saw carloads of wheat at stations, yet these little kiddies going hungry and pleading for a "baksheesh."

Something was lacking. What was it? As the train pulled out to go on to Shanghai we did a little figuring. There were four hundred fifty million people in China, fifteen million hungry, starving. There was food, but not distributed. They lacked organization. We shall eliminate the 50—let us say if 400 million Chinese would observe one little principle, established and practiced in the Church of Jesus Christ, there would be enough food in China itself to have given two meals every day to those fifteen million starving Chinese.

You can figure that out yourselves. Three hundred fifty million going without two meals once a month, seven hundred million meals, give the value of those two meals in fast offerings to the proper source, and let it be distributed, and without France or Japan or the United States they would have had the means there, within themselves, of saving these hungry children from starving.

Ah, but they would have to have had the wards, stakes, bishops, teachers, and the central organization as the Lord has provided in his Church as a part of the gospel. There is a practical demonstration of the power of God unto physical salvation, and it is not just dreaming, because you and I know it can be carried out in practice.

IV. Saved from Moral Impurity

The world needs to be saved from immorality. God has spoken and explained how in truth young men and young women may protect themselves and grow up through their teens into young manhood and womanhood and, unpolluted, transmit to their children a kingly birth, queenly attributes. You who have travelled through the world know what that means, and you in the Church who have knelt at the altar and covenanted to rear a family in purity, know wherein lies the happiness here in this life.

The ideals of the gospel in regard to living in purity through your teens, are fundamental in character building, fundamental in establishing the virility of manhood, the crowning glory of young womanhood, the foundation of happiness in the home, and the source of the perpetuation of the human race. The gospel of Jesus Christ touches the heart life, the very existence, of the individual as an individual, and as a member of the home, and as a citizen in this great republic or in any other nation.

"The power of God unto salvation!" Somebody in the audience might say, as a man said to Beverly Nichols, the English writer, "Before the gospel could bring all this about you would have to change human nature."

Beverly Nichols wrote what I have given before in public, what I think is a good answer to that. You will find it in a book, "The Fool Hath Said."

If you deny the possibility of changing human nature you are saying to Christ by implication, "Go back. We don't want you." You are attempting the impossible.

Well, some brave men have said this, but it was the gray uniforms of the atheists that they were wearing and not the shining robes of the servants of Christ. You can change human nature. No man who has felt in him the Spirit of Christ even for half a minute can deny this truth, the one great truth in a world of little lies.

You do change human nature, your own human nature, if you surrender it to Christ. Human nature can be changed here and now. Human nature has been changed in the past. Human nature must be changed on an enormous scale in the future, unless the world is to be drowned in its own blood. And only Christ can change it.

Twelve men did quite a lot to change the world 100 years ago. Twelve simple men, with only the wind to bear them over the sea, and with only a few pence in their pockets, and a shining faith in their hearts They fell far short of their ideals. Their words were twisted and mocked, and false temples were built over their bones in praise of a Christ they would have rejected, and yet by the light of their inspiration many of the world's loveliest. . . were created, and many of the world's finest minds inspired.

If twelve men did that 100 years ago what might not twelve men do today? For God has now given us the power of whispering across space, of transmitting our thoughts from one end of the earth to the other. What shall we whisper? What shall we think? That is the question.

We will whisper that "the gospel is the power of God unto salvation to all them that believe, to the Jew first and also to the Greek, for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith." We will whisper—not only whisper but proclaim—that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored by the visit of our Father in heaven and his Son Jesus Christ to the Prophet Joseph Smith; that man's spirit is just as eternal as is Christ's, who lived on this earth 2,000 years ago and who came back in this dispensation, a living Being.

That being true of him, it is true of you, my fellow men who hold the priesthood. It is true of you mother, wife, child, and we will whisper it to the world that the gospel of Jesus Christ is established and the power of the priesthood given to represent God on earth, and that the organization of this Church is so complete that these few things to which I have referred this afternoon may be made applicable to all the world.
