David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Transforming Power of Faith in Jesus Christ

For I know that my redeemer liveth, and he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:

And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:

Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me. (Job 19:25, 26, 27)

Such was the heartfelt assurance of Job expressed in humiliation when everything else had been taken from him and even his body utterly wasted in affliction.

If a few more million men in the world could feel that testimony of the reality of our Redeemer selfishness would be less manifest, war among nations would be eradicated, and peace would reign among mankind.

"What think ye of Christ?" was the question Jesus put to a group of Pharisees when they, with scribes and Sadducees sought to entrap or confound the great Teacher by asking him entangling questions. He silenced the Sadducees in their attempt to ensnare him with regard to paying tribute to Caesar. He satisfied the scribes regarding the first and greatest commandment, and now he put to silence the Pharisees regarding their anticipated Christ.

To this congregation, to the Church, and to the world, I repeat this question as being the most vital, the most far-reaching query in this unsettled, distracted world.

Great minds in all ages who have contributed to the betterment of mankind have been inspired by noble ideals.

History is replete with men who, as Wordsworth puts it, "By vision splendid, were on their way attended." There is John Milton, for example, inspired with a desire as a boy of twelve to write a poem that would live for centuries. As a result, the world has "Paradise Lost," and, though blind, the poet as he approached the closing moments of his life, explained: "Still guides the heavenly vision." Sir Walter Scott wrote almost day and night to pay off a debt for which he was not really responsible. George Washington, guided by the desire to build a noble character and to be of service to his country, cried: "I hope I may ever have strength and virtue enough to maintain what I consider to be the most precious of all titles the character of an honest man." Abraham Lincoln's lofty soul, expressing himself:

With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in to bind up the broken wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphans. To do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.

These and others who live to their best, are the men "who realize in daily life their luminous hours and transmute their ideals into conduct and character. These are the soul architects who build their thoughts and deeds into a plan. Who travel forward, not aimlessly, but toward a destination. Who sail not anywhither but toward a port, who steer not by the clouds, but by the fixed stars. High in the scale of manhood these who ceaselessly aspire towards life's Great Exemplar."

But the highest of all ideals are the life and teachings of Jesus of Nazareth, and that man is most truly great who is most Christlike.

What you sincerely in your heart think of Christ will determine what you are, will largely determine what your acts will be. No person can study this divine personality, can accept his teachings, without becoming conscious of an uplifting and refining influence within himself. In fact, every individual may experience the operation of the most potent force that can affect humanity. Electricity lightens labor in the home, imprisons alike on a disc the warbling tones of the mocking bird and the convincing appeal of the orator. By the turn of a switch, it turns night into day. The possibilities of the force resulting from the breaking up of the atom seem to be limitless, either for the destruction or the blessing of life. Other and greater forces are already glimpsed. None, however, is so vital, so contributive to peace and happiness of the human family as the surrendering of our selfish animal-like natures to the life and teachings of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Writes George R. Wendling in "The Man of Galilee:"

Believe it! the most wonderful work in all the world is not to take iron, steel, and brass and make a locomotive; nor is it to take gold and diamonds and cog-wheels and make a watch; nor is it to take canvas and colors and brush, and paint an Angelus; nor yet is it to take pen and parchment and write an Iliad or Hamlet, but an infinitely greater work than all is to take an ignoble, cruel, impure, and dishonest being and transform him into an upright, gentle, noble, and pure man. Here we touch the creative power of the Galilean—and bow before the mystery.

Here we find the crowning glory of all the evidences, attested by millions of intelligent men and women, the fact, mysterious but not illusory, that his very presence is found, is realized, is verified, and that he is as helpful, as vital, and as inspiring now as when the matchless Beautitudes fell upon the ears of a listening multitude two thousand years ago.

Peter, the chief Apostle, is a striking example of this transforming power. He was a humble, reputably a rough, uncultured fisherman to whom Jesus of Nazareth became an inspiration. The vision that bade him say, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God," became the guiding light of his life. Conditions occasionally made him falter, but he regained the lightened pathway. Bigots scoffed at him, religious zealots, political charlatans arrested, imprisoned and shackled him as a dangerous enemy to society, but the heavenly vision lightened the darkened dungeon, burst open prison doors, struck off the fetters that bound his wrists, as well as his wavering soul, and gave him courage and strength to face his accusers with the sublime testimony: He "whom ye crucified, Jesus Christ, is the only name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)

Only a comparatively well-to-do man, making a fairly good living by fishing, of whom the world would never have heard had he not been inspired by a testimony of the divine mission of the Man of Galilee—just a humble fisherman, who, by the light of that inspiration to him and a few others, "Many of the world's loveliest things have been created, many of the world's finest minds inspired."

Another good example is Paul, a contemporary of Peter, whose early life and teachings were entirely different from those of the fisherman, but who, when the vision of the risen Lord pierced his prejudiced mind, was inspired throughout the remainder of his days by one guiding thought expressed on the occasion of his great vision: "Lord what wouldst thou have me do?" Paul, as Peter, had his hours of discouragement. Pride sometimes perturbed him, and conformity to church authority was occasionally difficult. He, too, was mobbed, beaten, and imprisoned, put in stocks in a dungeon, but the heavenly vision of the risen Lord ever guided his footsteps.

Recall also the Prophet Joseph Smith who declared: "I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision: I knew it, and I knew God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation." (Joseph Smith 2:25.)

Through railings, scoffings, mobbings, arrests, imprisonments, persecutions that led to martyrdom, he, as Peter and Paul before him, ever strove to the utmost of his ability to follow the light that had made him a "partaker of the divine nature."

I quote these three outstanding leaders in the realm of religion to show how the assurance of the divine mission of our Lord and Savior not only transformed their personal lives to a greater or lesser degree, but influenced for good the entire world.

Since man's first advent on earth, God has been urging him to rise above the selfish groveling life of the purely animal existence into the higher, more spiritual realm. After several thousand years of struggling, mankind even now but dimly recognizes the fact that the greatest of the world's leaders are those who most nearly approach the teachings of the Man of Galilee. This is psychologically sound, because the thoughts a man harbors determine the realm in which he serves. "Be not deceived," writes Paul to the Galatians, "God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." (Gal. 6:7-8.)

A Great Drama

Today there is being enacted a great world drama, the final act of which we can only dimly surmise. In Korea, one of the bloodiest wars of modern times is raging. Engaged in it are soldiers from South Korea, United States, Great Britain, France, Turkey, Greece, Netherlands, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Thailand, the Philippines, South Africa, and one or two other nations—all enlisted under the United Nations' banner. Political relationships leading up to their fighting as an international army need not concern us this morning, but there is one significant fact most worthy of attention: battling for the same cause are Buddhists, followers of Confucius, Moslems, and Christians. Opposed to them are communists, openly avowed to be anti-Christ. Two hundred twenty-nine thousand casualties are already reported in this conflict! It would almost seem to be the beginning of the great battle of Armageddon. More destructive to the spreading of Christian principles in the minds, particularly of the youth, than battleships, submarines, or even bombs, is the sowing of false ideals by the enemy. Particularly, during the last five years, Communist Russia has gained conquests over the satellites for the time being under her dominion, including China, and now threatening Japan by sowing seeds of mistrust in the body politic. Misrepresentation, false propaganda, innuendoes soon sprout into poisonous weeds, and before long the people find themselves victims of a pollution that has robbed them of their individual liberty and enslaved them to a group of political gangsters.

So it is with evil thoughts that may be permitted insidiously to enter and to find lodgment in the human mind. Thoughts harbored determine destiny.

"My spirit," says the Christ, "will not dwell in unclean tabernacles." The corruption that is in the world through lust, as mentioned in one of Peter's epistles, has its source in thoughts and schemes harbored in the individual mind. A man who takes advantage of his neighbor in a business deal when the opportunity offers, has prepared himself for the occasion by dishonest thinking. Young couples do not lose their chastity, named by the Book of Mormon as "precious above all things" without their having previously in thought justified the act. The husband who coolly turns from a loyal wife and family and seeks illicit relationship elsewhere, perhaps with a disloyal wife of a neighbor, has previously poisoned his soul with immoral ideas. Disgruntled members of society, fault-finders in wards and stakes, do not become such merely because of some offense real or imagined. What they say and do have been preceded by selfish desires or unattained ambition.

I mentioned communism in its war against individual liberty and free enterprise as surreptitiously sowing poisonous seeds within the body politic. It is also from within, morally speaking, that our cities become corrupt; not from outward, open assault on virtue, but from insidious, corrupt actions of trusted individuals. Our government has recently uncovered a gambling ring that covers a twenty billion dollar business in vice. Many large cities in the United States are connected with it and contaminated by it. Too many of these city officials license darkened rooms wherein men and women, and not infrequently teen-age boys and girls, may guzzle beer and whiskey and indulge in other vices sought by persons of low ideals. For the permission and perpetuation of such dens of iniquity in our cities, the public is not entirely free from blame. However, those who are elected to office—commissioners, peace officers, trusted servants of the people—are most directly responsible. Generally speaking, these men are honest in their intentions and actions to enforce the laws and if possible to eradicate, at least to reduce to a minimum, the evils upon which the underworld thrives. One or two, or a half a dozen unprincipled men, however, can frustrate the most earnest efforts of the upright officials. For example, officers informed that minors are permitted to enter a certain `joint" will find when they get to the place that the proprietor has been "tipped off" and seemingly everything is within the law. If and when appreciation of such "tip-offs," and other favors, is expressed in secretive payments of money, those participating in the graft may meet in a room, a club, or in a private residence, ostensibly to play a social game of poker, and under this guise divide their ill-gotten gains. Thus do our cities, as well as individuals, become corrupt from within.

Such exploitation of the poor unfortunates whose thoughts and desires lead them only to gratify their appetites, indulge their passions to exist by deceit, cunning, and crime, are among the corruptions that Peter says "are in the world through lust."

Citizens should never lose sight of the fact, however, that—

There is not vice so great but we can kill And conquer it if we but will,

Christ came to redeem the world from sin. He came with love in his heart for every individual, with redemption and possibility for regeneration for all. By choosing him as our ideal, we create within ourselves a desire to be like him, to have fellowship with him. We perceive life as it should be and as it may be.

The chief Apostle Peter, the indefatigable Paul, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and other true followers of the risen Lord recognized in him the Savior of the individual, for did he not say, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man"—not the sacrificing of the individual for the perpetuation of the socialistic or communistic state.

Members of the Church of Christ are under obligation to make the sinless Son of Man their ideal—the one perfect being who ever walked on earth.

Sublimest Example of Nobility God-like in nature Perfect in his love Our Redeemer Our Savior The immaculate Son of our Eternal Father The Light, the Life, the Way Head of the Church that bears his name Restored in its fullness by the appearance Of God the Father And his Beloved Son To the Prophet Joseph Smith. O Thou great Friend to all sons of men, Who once appeared in humble guise below, Sin to rebuke, to break the captive's chain, And call thy brethren forth from want and woe, We look to thee! thy truth is still the Light Which guides the nations, groping on their way Stumbling and falling in disastrous night, Yet hoping ever for the perfect day. Yes: thou art still the Life, thou art the Way The holiest know; Light, Life, the Way to heaven! And they who dearest hope and deepest pray, Toil by the Light, Life, Way, which thou hast given.

(Theodore Parker)
