David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The World Needs Appreciation of the Principles Enunciated by Jesus Christ

This morning just following the Tabernacle Choir broadcast, I expressed a few words of appreciation to the Tabernacle Choir members. Perhaps nowhere else in the world can you find several hundred singers who devote their time and their means, two or three times a week, to the service that that choral body is rendering. They will not take even their carfare. They have to pay, some of the mothers, for women and girls, to take care of the little babies and children while the mothers go out to render this service. They are radiating their influence throughout the world. To the members of the choir such effort seems somewhat insignificant, but to that little thing surprises the visitors who come to the block.

We should like the world to come and see today what you have done. I wish we could all see just how you have struggled to contribute your share of the money needed to complete this house. The bishop was not the only one to whose eyes tears sprang when he said, "I have seen members sell even their cow, and give all the money toward completion of this building."

I should like to see and know the details of some young girl who gave of her wages and denied herself a new dress or a new hat. A little thing? No, that is the big thing which the world needs. I should like to see the young man, the young deacon, who saved his meager wages and gave to the bishop to contribute to this. I should like to look into the homes of the parents whose boys or girls were on missions, or who are now on missions when this project began. You had to send out some $60 to $75, and besides that, give your contribution to the erection of this building. A little thing—it is an illustration of what the world needs.

Here's a quotation I wrote just before I left home from a book entitled, "Wake Up or Blow Up."

Under the heading he has this word, "America; lift the world, or lose it." This will give you an idea of his theme.

We could conquer the world's heart by serving it as Jesus said we should, but in this all-out attack of help, the church has a very basic responsibility. It must find the right kind of men. The technicians will fail unless they have the type of character that the church at its best produces.

These are the men-men of high honor; men with good habits, integrity, warm hearts, Christ-like, compassionate desires to help; democratic and congenial men who are loving and beloved. Unless the churches will send out such men as missionaries, America cannot fulfill her destiny as a leader in the nations.

The author of "Human Destiny," Pierre Lecomte du Nouy, expresses largely the same thought:

The time has come for nations as well as individuals, to know what they want. If civilized countries want peace, they must understand that the problem must be approached basically. The old scaffolding willed to us by past generations cracks on every side. It cannot be consolidated by makeshifts, by bits of string, by pots of glue and treaties gravely signed by highly dignified gentlemen.

In current life, in his relations with his fellow men, man must use his reason, but he will perpetrate fewer errors if he listens to his heart.

Then he says:

The state should be the servant of the man, protect him in his free, individual expansion and be worthy of him, of the individual. It should not dominate him. The value of a country is the sum of the values of its children. Any government which seeks to substitute its interest to the pursuit of individual development is regressive and threatens human dignity.

Some people may say that we are still far removed from the time when man will be sufficiently evolved to be fully conscious of himself and to be worthy of being treated in any way but as a child. This may be true, but all the more reason to help him to develop into organized society toward this goal, for as long as a state pursues an aim different from that which should be the aim of its members, no real progress is conceivable.

Now that gives the idea of what it is. "As long as there is no collective conscience rendering the nations," that is, the citizens, not the governments, "jointly liable for the engagements taken by their representatives, treaties will constitute a tragic comedy and it is surprising that anyone can still be their dupe. Yet the game continues and the abovementioned gentlemen who take themselves very seriously dictate and sign acts which are supposed to assure the peace of the world. For how long?"

Then he touches a principle already mentioned here today—that individual consciousness, that individual testimony, and with it a willingness to sacrifice, if necessary, for the establishment of the truths of the Gospel among the nations.

Examinations deal with a quantity of facts destined to be forgotten in three months or which are purely technical. Children are trained to behave decently in public, but nobody dreams of making them repeat daily as a prayer; "Every promise is sacred. No one is obliged to give a pledge, but he who breaks his given word is dishonored. He commits an unpardonable crime against his dignity. He betrays; he covers himself with shame; he excludes himself from human society."

If this is not in reality a prayer, it is a creed, a creed which by expressing faith in the dignity of man addresses itself beyond him to God from whom we have received it.

And then he makes an appeal for man, the individual man, to bring himself in harmony with the ideals enunciated by Christ.

Mankind has tried everything except Christianity. The world has tried hatred, impurity, graft, self-interest and has been brought to the brink of perdition. It is curious that we must stand up in the Twentieth Century and plead with people who bear his name that Jesus Christ was not a foolish ruler, a visionary leader, that his word is the illuminating word, that his way is the living way, that it is only safe to trust and follow him.

The Church must repent of her lukewarmness and rebuke with prophetic wrath the selfishness of men and break her cowardly silence and say to the world, "We've let you run affairs after selfish pagan methods until you have come to the brink of ruin. Unless you Christianize your industrial system, it cannot last. Unless you Christianize your institutions, they cannot endure.

Better foundations can no man lay than that which is laid by Jesus Christ. Too long have we imagined that the principles of Christ were for some other world. We have put the kingdom he came to establish beyond the stars, but this was not the purpose of his mission. This is not the meaning of his gospel. His laws are to be followed in the world in which we live, now and here, in street and market and factory. It will only be through obedience to moral law, the Sermon on the Mount and the Golden Rule, and whole-hearted response to the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man and the suffering love of Jesus Christ that there can ever be frictionless society in our world.

"Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God," was one of the messages of the Savior. He had that in mind undoubtedly when he said to those two disciples, in answer to their question, "Master where abidest thou?" "Come and see."

You, brethren and sisters, did not think when you were making those contributions to this building, that you were illustrating, or making practical in your lives, the very principles, for which these men, worried about the future of this world, are pleading. When that first writer, the author of "Wake Up or Blow Up," makes his appeal for missionaries to go out, he did not have in mind missionaries who would go out and pay their own expenses, but you know that is what this Church is doing now.

Of course you know, sending them out to all parts of the world without compensation, wherever we are admitted, preaching the restoration of the Gospel to Joseph Smith in this day, each one contributing his time and each one carrying the responsibility to be honorable, to possess integrity, to radiate a sincerity which will go into the hearts of others, and lead the honest in heart to see the truth of his message.

"Come and see," we say to the world, and though we make mistakes and though we are frail and not accomplishing all that we have in mind, here in this little group of a million people you will find the application of the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in daily routine and activity.

The success of that work depends upon you, upon me. The Lord always speaks to the individual, not to somebody else but to you. It is necessary for each individual to sense his relationship as a son or her relationship as a daughter of our Father in heaven. You are not just a cog in the wheel of the state. To be such I think is the greatest danger in the world today, and I find some in our Church who rather favor that.

They think the state is our protector. It isn't. The state as a servant, is here to protect you in your work, on your farm and in your business, and to see that justice is administered, and you have a right to that protection.

The state has not anything that you do not give it.

The government has no means but that which you give it, and we give it to the government so that it will protect each individual in his right. That is a fundamental principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Brother Lee emphasized the value of the individual when he referred to the strength of an individual testimony. You would not do what you are doing if you did not feel that this Church belongs to you. It is your Church. It does not belong to the president nor to his counselors nor to the Twelve.

That individual testimony is the strength of Zion, the priesthood and each man who holds that priesthood knowing of the dignity, knowing of the revelation and divine announcement that Jesus Christ has established this Church for the good of the individual.

You who have completed this Church edifice say in substance to each child, "Come and see. Come and learn the best way to live." And we should like all the world to know that in this house the fundamental principles of the Lord Jesus Christ will be taught.

Now I have in my mind not just faith, repentance and baptism. Our children have absorbed those principles, not only through teaching but more principally through the actual performance of these ordinances. But I do have in mind some of the following:

First, respect for parents. That is a fundamental principle of the Gospel. We should like boys and girls to understand from teachers who instruct them that one of the first duties of children is to honor their parents. It is a source of deep sorrow when a girl will challenge the advice of parents and marry contrary to their advice. It makes life tragically sorrowful when a father will cry and say, "What can I do?" as he realizes that his daughter is defiantly going to marry a rake. "Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be long upon the earth which the Lord thy God giveth thee." Respect for parents is a fundamental principle, and parents, it is your duty to sit down and talk with the children before they become rebellious. Win their confidence and they will not defy you.

Another principle which will be taught here in this building is reverence. That is a wonderful principle, too. It is a source of refinement. One of the brethren referred to the necessity of restraint on the part of the children from marking the walls or breaking windows. This is the house of God. Any irreverent feeling that would prompt such desecration is contrary to the teachings of Jesus.

Why, when he saw those people in the temple, changing their money for the convenience of the Jews who came from other nations, when he heard the bleating of the sheep, the cooing of the doves that were brought there for the convenience of those who were going to offer sacrifices, he felt that his house, his Father's house, was desecrated. His whole being rebelled against it.

Yes, it was convenient for the foreigners who came to offer sacrifices, but the bleating of the sheep, lowing of the cattle, cooing of the doves should be out somewhere else and not in the house of God. The money changers were a convenience for those who came with foreign change, but their money should be changed not in the house of God but outside. And so our business dealings, ought not to be brought in here, nor our jealousies, nor our scheming. This is the house of God and should be revered as such.

George Washington fought for the liberties which we enjoy. He was a reverent man and was wounded to his heart when he heard that some of his soldiers were taking the name of God in vain. And he wrote a letter condemning such a practice. Soldiers should be above it. What an ideal:—to have an army praying to God and refraining from taking his name in vain! Come and learn that principle. Come and see, for Christ is here teaching just that principle through the Gospel which he has given to us.

We learn not only reverence, but also the principle of self-control. It is one of the sources of sorrow to find that so many couples wreck their married life on the shoals of divorce, and I find as I read the applications for cancellation of sealings and the reasons given, that very often one is because the husband cannot control himself. Sometimes it is the wife, but very seldom. Principally it is the men who try to dominate or who mistreat their wives who have promised to live in respect and serve throughout time and eternity. If the little principle of self-control could be practiced in the home, there would be fewer heartbreaks, and disrupted homes. The Word of Wisdom is given not only for the benefit of the physical body but it is also given that men may learn in little things to control their appetites. If they can control their appetites, then they have strength to control their tempers. If they control their tempers, they can control their tongues which lash out and leave wounds that sometimes take years and probably centuries to heal. These are practical? Why, they are part of life itself. "Come and see" and learn what the ideals are that will be taught and promulgated in these classrooms, yes, and in the recreation hall and particularly here in the chapel.

Not only self-control, but we shall learn here that the value, the strength of each individual must come from within, not from what parents say, not from what the bishop says, the president of the stake or the General Authorities. Their words may awaken a thought in the mind, arouse a determination, but that determination and that thought must come from each individual's soul. You decide which course you are going to take and the Lord will judge you accordingly.

Nae treasures, nor pleasures, Could make us happy lang; The heart aye's the part aye That makes us right or wrang.

So every penny, every dollar, every tens of dollars or hundreds or thousands of dollars that you donate here presents to the world, an illustration of practical Christianity. It is not just saying that you love the Lord but it is doing. It was not easy, I know, to make the contribution that you have, but you will be rewarded manyfold for having done it because you lost yourself for the good of others, for the cause of Christ.

"Not everyone that saith to me, `Lord, Lord,' shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven."

With all my heart I pray God to bless you for the good you have done for yourselves but more because of the good you have done to the world. Two thousand and more other wards and branches are demonstrating to the world just what practical Christianity is. The Church is growing. Its radiation is entering the hearts of thousands, millions perhaps from whom we never hear, but you are doing the work. You are missionaries.

Yes, the world is in a critical position and selfishness is at the bottom of it, and greed and hatred, but the leaven is working. Eyes are being turned to the Church of Jesus Christ, established by him and he is its head. God preserve the Church. God bless his servants who hold the priesthood. Protect our missionaries who are out in the field, teaching the fatherhood of God, the brotherhood of man, but more than that the restoration of the Gospel, and the reality of our Father and the reality of his Beloved Son.

God bless our soldier boys. They, too, are missionaries. A few of them slip, but the reports that come from them from different parts of the world show that most of them are true to their ideals. That is what counts. Christianity applied in the foxhole, on the battleground, among the generals and among those who are flying in the air.

We think of them tonight and we think of them when we kneel to pray.

May the day soon come when the influence of the Church will be felt even behind the iron curtain; for this gospel must be preached to all the world, to every nation, kindred, tongue and people.
