David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Anniversary of Joseph Smith's Birth

Fellow members of the two Twenty-Seventh Wards, I esteem it a great privilege to meet with you in worship on this 146th anniversary of the birth of the Prophet, and the Sunday nearest to Christmas. This is an eventful occasion, and I pray that the spirit of the season will abide with us tonight while I try to give a message appropriate to these two great events.

I have chosen a text that will take our minds to a scene preceding the birth of the Savior. You will find it in the second chapter of Luke:

And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David:)

To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife. . .

And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered.

And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn.

Such is a brief account of a most significant event in the world's history. Those persons travelled with many, many others, bound to their native city to be taxed in accordance with the decree as mentioned in the paragraphs preceding what I have read.

Undoubtedly, they were weary. They had walked, Mary resting as best she could, and she could ride on the little donkey that carried their belongings. A few hours before that they had rested at the well, now known as Mary's Well. Then they had had several miles trudging still. Others had preceded them because they could travel with more speed.

And so it must have been early in the evening at least, and probably late in the evening. Darkness had set in when Joseph and Mary applied to the inn, and were told by the registrar, "There is no place."

You mothers can picture this more earnestly, and securely, more impressively, than anybody else. Undoubtedly, Mary had visions of an early birth. Seemingly she had not come prepared for the events that took place that night and the next day. That is why the babe was wrapped in swaddling clothes.

Imagine how she felt, and how Joseph, in sympathy with his wife, felt, when they were told, "There is no place in the inn," then stepping out in that darkness, and going to seek a place down in the stable, the humblest spot in the entire town. Others had preceded them there, and had already housed their animals. Some people were sleeping in the loft, undoubtedly, where travelers who could not afford to go to the inn found lodging.

My theme tonight can probably be best understood, or introduced, by a man by the name of Stetler, an educator, philosopher, who imagined that he was there that night, and this is what he says:

The city was crowded with strangers. I hurried to the little inn to find it jammed with folks trying to get lodging for the night. The answer came again and again from the innkeeper, "No room in the inn." Being a friend of the innkeeper, I had no trouble in getting lodging for the night.

Soon I observed a young man and his wife approach the desk and ask for a room. "Sorry, sir, but there is no more room in the inn," said the keeper sternly. "But I must have a place where my wife can rest," pleaded the young man, and he leaned over and whispered something to the innkeeper.

"The only thing I can suggest," replied the keeper curtly, "is the stable. There you will find plenty of straw. Perhaps you can keep warm," and with that he returned to his many wealthy and distinguished guests.

Soon I retired for the night, but was awakened by the most beautiful singing I had ever heard. It seemed to be coming from a nearby hillside. The melody was not familiar to me, and while I could not catch all the words, the message wafted over the air seemed to be, "On earth, peace, good-will to men."

Shepherds coming in the next morning from the hillside related a strange story. There had been an angel chorus, and an angel of the Lord appeared, and spoke to them, saying, "For unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Savior. Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger."

The shepherds had hastened to Bethlehem to see this miracle. There was a great stir around the inn when it was learned that during the night a child had been born to the young woman, who, with her husband, had gone to the stable for shelter. I said to myself, "Why didn't I give up my room? No room for the Savior! Great God, what an opportunity I have missed!" You say to me, "Your imagination is running riot."

Well, I wonder how often there is no room for God in your life and mine in this day and age. Somehow it seems the cry of the innkeeper is still true. "There is no room in the inn."

A few years ago an incident happened in Edinburgh in the winter of 1909, when no less a personage than the prime minister of Great Britain delivered a lecture in the McCune Hall of the University of Edinburgh on the subject, "The moral values which unite the nations."

The gentleman presented in an interesting manner the fundamental ties that unite the different nations of the world—common knowledge, common commercial interests, the intercourse of diplomatic relationship, and the bonds of human friendship.

The audience greeted his masterful address with a great outburst of applause. As the presiding officer arose, and was about to express his appreciation, and that of the audience, a Japanese student who was doing graduate work at the University, stood up and leaning over the balcony, said, "But Mr. Balfour, what about Jesus Christ?"

Mr. Robin L. Sphere, to whom Professor Lang related this incident, writes that one could have heard a pin drop in the hall. Everyone felt at once the justice of the rebuke. The leading statesman of the greatest Christian empire in the world had been dealing with the different ties that are to unite mankind, and had omitted the one fundamental and essential bond, and every one felt, too, the dramatic element in the situation that the reminder of his forgetfulness had come from a Japanese student from a far-away non-Christian land.

A few years ago, and this you will remember, representatives from the leading nations of the world met in San Francisco to draw up a Constitution that would unite the nations of the world. The United Nations Charter was about finished when one of the small nations, I think from South America, suggested that they insert the name of God and appeal to him for guidance.

The suggestion was voted down. There was no room in the United Nations Charter for the Christ, for his name, or the name of his Father.

I am glad that the statesman who spoke about it did invoke the guidance of divinity, the divine guidance of the Son of Man, but I have always regretted that there was no room in the charter for his name.

Too often there is no room in our homes for the Savior, or for things that point to religion. We sometimes omit from those homes the prayer to Christ, and the prayer for divine guidance. Sometimes there is no room there because of intemperate parents, or profane parents. This will illustrate what I mean. It is written by William H. Davis, and titled, "The Little Ones."

The little ones are put to bed And both are laughing, lying down, Their father and their mother, too Are gone on Christmas Eve to town. "O Santa Claus will bring a horse Gee up," cried Will with glee. "If I am good I'll have a doll From old Santa," laughed Emily. The little ones are gone to sleep; Their father and their mother now Are coming home with many more. They are drunk and make a merry row. The little ones on Christmas morn jump up Like skylarks from the grass, And then they stand as still as stone And just as cold as stones, alas. No horse, no doll beside their bed, No sadder little ones could be "We did some wrong," said little Will, "We must have sinned," sobbed Emily.

No room in that home for him who said, "Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not for of such is the kingdom of heaven."

Campbell Morgan gives this short account of his experience when he and his bride first entered their new house.

My father came into my house soon after I was married, and looked around. We showed him into every room, and then in his rough way he said to me, "Yes, it is very nice, but nobody will know, walking through here, whether you belong to God or to the devil."

I went through and looked at the house again, and I thought, "He is quite right."

No room in that house, so far as furniture or books are concerned, for the Master. Often there is no room in our hearts for the teachings of the Babe of Bethlehem. We lack self-control. We fly in anger at a loved one who chances to make a mistake or who irritates us. We speak in anger, and probably strike, one of our little ones. We indulge in those things which Christ has advised us to avoid. It really means—all such things—that we have no room—there is no room in the inn. What else is it? You cannot explain it any other way, can you?

Recently, the United Nations Committee sensed the absence of something from that charter, and again the resolution was introduced that they offer prayer and appeal to God. I'm going to try to find out some day who gave that. I have never known.

So they compromised, sensing the need of divine help, but not wishing to offend atheistic nations, to rise and bow their heads in silence so that each one may pray as he wishes. I think that is a long way down the line of cowardice from the time when Benjamin Franklin and the other framers of the Constitution of the United States felt the same need of divine guidance. They too started out without prayer, but they seemed not to make any progress until finally that old gentleman, the oldest, I believe, in the committee, arose and said, "The longer I live the more convincing proofs I see that God governs in the affairs of men, and if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his aid, is it possible that an empire can rise without his aid?" and they asked a man each morning to offer prayer, and sincerely offered, with the result that we have the Constitution of the Unied States, giving to each individual liberty of conscience to worship God as he wished, the right to possess his own property, to speak his own mind, to publish what he would, do what he wishes so long as he does not trespass upon the rights of another, or deprive his neighbor of those same privileges.

As those two nations felt the need of God and his guidance, so do individuals. Sometimes, and many times, there comes into a man's heart or a woman's soul a sense of dependence upon some great power. Perhaps you felt it in school, you sincere students, when you realized that graduation meant so much to you, when you failed you could not stand the humiliation. I hope you sensed that keenly enough to go down on your knees, and if you did not, that you offered a silent prayer in your soul for God's guidance; that you did not say to him, "There is no room in my heart for you. I need you in my heart."

If you young people would sense that, you would find less sorrow because of yielding to temptation. There would be fewer parents with broken hearts because you yielded to that temptation. Strength comes from within, but that soul within is strengthened by a realization of dependence upon God.

Now is the time as never before for the so-called civilized nations, struggling for peace, to answer the question, "What of Christ?" If men ever reject the fact that Christ is our Lord and Savior, that his mission is to redeem man from sordid, animal life, of selfish indulgence in sin, and lift him into a realm shown only by him, of self-sacrifice, generosity, beauty and love; if the majority of nations fail to recognize Christ as the only name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved; if doubting men reject the possibility of obtaining that spiritual assurance of Christ's divinity disclosed by Thomas when he reverently exclaimed, "My Lord and my God;" if men's acts be in accordance with rejections rather than in accordance with their acceptance of him as the one divine, then this world will continue to be torn by contention, made miserable by hideous warfare, and ignominiously wrecked on the shoals of materialism, selfish indulgence, and disbelief.

Without Jesus of Nazareth, the Crucified Christ, the Risen Lord, the world cannot survive.

Of all festivals throughout Christendom, Christmas comes most nearly being universally accepted and celebrated. There is something intrinsic about it that appeals to everyone from the stripling youth and the little toddling infant to the old philosopher walking in the sunset of life. It is the one season of the year when selfishness is subordinated, when the desire to give exceeds the desire to get—kindness, forgiveness, forbearance, love. These are among the simple virtues which make this holiday season so delightful.

The true spirit of Christmas is the spirit of the Christ, radiating through the centuries down the heavenly announcement of the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem comes the message, "Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good-will toward men."

The gift of a loving Father of his beloved Son who lived the one perfect life should ever be the central theme of Christmas celebrations. Let us cherish the hope that some day the friendly, unselfish, generous, mutually helpful spirit that characterizes the Christian tie will dominate human society.

When he came as a lowly babe, there was no room in the inn. Today every heart in every home should bid him welcome. If such were true, unselfishness, jealousy, enmity, and all things which bring unhappiness would be replaced by kindness, willing service and good-will.

As we do away with strife, suspicion, for a day, so let us do away with them continually. Christ came to give us peace, and life eternal. Let us accept his gift with gratitude, and show our thankfulness by following the pathway that leads to peace. The responsibility of establishing peace in the world rests not alone upon a union of nations. It rests upon every individual, upon every home, upon every hamlet and city. The source of happiness is within one's soul. So springs faith in Jesus Christ as our Lord and Savior.

First then, let each individual admit into his own heart the true spirit of Christmas. Then let it radiate throughout his home. A thousand such homes would make a truly Christian city, and a thousand such cities, a truly Christian nation.

One hundred and forty-six years ago today another little babe was born—December 23, 1805. He grew to young manhood as other obscure little boys grew, but his soul became filled with the longing to know just which church is right, and that longing led him into prayer, and in answer to that prayer, the door was opened to admit the living Christ. It was through that prayer that the reality of Jesus Christ was revealed again to the world.

I say "the reality" because that vision gave to that young boy a picture of the personality of Deity, and between you and me there is no other way, there is no higher concept, that can come to the human mind in worship of those divine beings. You try it.

Men speak of the force that permeates all nature, and they call it God. They know it exists. There is not an intelligent person, I think, living, who does not recognize the existgent person, I think, living, who does not recognize the existence of a power or force beyond the comprehension of thing that man has. They call it God, but can you worship it? Can you invite that power into your homes, and say to your child, worship that power? I cannot. Perhaps my mind is not sufficiently great to comprehend it.

I recognize that force of electricity. I recognize the presence of a force, a ray, that came through a machine today, and I said to the doctor, "I know that thing exists, but you cannot see it."

"No, but we know it is there," he said.

"So it is," I replied, "with everything great in the world, with the greatest things in the world, including the Holy Spirit. You can feel it. You can sense it, but you cannot see it."

"Yes," he said, "and now we have the atomic bomb. No man has seen it."

All right, we have all these forces. We know they exist, but I cannot kneel down and pray to any one of them. Can you? When in your distress you ask God to come to you, give you power, are you thinking of a force? I will ask any man. But you personalize that, and see personality in Deity in God, no matter how you picture him, if you personalize Jesus Christ, who is in the image of God, you have that which ties your soul to his, and you feel a nearness which you cannot feel any other way.

That is the great message that Joseph Smith gave when he opened the door and let the Christ in. Are we going to shut him out of our lives, through the indulgence of the animal things that are practiced? You can find pleasure in so doing. There is pleasure in any animal indulgence which you wish to participate in, but it is groveling, it is unsatisfying. If we subdue those things and rise to the spirit life of Christ, we find true joy.

That life is expressed in a wonderful sentence, which he later said to the Pharisees and others, is the summary of all the commandments: "Love the Lord thy God with all thy might, mind and strength, and thy neighbor as thyself."

You say you cannot do it? Try it. We can approach it. We are approaching it this Christmas time. True, we are giving many times just because somebody else is going to give something to us, and we give sometimes for fear somebody will give it to us, and we will be embarrassed, but back of it all is the spirit of the Christmas, and if we can do that for a week during Christmas, we can do it two weeks after, and three weeks, and a month.

The Gospel is just a simple presentation of ideals by which we can rise one by one up to the spirituality of the Christ, and his life was devoid of everything which man usually possesses. He did not have a home which he called his own. The foxes had holes, the birds of the air had nests, but the Son of Man had nowhere to lay his head, and yet he rose to the heights and became after death, conqueror of death, creator of the world. No other being in the world has ever exerted such an influence, and of him one man said truly,

"A field without flowers, an alphabet without vowels, a continent without rivers, a night without stars, and a sky without a sun—these would not be half so sad as a world without a Bible, or a soul without Christ."

To apply his teachings in three words we should have in our hearts this Christmas Day and always three words, each commencing with "S". First, sincere faith in Christ the Lord.

Second, self-mastery. Do not under-estimate it. Do not brag about your temper. Do not justify an evil act, or a quick or an injurious act because you say you cannot control your anger. That is an admission of weakness. Do not say that you were tempted, and you could not resist it. That is worse than an admission of weakness. That says that you thought about that act before you committed it. Self-mastery, as Christ gave the lesson on the Mount of Temptation. He passed through every experience which you or I will pass through, temptation of the appetite, illustrative of the physical appetites and passions; temptation of pride—cast yourself down—a challenge; and the temptation of wealth, power. "All these will I give you if you will only fall down and worship," but he rose above them all and said, "Get thee hence, Satan, for it is written, `Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.'" We too pass through those temptations in our own way. That is why I say the second great point is to hold to that self-mastery.

The third is service—service to our fellow men. Are you asked to do something in the Church? Do not refuse it. It is an opportunity in an organized way to render help to somebody in need. Are you asked to lead the choir? To sing in the choir? To go ward teaching? Do not refuse it. No matter how humble it seems to you. There is no position in the Church that is too humble for the greatest man to serve in.

"And inasmuch as ye do it unto the least of these, my servants, ye have done it unto me."

I like to call attention of the young people to the fact that Joseph Smith exemplified those high teachings in his life. People like to attack the Prophet. They like to say he was guilty of this and guilty of that. Men arrested him time after time, and finally thrust him into prison because of what they thought were ignominious things. But they don't know him, and they do not read his life.

Take the last day of his life, if you wish to see exemplified the spirit of the Christ—the last few weeks of his life. He felt impressed to lead the people out here in the west, and he started. He crossed the Mississippi River with Hyrum, his devoted brother, and with other great men, but there were enemies within the flock at Nauvoo—jealous men, men with hate in their hearts, and some of them influenced Emma, and she sent word with Porter Rockwell that "they are saying around here that you are a false shepherd fleeing from the flock."

Joseph turned again to Nauvoo, saying to Hyrum, "I'll stay. You go on."

Hyrum said, "No, I'll go back with you."

And Joseph returned with this great feeling in his heart: "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of no value to me."

There is the Spirit of the Christ. A man 35 or 36 years of age has risen to high rounds on the ladder of spirituality when he can say that just out of the goodness of his heart, a natural spontaneous feeling which animates his life. And that was exemplified in the prison, and I would like to conclude with this thought, for it brings in both the greatness of the Prophet, and the reward of a righteous life by the Savior.

Joseph Smith, John Taylor, Hyrum, and Willard Richards were incarcerated. Dan Jones had left with a prophecy on his head which was afterwards fulfilled. Willard Richards had said, in answer to a question of the prophet, "Would you like to go away?"

He said, "Joseph, you did not ask me to go with you, or to come to Nauvoo. You did not ask me to cross the Mississippi River with you. You did not ask me to come here to Carthage, and I am not going away. But I will tell you what I will do. If they arrest you to take your life, I will die for you instead." And Willard Richards was a great man. You would not find a man like that devoted to another who was not just as noble as he himself, and nobler.

In that environment, Joseph asked that they sing "A Poor, Wayfaring Man of Grief," by Montgomery. Have you ever studied that carefully? It is not sung very often, but you remember, it is—

A poor wayfaring man of grief Hath often passed me on the way Who sued so humbly for relief That I could never answer "Nay." I had not power to ask his name, Whereto he went or whence he came Yet there was something in his eye That won my love, I knew not why. Then I shared with him my crust And enjoyed manna. I dipped And gave him the cup to quench his thirst I drank, but he returned to me And never thirsted more. I found him in prison The tide of lying tongues I stemmed And honored him mid shame and scorn Found him by the wayside, stripped, wounded Nigh to death I revived his spirits, and supplied Wine, oil, refreshment—he was healed; I had my self a wound concealed, But from that hour forgot the smart, And peace bound up my broken heart. Then he asked if I for him would die My flesh was weak, my blood ran chill But the free spirit cried, "I will." Then in a moment to my view The stranger started from disguise The tokens in his hands I knew The Savior stood before mine eyes. He spoke, and my poor name he named. "Of me thou hast not been ashamed. These deeds shall thy memorial be Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

It is through those deeds that we let the Christ enter the inn. May our doors and our hearts always be open to him.
