David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Dedicatory Services for the Monument

Monuments are links that unite one generation with another. We assemble here today to unveil and dedicate one of the great monuments of the world. In some respects it is most singular and outstanding. It is a monument designated by a sentence. In our country we have the Washington Monument, the Lincoln Monument, the Thomas Jefferson Monument, the Brigham Young Monument and others, to individuals. This monument is designated as "This is the Place" Monument. Every sentence, every phrase fills two purposes. It denotes a certain thing. It also connotes, sometimes, many things. Abraham Lincoln, for example, denotes a long, tall, angular individual, but it connotes the preservation of the Union and other historical features that are sacred to every true citizen of the United States. I think it would be interesting for a few moments to try to contemplate what "This is the Place" connotes.

A hundred years ago yesterday the great leader, Brigham Young, looked over this Valley and used that famous phrase: "This is the right place. Drive on." What did he have in his mind when he said: "This is the place?" By reading the reports of his sermons we find, first, that he had in mind the prophetic utterance of the man whom he loved, the Prophet Joseph, who said the Saints would go to the West, build cities, and become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains.

Secondly, when that great leader uttered the sentence, "This is the Place," he had in mind that here they would find a place of refuge and peace.

Third, he had in mind that from this center there would radiate to all the world a message of truth insofar as it would be possible for that little band and those who followed them to declare that truth to the world. Perhaps back of it was to establish brotherhood, peace, and above all, faith in God our Father.

And fourth, he had in mind in this place we shall establish industry, worship, education and mutual service.

On one occasion soon after they entered the Valley he said to that little group: "First build your fort and protect yourselves from degradations. As soon as you have built your log house," and I quote, "let a sufficient number of rooms be appropriated for schools, furnished by the best teachers, not furnished by the best furniture, upholstered—furnished by the best teachers, and give every child among you an opportunity of continuing his education anew and see that he attends to it. That individual who has an opportunity to educate his children and does not, is not worthy to have children. Teach your children the principles of the kingdom that they may grow in righteousness."

These are some of the thoughts connoted in the mind of Brigham Young when a century ago he said, "This is the Place."

The Centennial Commission, with all associated, have tried to commemorate these ideals in the celebration that has been carried on now since January 1, 1947. They commemorate first the building of cities and these common wealths, and to that end the program has been carried forward to every hamlet and county in this state. They have tried to commemorate the schools in education, in music, art, drama, and tragedy, physical prowess as it is exhibited in the highest and best in sports. They commemorate too the ideals of the pioneers in courtesy, service to one another and to visitors and strangers.

In conclusion, as we look upon this place and monument, I will say in the words of one of our outside friends:

"`This is the place in all the West' Exclaims the traveled stranger guest, 'Where Brigham and his Mormon band First built in Utah's wonderland. "`And so' twill be year after year They will criticize or praise or cheer When we have long since quit the race Will still be heard, "This is the place."'"
