David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Missions and Missionaries of the Church

Said the Savior to his Apostles:

Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. (Matt. 28:19-20.)

Nearly every member of the Church understands that there are two great ecclesiastical divisions in the Church of Jesus Christ: one made up of the organized stakes and wards; the other, of the missionary work.

It is of this second division I wish to speak this morning.

I think many of us fail to realize the value and potent possibilities of this great branch of Church activity.

Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me! (D&C 18:10, 15-16.)

The text I have just quoted, "go ye unto all the world" is really the missionary injunction given by the risen Christ to his apostles. In effect he says:

Consider this work unfinished until all nations shall have accepted the gospel and shall have enlisted themselves as my disciples.

Now, that command was not given to men indiscriminately; for even to the Twelve to whom he addressed that commission he gave later a formal assignment and blessing saying:

. . . as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.

And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. (John 20:21, 22.)

With the same direct commission from the risen Lord who with the Father appeared in person in the beginning of the nineteenth century, the proclamation of the gospel is being made by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to "every nation, kindred, tongue and people" as fast as means and personnel can carry it forward.

The missionaries, generally, are young men and women, ranging in age from twenty to thirty years, with a sprinkling among them of more experienced men and women.

It is well to say here that the direct responsibility of preaching the gospel rests upon the priesthood of the Church—not upon the women, though the efficiency of the latter in cottage meetings, in Primaries, and Sunday Schools, and in other phases of missionary work is of the highest order, and their willingness, even eagerness, to labor is not excelled by that of the young men.

Who are these youths chosen to represent the Church? They, too, as their mission presidents, come from the rank and file. They are farmers, artisans, factory workers, bank clerks, secretaries in business firms, and other vocations. Some who are married leave their wives and their children who help to support them in their work. All of them look forward to the time after their return when they, with congenial loving companions, may build happy homes.

As already stated, each pays his or her own expenses, in most cases, of course, with the assistance of parents. True Christianity is love in action. There is no better way to manifest love for God than to show an unselfish love for your fellow men. This is the spirit of missionary work. Our hearts respond to the cry of the poet:

O brother man! fold to thy heart thy brother. Where pity dwells, the peace of God is there; To worship rightly is to love each other, Each smile a hymn, each kindly deed a prayer. ("Worship"—John Greenleaf Whittier)

These men go out in the spirit of love, seeking nothing from any nation to which they are sent: no personal acclaim, no monetary acquisition. Two or three years ago, many of these missionaries were just out of the army. Not a few had saved their government allowance to pay their expenses in the mission field if and when they should be called.

In this fact we get a glimpse of the helpful influence of the missionary system upon the youth. Every deacon, teacher, and priest, every elder in the Church understands that to be worthy to be a representative of the Church of Christ, he must be temperate in his habits and morally clean. He is taught that there is no double standard of chastity, that every young man, as well as every young woman, is to keep himself free from sexual impurity.

I once read one of the most impressive letters of a mother to a son that I think has ever been written. It contained only three words, except the signature. Those words were: "Quinn, keep clean," and was signed, "Lovingly, Mother."

These young men are instructed that they go out as representatives of the Church, and that a representative of any organization—economic or religious—must possess at least one outstanding quality, and that is: trustworthiness. He was right who said, "To be trusted is a greater compliment than to be loved." And whom do these missionaries represent? First, they represent their parents, carrying out the responsibility of keeping their good name unsullied. Second, they represent the Church, specifically the ward in which they live. And third, they represent the Lord Jesus Christ, whose servants they are.

These ambassadors, for such they are, represent these three groups and carry in that representation one of the greatest responsibilities of their lives.

Now, what is the outstanding message that they have to give to Christian, as well as un-Christian countries? There must surely be something distinctive to justify their presence in all parts of the world.

First, their message is that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the redeemer and Savior of mankind. To these missionaries—"Jesus is not a legendary figure in history," to paraphrase a question asked by Hall Caine to the Christian world,

. . . he is not merely a saint to be painted in the stained glass of church windows, a sort of sacred fairy not to be approached and hardly to be mentioned by name. But he is still what he was in the flesh, a reality, a man of like passions with ourselves, a guide, a counselor, a comforter, a great voice calling to us to live nobly, to die bravely, and to keep up our courage to the last.

These missionaries declare with Peter of old:

. . . there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:12.)

The second distinctive message is this: Every missionary should clearly understand, and so declare in unmistakable words, the relation of this Church to other Christian organizations—that it is neither an outgrowth nor a division of any of them. True, the Church is generally classed with the Protestants; but Protestantism began with the great dissenters—Martin Luther, Philip Melanchthon, Ulrich Zwingli, John Knox, and others. These great reformers denounced corrupt practices in the Roman Church, particularly the selling of indulgences wherein delinquents could make satisfaction by money contributions, a practice carried on under one pretext and another until it became a regular financial expedient for increasing papal revenue.

It was extended even to soul in purgatory.

The great men whom I have named rebelled against this evil and others, and organized churches in protest.

Accordingly, when the second Diet of Spires in 1529 passed a resolution

. . . disallowing further religious innovations in the Lutheran states, whilst prohibiting the profession of the Zwinglian and Anabaptist forms of the reformed faith, the Lutheran minoriy protested, and this protestation was signed by fourteen cities as well as by the elector of Saxony, the landgrave of Hesse and four other provinces. Hence the name Protestant as a designation of the evangelical party.

Protestantism, under many different names, spread over Europe and later among the American colonies, and freedom to worship as one sincerely wished became more and more the proscribed right of the individual, but in the hearts of many a true believer in Jesus of Nazareth, there remained an abiding belief, a feeling that the authority to represent him had been taken from the earth, and that there

. . . can be no recovery out of that apostacy till Christ shall send forth new apostles to plant churches anew.

This in effect is what the Lord told Joseph Smith when as a fourteen year-old lad he inquired which of all sects was right and which should he join. Joseph was told to join none of them for, as has been heretofore quoted,

"they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrine the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith, 2:19.)

A few years later, specifically, April 6, 1830, Joseph Smith received by the spirit of prophecy and revelation instructions from the Savior "to organize his Church once more here upon the earth."

Thus was established by direct revelation and divine authority from the Eternal Father and Jesus Christ who founded the Church of the Meridian of Times, the Church of Latter-days, which is set up as a fore-runner, if you please, to the establishing of the kingdom of God upon the earth. And in the words of President John Taylor:

Unless the Father had a Church and a people who had submitted to his law and were willing to submit to it with an organization of such a people gathered from among the nations of the earth under the direction of a man inspired of God, the mouthpiece of Jehovah to his people, I say that with such an organization there is a chance for the Lord, God to be revealed. There is an opportunity for the law of life to be made manifest, a chance for God to introduce the principles of heaven upon the earth and for the will of God to be done upon earth as it is done in heaven. (J.D. 18:140, Oct. 10, 1875.)

With these two great fundamental truths as the heart of their message, namely, (1) the divinity of the mission of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, and (2) the restoration of his gospel in this age, the missionaries are to the best of their ability, fulfilling the injunction to preach the gospel to every creature, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever the Lord has commanded.

This, then, brethren, is a world-wide Church organized preparatory to the establishing of the kingdom of God on earth by means of which

. . . the Lord God may be revealed, and an opportunity for the laws of life to be made manifest.

These thousands of missionaries and men who hold the priesthood everywhere are ambassadors of good will, the ultimate purpose of whose service is to change the hearts of men everywhere from selfishness and greed to tolerance, compassion, and brotherhood. And, so, with all our hearts we can sing:

Go, ye messengers of glory; Run, ye legates of the skies; Go and tell the pleasing story That a glorious angel flies, Great and mighty, With a message from the skies. Go to ev'ry tribe and nation; Visit ev'ry land and clime; Sound to all the proclamation. Tell to all the truth sublime: That the gospel Does in ancient glory shine. Go to all the gospel carry. Let the joyful news abound; Go til ev'ry nation hear you, Jew and Gentile greet the sound. Let the gospel, Echo all the earth around. Bearing seed of heav'nly virtue, Scatter it o'er all the earth; Go! Jehovah will support you; Gather all the sheaves of worth; Then, with Jesus, Reign in glory on the earth. —John Taylor
