David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Old Battles Yet to Be Fought—New Victories to Win

And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid; for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.

For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. (Micah 4:3-5)

So wrote the Prophet Micah, probably quoting Isaiah, 750 years before Christ. Over 2600 years ago, the eye of prophecy saw a time when "nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." During the intervening centuries since that prophecy was uttered, many nations have lifted up sword against nations; in fact, war has been one of mankind's greatest evils.

Well may we wonder how many more years will pass before "they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid"; when, in Lord Tennyson's words:

The war-drums throb no longer, and the battle-flags be furled, In the parliament of man, the Federation of the world.

Restrictions incident to the great conflict have largely been abrogated; and once again we meet in a general Conference of the Church without fear of molestation from a murderous enemy. We join the Allied Nations in giving thanks that gangsters who, through evil manipulations and clever strategies seized control of Nations, have been defeated; that their attempt to set up dictatorial government has been frustrated; that freedom has been preserved, and liberty kept within the grasp of those who cherish the right of self-government.

In this great conflict God's overruling power has been manifest. Let the nations not forget him in the hour of victory.

Out of the war has come the harnessing of atomic energy. In discussing this new and terrible force, scientists and military experts are now writing articles saying that all present means of defense are inadequate, already antiquated, and must be changed if the world is to be protected from future devastation.

I would that these men of reputed wisdom and foresight would lay equal emphasis on the fact that the future safety of the world depends not so much upon the changing of defense as upon the changing of men's way of thinking, and acting. Men and nations must have a change of heart. Hate and envy, suspicion and greed must be supplanted by sympathy, forbearance, tolerance and justice before the hoped-for time comes that "nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more."

Now that another terrible war is ended, the great question is—Are human minds equal to the problems that are theirs; are human hearts sufficiently filled with virtues needed in the present crisis? With this thought in mind, I echo the cry of one who pleads—

"O human hearts, beating through fear, through jealousy, through pride, through avarice, through bitterness, through agony, through death; beating shame and forgiveness, bewilderment and love.

"O my own country, my new world, prepare, prepare—not to avenge wrong, but to exalt right. Not to display honor, but to prove humility. Not to bring wrath, but vision; not to win war, but a people. And not people only, but all peoples. Not to exact justice from your enemies only, and not from your friends only, but from yourselves!"

Truly,

The world is in the valley of Decision, And out of it there is but one sure road; Eyes unsealed can still foresee the mighty vision Of a world in travail turning unto God.

Yes, World War II is ended, but old battles are yet to be fought; new victories yet to be won before the peace for which we pray can be realized.

Man's suspicion and lack of trust is one of the greatest enemies of peace. Nations are distrustful of one another. Thus, the seeds of envy and enmity are sown.

This lack of confidence in one's fellowman is even more of an individual than a national vice. We are prone to magnify weaknesses and to imagine vices in others that do not exist. We chew the cud of slander with satisfaction. Slander, "whose whisper over the world's diameter, as level as the cannon to its blank, transports his poisoned shot." Talk about battles yet to be fought! Back-biting and evil speaking head the list!

"If any man among you thinketh himself to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this man's religion is vain."

The battle against godlessness must still be fought. Nietzche even before the first World War denounced Christianity as a cunningly devised system that has "debauched and undermined and sapped the vigor of the modern European world, and is the most powerful instrument of racial degeneration ever devised by common herd."

Nietzche is dead, but the poisonous seeds he sowed in his blindness and bitterness still produce fruit of skepticism and unbelief. In charity we can say that the Christianity he condemns is not the Gospel of Jesus Christ as taught by the Redeemer of Man. But egotists and misled people who cannot discriminate between truth and error still find themselves wavering with respect to the divine mission of Jesus Christ. Every true Christian, and especially every faithful member of the Church of Christ should be militant in defending the principles of the Gospel as given by our Lord and Savior, for, in the words of Mark Hopkins, "true Christianity promotes industry, honesty, truth, purity, kindness. It humbles the proud, exalts the lowly, upholds law, favors liberty, is essential to it, and would unite men in one great brotherhood. It is the breath of life to social and civil wellbeing here, and spreads the azure of that heaven into whose unfathomed depth the eye of faith loves to look."

There has been but one perfect character in this world—the peerless personality of Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. No man can do better than to accept Christ as the great exemplar and the safest guide.

It is not an easy thing in this old world to make God the center of our being. To do so we must determine to keep his commandments. Spiritual attainment, not physical possessions, not the indulgence and the gratification of the body, must become the chief goal. God should not be viewed from the standpoint of what we may get from him, but from what we may give to him. Only in the complete surrender of our inner life may we rise above the selfish, sordid pull of nature. We should seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness. What the spirit is to the body, God is to the spirit. As the body dies when the spirit leaves it, so the spirit dies when we exclude God from it. I cannot imagine peace in a world from which God and religion are banished.

Another old battle still raging, and one we must win before permanent peace is established on earth is the battle against selfishness.

Selfishness is the root from which spring most human ills and suffering. It promises satisfaction, but its fruit is disappointing, and produces only ill-will and unhappiness. Selfishness and enmity caused the first recorded murder, and the first implied rejection of the great truth that man is his brother's keeper.

It was selfishness that caused the violation of the Munich Pact that led in, September 1939, to the murderous invasion of Poland, and the subsequent destruction of European nations with all its attendant horrors and human suffering. It was selfishness and inordinate ambition that caused the destruction of Pearl Harbor.

Unless the battle against selfishness is won at the peace table, our hopes for permanent peace may be shattered, and the world again stricken in warfare.

Nature's law demands us to do everything with self in view. Self-preservation is the first law of mortal life. But Jesus says: "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." Jesus on the Mount of Temptation triumphed over all appeals to selfishness, and thereby set an example to all men who would strive for spiritual attainment. There is no development of character without resistance; there is no growth of spirituality without overcoming. "He that overcometh and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations."

A fourth old battle that is still raging, and in which the opposition seems to be gaining ground, is the battle against intemperance. The attitude of the Church of Jesus Christ towards temperance is unmistakable. February 27, 1833, the Prophet Joseph Smith received what is known as the Word of Wisdom for the benefit of the Council of the High Priests assembled in Kirkland, and the Church, and also the saints in Zion, given by revelation which sets forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days. Wine and "strong drinks" are condemned as beverages, and the use of them condemned in all cases except in the use of wine for sacramental purposes, and even this should be "pure wine of the grape of the vine of your own make."

Tobacco is condemned also as being "not good for man."

At the time the Church took this decided stand against whiskey and tobacco, no state in the Union had passed any law against the liquor traffic. It is true that many temperance societies had been organized, and the cause of temperance was gaining impetus, but it was not until 1851—18 years after the revelation on the Word of Wisdom—that the first permanent prohibition law was passed in Maine. Later, religious denominations began to organize temperance societies. It appears, therefore, that the "Mormon" Church was among the very first organizations, if not the first organization or Church in the United States to legislate as an organized body against the use of alcoholic drinks and tobacco.

In 1912 President Joseph F. Smith in his opening address at the 78th Annual Conference said: "There is a general movement throughout the land looking toward local option of temperance among the people of our state and adjoining states. I sincerely hope that every Latter-day Saint will cooperate with this movement in order that we may curtail the monstrous evils that exist especially in our cities. I wish to say that I am in sympathy with this movement, and I know my brethren are united with me, and in harmony with the efforts that are being made to establish temperance throughout the land."

Many of you will remember how President Grant pleaded with the people in Utah to retain the 18th Amendment. To the day of his death he regretted that Utah was in the column of states that repealed the prohibition law.

Conclusion

I know of no force so potent in eradicating these enemies of peace from the human heart as the Gospel of Jesus Christ. True religion is today the world's greatest need—a sense by the individual of a relationship with God—that indefinable something which enters into the soul of man and which unites him with his Creator. "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth; so is every one that is born of the Spirit."

A celebrated British statesman, Edmund Burke, in the latter half of the century wrote: "True religion is the foundation of society. When that is once shaken by contempt the whole fabric cannot be stable nor lasting."

"I have now disposed of all my property to my children," said Patrick Henry; "there is one thing more I wish I could give them and that is the Christian religion. If they had that and I had not given them one cent, they would be rich. If they have not that, and I had given them all the world, they would be poor."

Only through the application of righteous principles by individuals and nations can a permanent peace be established, and nations learn war no more.

O Brother Man! fold to thy heart thy brother; Where pity dwells, the peace of God is there; To worship rightly is to love each other, Each smile a hymn, each kindly deed a prayer. Follow with reverent steps the great example Of Him whose holy work was `doing good;' So shall the wide earth seem our Father's temple, Each loving life a psalm of gratitude. Then shall all shackles fall; the stormy clangor Of wild war music o'er the earth shall cease; Love shall tread out the baleful fire of anger, And in its ashes plant the tree of peace! (John Greenleaf Whittier)
