David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Our Individual Responsibility

It is important that we all be impressed with our individual responsibility and that we appreciate that this Church depends upon all the people, not upon just a few, and that those who fail to carry their share of responsibility are not wholly true to their trust.

Fortunately, there are many members and officers in the Church who are determined to carry out their individual responsibility—not because it has been urged upon them by someone else but because they know that it is their individual responsibility.

I believe we should be influenced in this as, reputedly, a group of sailors were many decades ago. It was during the anti-slavery agitation, that a meeting was called in Fanueil Hall, Boston. It seems that these sailors had been hired to break up the meeting. They went there in a body, danced around on the floor, sang, shouted, and in every way possible tried to prevent the speakers from addressing the meeting. In vain were they appealed to: Their love of liberty, the memory of their old home, the honor of Massachusetts were all invoked; but still they continued their disturbance and refused to be quiet.

Suddenly a man, evidently one of their own number, arose. Quieted for a moment by his appearance, and thinking they had found a champion, the mob ceased its noise. The man said, "Boys, I would not be quiet unless I had a mind to." Encouraged by this remark, the mob burst into loud applause, which lasted some minutes. When it ceased because of the men's desire to hear more, the man continued: "No, I would not be quiet if I didn't have a mind to, but if I were you, I would have a mind to, not because of the memory of this hall, not for the honor of Massachusetts, not for loyalty to her government only, but because you are men; and honorable men always stand up for the liberty of right, justice, and free speech." They were quieted; their manhood had been touched.

I believe that we all should carry out the responsibility that is upon us, not merely because others have urged us to do so, but because we have it in our souls to do it.

And what is this responsibility that rests upon every member of the Church? In the 107th section of the Doctrine and Covenants we find the following in the 99th verse:

"Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence."

Two principles in that admonition stand out: first, the learning, the knowing what one's duty is; second, to act in all diligence in the performance of that duty.

To know one's duty, to learn the truth, is the duty of every Latter-day Saint, of every man and woman in the world, including those outside of this Church. There is a natural feeling which urges men and women towards truth; it is a responsibility placed upon mankind. But that responsibility rests upon the Latter-day Saints in greater degree than upon their fellowmen—because the Latter-day Saints have learned the truth that the everlasting gospel has been restored.

But knowing a thing, or merely feeling an assurance of the truth, is not sufficient. "To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin." (James 4:17)

This thought brings us to consider the second duty mentioned in this revelation by the Prophet Joseph Smith. "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence." The man who knows what his duty is and fails to perform it is not true to himself; he is not true to his brethren; he is not living in the light which God and conscience provide. This comes right home to you and to me. When conscience tells me that it is right to go along in a specified line, I am not true to myself if I do not follow that. Oh, I know we are swayed by our weaknesses and by influences from without; but it is our duty to walk in the straight and narrow path in the performance of every duty!

And mark this: Every time we have opportunity and fail to live up to that truth which is within us, every time we fail to express a good thought, every time we fail to perform a good act, we weaken ourselves and make it more difficult to express that thought or perform that act in the future. Every time we perform a good act, every time we express a noble feeling, We make it easier to perform that act or express that feeling another time.

I am reminded of the story of the woman who "felt" sympathy; she knew how to sympathize with the poor heroine on the stage. This lady sat in her box, comfortable in her furs and fine silks, and as she looked at the performance, she wept in sympathy with the heroine who was suffering imaginary torments; and while that woman was sympathizing with the stage heroine, her own coachman froze to death on the carriage seat outside because of insufficient clothing.

It is not enough to "feel;" we must act so that it will benefit somebody.

Let us look around in our own ward next Sunday and try to estimate how many of the Latter-day Saints are absent from the sacrament meeting. It may be that a majority are absent. And those who are absent without a real excuse are neglecting one of the duties of a Latter-day Saint. Upon whom does the responsibility of bringing in these brethren and sisters rest? First, perhaps, upon the bishopric. As the bishop sits there, let him look around and notice if all the presidents of the various organizations in the ward are present. Let him note if the presidents of the priesthood quorums are absent.

But it is not the bishop's sole responsibility; this Church rests upon all and not upon a few. If one of the presidents of seventy's quorum in that ward is present, and he finds that some of the seventies are absent, the responsibility of bringing them to meeting rests upon him. If presidents of the various quorums of deacons are present, they should note what quorum members have absented themselves from that meeting and let them assume the responsibility of visiting those members. And so throughout the various organizations in that ward.

Where is the responsibility, then? It is divided as it should be, as God intends it to be, among the people composing The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; the responsibility does not rest upon the officers alone; it rests upon the members also. God has blessed us with a knowledge of the truth; and the knowledge of the truth is not enough unless it is expressed, unless it is bringing others to that knowledge. That is the spirit and responsibility of the Latter-day Saint, and it rests upon us all.

Every man, every woman, every boy and girl must bear a part of the responsibility of this Church.

"Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty," and act in all diligence in the performance of it.

"He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand." (See D&C 107:99-100)
