David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Reverence and Order in Conducting Worshipping Assemblies

You brethren have all heard about the value of the "Three R's" in education—"Readin' - Ritin' - and `Rithmetic." I should like to speak about the "Three R's" in presiding and conducting our services. They are: Reverence, Readiness, Respect.

Carlisle says: "Reverence is the highest of human feelings." We need more reverence in our house of worship. In this regard, we have made much improvement in that last twenty years, I think. I have visited a number of the wards here in the city, and in other parts of the Church, and have felt the presence of the Lord in rich abundance, especially during the administration of the sacrament. There is a feeling of communion with the spirit. That is as it should be, not only during the administration of the sacrament but throughout the entire service. There should be a feeling of reverence as soon as we enter a house of worship. A bishop in this city said to me one day, after his chapel had been dedicated, that a workman went there following the dedication, and, as he came to the door, he hesitated about entering. He said, "I hesitate about going in. There is something here I haven't before felt." I don't know whether it was just imagination on the part of that workman, but I do know that that is how every man should feel who enters a chapel that has been dedicated as a place of worship.

"Reverence is the highest virtue," says Carlisle. I think love is the highest, but reverence includes love. Reverence is profound respect mingled with love. It is a complex emotion made up of mingled feelings of the soul. Reverence embraces regard, deference, honor and esteem. Without some degree of it, therefore, there would be no courtesy, no gentility, no consideration of others' feelings or of others' rights. On this subject, one writer says: "One finds lack of reverence even in the church. In every community there are those who treat the house of God as they treat a street-car, entering it and leaving it when they please. Even habitual church attendants often surprise and shock one by their irreverent behavior in the house of prayer. Those persons are not ignoramuses or barbarians; they are simply undeveloped in the virtue of reverence."

If there were more reverence in human hearts, there would be less room for sin and sorrow, and increased capacity for joy and gladness. To make more cherished, more adaptable, more attractive, this gem among brilliant virtues is a project worthy of the most united and prayerful efforts of every officer, every parent, and every member of the Church.

In no Latter-day Saint home should the name of God be taken in vain. That is where we should begin to teach reverence.

But I am particularly interested tonight in reverence in the House of God. One contributing factor to such reverence is adherence to the second "R" —Readiness. Preparation for Sunday services should begin in the bishop's council meeting held some day during the week. You bishops direct the most important meeting in this Church. It isn't the Sunday School, great as it is, and I am a lover of the Sunday School. It isn't the Mutual Improvement Association. Most important of all is the sacrament meeting. I know that Sunday School superintendents meet and prepare for Sunday School session in the morning, and as a result everything moves as clockwork. The presiding officer need not say a word. I have seen a Sunday School of five hundred persons conducted without the presiding officer moving from his seat, or even making an announcement.

Bishops, if you prepare for the sacrament meeting in your council meeting, you will have in hand all details before the service begins. Know who is going to pray, who is going to sing, and whether the singers are going to remain throughout the service. I may be too sensitive on this point, but it creates a discord in the harmony of the service when I see musicians invited (probably a double quartette) to sing one number, and then to have the bishop arise and say, "We shall have to excuse them from the meeting because they have another appointment." I should rather they would not come. We have met to worship. Let us have somebody come who will remain. I congratulate you boys tonight. (Referring to the boys' chorus.) This has not been your meeting. You have had to listen to matters that pertain to men, but you have remained throughout the entire service, and you have contributed to the reverence and to the impressiveness of this meeting.

By previous preparation, the bishopric know what boys are going to pass the sacrament. The deacons are going to be in their seats, and they realize that they are going to remain there during the meeting. Years ago it was not unusual to see the boys get up and some of them actually go out of the service. Another discord in reverence. If you have arranged and instructed these boys they will know that they are to retain their seats and assist in keeping order. You know who will speak and give a message appropriate to the occasion. It might be Christmas; Joseph Smith's birthday; perhaps the anniversary of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. If you are prepared to give the people something worthwhile, a message instructive and inspiring, they will be pleased to attend meetings. "Readiness," said an old philosopher, "is everything!"

And that brings us to the third "R" —Respect.

In presiding in our meetings there are two elements to keep in mind—conducting the exercise, and the presiding authority. The bishop is the presiding officer in the ward. Not infrequently, however, the stake president, for example, is in attendance, and when he is, proper respect should be shown him as a superior officer. The bishop has the right, of course, to go on and carry out his program, but respect would suggest that he say to the president of the stake, "What is your pleasure?" It may be that he has a special message. If not, he will answer, "Go on with your usual exercises or with the program that you have." It may be that one of the Twelve will be present. He then is recognized by the bishop and the stake president as a superior officer in the Church and shown respect accordingly.

In fast meeting, after your testimonies are given, proper respect would suggest that you say to the president of the stake, before the close of that fast meeting, "What is your pleasure?" The organization of the Church is so complete that there is never a question as to who presides.

These are the "Three R's"—Reverence, Readiness, Respect. God help us to use them for the increase of spirituality, for the salvation of the souls of the youth.
