David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Counteracting Pernicious Ideas and Subversive Teachings

Religious leaders, civic officers, and all lovers of law and order are today deeply concerned, and not without justification, about the recklessness and lawlessness of youth. Even young folks, themselves, are deprecating the disobedience of parental authority, manifested by some of their companions. It is a dangerous sign when home discipline breaks down, and the loving advice of a wise father and a loving mother is defied. We are told by an early American explorer that among the Iroquois Indians, "The crime which is regarded as most horrible, and which is without example, is that a son should be rebellious towards his mother"—an ideal that might well be cherished today among men who esteem themselves high in the scale of civilization.

Our Country's Most Precious Possession

Our country's most precious possession is not our vast acres of range land, supporting flocks and herds; not productive farms; not our forests, not our mines, nor oil wells producing fabulous wealth—our country's greatest resource is our children, our young men and women, whose characters will largely determine our nation's future.

If it were possible for me to speak directly to the young men and women of the Church, I would say that true joy of life is found not in physical indulgences and excesses, but in clean living and high thinking, in rendering to others not inconvenience, injury or pain, but encouragement, cheer, and helpfulness. This is simply saying to them that satisfaction in daily life is found in trying to keep the simple law —"Do unto others as you would have others do unto you." Right actions toward others bring joy; wrongful deeds result in pain and not infrequently remorse.

Conformity to the Lord's word or law will invariably contribute to man's happiness and salvation. Those who do not what the Lord commands will be subjected to justice and judgment. In other words, there is eternally operative in the moral world a law of compensation and retribution— compensation commensurate with conformity to law; retribution in actual degree to the extent of disobedience.

In this sense, the word "law" has a deeper significance than a rule or dictum prescribed by authority for human action. It means rather "a uniform order of sequence" as operative and unvarying as the law of the inclined plane, or of the law of falling bodies.

Confirmation of this may be found in the Lord's statement to Cain, the first disobedient son in recorded history: "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door." (Gen. 4:7)

It is also stated by the Prophet Joseph Smith as follows: "There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicted:

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicted."

It is said that "the soul in the formative period of youth, while it is yet unspotted from the world, may be likened to a block of pure, uncut Parian marble, in which lie boundless possibilities of beauty or of deformity. From the crude marble one will chisel a form of exquisite grace and symmetry; another a misshapen monstrosity, each visualizing in the formless stone the conception of his brain. Thus we are molded by our ideals."

Thoughts are the seeds of acts, and precede them. Mere compliance with the word of the Lord without a corresponding inward desire will avail but little. Indeed, such outward actions and pretending phrases may disclose hypocracy, a sin that Jesus most vehemently condemned. "O generation of vipers," he cried out on one occasion, "how can ye, being evil, speak good things?" The Savior's constant desire and effort were to implant in the mind right thoughts, pure motives, noble ideals, knowing full well that right words and actions would inevitably follow. He taught, and modern physiology and psychology confirm, that hate and jealousy and other evil passions destroy a man's physical vigor and efficiency. "They pervert his mental perceptions and render him incapable of resisting the temptation to commit acts of violence. They undermine his moral health. By insidious stages they transform the man who cherishes them into a criminal."

Charles Dickens makes impressive use of this fact in his immortal story "Oliver Twist," wherein Monks is introduced first as an innocent beautiful child; but as "ending his life as a mass of solid bestiality, a mere chunk of fleshed iniquity. It was thinking upon vice and vulgarity that transformed the angel's face into the countenance of a demon."

It is almost impossible to believe that such a devilish nature as Bill Sikes', depicted in the same book, could be found in human form, but Dickens says himself: "I fear there are in the world some insensible and callous natures, that do become, at last, utterly and irredeemably bad. But whether this be so or not, of one thing I am certain: that there are such men as Sikes, who, being closely followed through the same space of time, and through the same current of circumstances, would not give by one look or action for a moment the faintest indication of a better nature. Whether every gentler human feeling is dead within such bosoms, or the proper chord to strike has rusted and is hard to find, I do not know, but that the fact is so, I am sure."

The operation of the same law in a positive way is illustrated by Nathaniel Hawthorne in "The Great Stone Face." Said Ernest to his mother one evening as they sat looking at an immense rock in which nature had chiseled a man's face with noble features and an expression "at once grand and sweet, as if it were the glow of a vast, warm heart that embraced all mankind in its affections and had room for more: `Mother, if I were to see a man with such a face, I should love him dearly.'"

She answered: "If a prophecy come true, we may see him some time or other with exactly such a face as that."

That face was finally depicted in the countenance of Ernest himself. Having lived a life in which he had constantly kept before him the "vision splendid," there was chiseled in his own countenance the benign features of the great image. "When he spoke he expressed what was in his mind and heart. His words had power because they accorded with his thoughts; and his thoughts had reality and depth, because they harmonized with the life which he had always lived."

No man can disobey the word of God and not suffer for so doing. No sin, however secret, can escape retribution. True you may lie and not be detected, you may violate virtue without its being known by any who would scandalize you; yet you cannot escape the judgment that follows such transgression. The lie is lodged in the recesses of your mind, and impairment of your character will be reflected sometime, somehow in your countenance or bearing. Your moral turpitude, though only you, your accomplice, and God may ever know it, will canker your soul.

"The more I know intimately the lives of other men (to say nothing of my own)," said Huxley, in a letter to Charles Kingsley, "the more obvious is it to me that the wicked does not flourish, nor is the righteous punished. The ledger of the Almighty is strictly kept, and every one of us has the balance of his operations paid over to him at the end of every minute of his existence. . . . The absolute justice of the system of things is as clear to me as any scientific fact. The gravitation of sin to sorrow is as certain as that of the earth to the sun, and more so—for experimental proof of the fact is within the reach of us all—nay is before us all our lives, if we had but the eyes to see it."

Man is endowed with appetites and passions for the preservation of his life and the perpetuation of his kind. These, when held under proper subjection, contribute to his happiness and comfort; but when used for mere gratification, lead to misery and moral degradation.

Associated with these natural instincts is a sin that always seeks seclusion. It is the prostitution of love, the noblest attribute of the soul. God has instituted marriage and the family as the proper conditions of expressing in our lives this divine virtue. But sometimes men and women with low ideals and weakened wills permit their passions, like unbridled steeds, to dash aside judgment and self-restraint and to cause them to commit sin that may sear their conscience and leave in their hearts an everlasting regret.

In this day when modesty is thrust into the background, and chastity is considered an out-moded virtue, I appeal to youth to keep your souls unmarred and unsullied from this sin, the consequence of which will smite and haunt you intimately until your conscience is seared and your character sordid. A chaste, not a profligate life is the source of virile manhood, the crown of beautiful womanhood, a contributing factor of harmony and happiness in family life, and the source of strength and perpetuity of the race. The Savior has said that if any shall commit adultery even in his or her heart they shall not have the spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear.

Resist evil, and the Tempter will flee from you. If you keep your character above reproach, no matter what others may think, nor what charges they make, you can hold your head erect, keep your heart light, and face the world undauntingly, because you, yourself, and your God know that you have kept your soul untarnished.

The only thing which places man above the beast of the field is his possession of spiritual gifts. Man's earthly existence is but a test as to whether he will concentrate his efforts, his mind, his soul upon things which contribute to the comfort and gratification of his physical instincts and passions, or whether he will make as his life's end and purpose the acquisition of spiritual qualities.

Duty of Parents

Luther Burbank, the great plant wizard, most impressively emphasizes the need of constant attention in the training of a child.

Parents who do not know where their children are at nights are recreant to the sacred obligation of parenthood, and untrue to the high ideals of the Church regarding home life.

Free Agency

Free Agency is a divine gift, more precious than peace, more to be desired even than life. Any nation, any organized group of individuals that would deprive man of this heritage should be denounced by all liberty-loving persons. Associated with this fundamental principle is the right of individual initiative, and the right to worship how, where, or what one pleases, and the simple privilege, for example, to leave a country if one chooses without having to skulk out as a culprit at the risk of being shot and killed.

At heart communism is atheistic, and facism is equally antagonistic to freedom and to other Christian principles—even denying the divinity of Jesus Christ, and the existence of God.

Conclusion

Today there is great need in the world for men of integrity, men of honor, men whose word is as good as their bond, leaders of nations who will consider international agreements sacred. The philosopher Thoreau said: "It matters not half so much what kind of ballot you drop into the ballot box once a year, as what kind of man you drop out of bed into the street every morning."

Man's greatest need is real conversion to the eternal truths of the Gospel—to the truth that Jesus Christ came to give life and light to the human family.

Recently, a group of friends presented one of their number with a valuable and practical gift. In accepting it, the man said that wherever he might travel the possession of that gift would be a constant reminder of his friends' affectionate regard.
