David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Sunday School Joys Ahead

With the consideration of the assigned topic "Sunday School Joys Ahead" I associate fond memories of Sunday School joys of the past.

"Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God. . . . And if it so be that you should labor all your days. . . and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!"

The source of all future joys in Sunday School work may be found in this text. First, in sensing the value of a human soul, and, secondly, in influencing him to live an upright life.

I commend the General Sunday School Union Board for emphasizing joy in the life of Sunday School officers, teachers, and children. Joy is sweeter than pleasure. Joy is an emotion excited with the acquisition or expectation of good. Pleasure is a state of gratification of the senses or mind and may be sensuous. It may be self-indulgence. It is nearly always transitory. Joy and happiness are permanent. Joy is pleasure not to be repented of.

Children are entitled to joy. When you are in the presence of youth you cannot help but exclaim with the poet:

How beautiful is youth! how bright it gleams With its illusions, aspirations, dreams! Book of Beginnings, Story without End, Each maid a heroine, and each man a friend!

Every generation seems to worry about its young people. Then these young folks grow up and worry about their children.

As indicated already, I have confidence in youth, therefore hope for the ultimate betterment of the human family. I base my trust in young people because, abiding in every normal human being's soul is a hidden impulse or longing to be somebody worthwhile, to accomplish some good thing. Winston Churchill once said: "There is a treasure, if you can find it, in the heart of every man."

It is natural for children to play, to seek pleasure. They are by right inheritors of joy. They should obtain this inheritance in their homes. If not, then by all means let them experience it in the Church. To quote one writer: "Let gayety cease to be a commodity of export. . . . Let us multiply anniversaries, family parties, and excursions. Let us raise good humor in our homes to the height of an institution. Let the schools, too, do their part. Let masters and students, school boys, and college members meet together oftener for amusement. It will be so much the better for serious work. There is no such aid to understanding one's teacher as to have laughed in his company; and conversely, to be well understood, a pupil must be met elsewhere than in class or examination."

I wish to emphasize the fact that our homes should be more attractive, and that more of our amusements should be in the home instead of out on the streets.

Joy Found in Achievement

True joy for teacher and for student is found in five achievements:

When all come to Sunday School they should feel that they are being invited into the presence of the Lord. They are guests at a spiritual banquet. They should not depart from the classroom hungry and disappointed. When you prepare a meal for your guests, you make thorough preparation. Remember that greater preparation is necessary for your guests in Sunday School, at the table of the Lord.

The second achievement is the joy of having in the class all who should be enrolled. And with this thought I wish to correlate the welcoming statements and the welcoming remarks made by Superintendent Bennion — the joy of finding the indifferent. Let me illustrate.

On Tuesday July 18, 1933, at about 3 o'clock in the afternoon, a little three-year-old lad was lost in the Bad Lands of North Dakota. He was bare-headed, bare-footed, and wore only a pair of coveralls. The Bad Lands are noted for their pitfalls, canyons, rattlesnake holes, and as a rendezvous for wild animals.

Upon discovering that the little boy was missing, his parents began an immediate search. Later in the evening neighbors and friends were notified, and an all-night search was made. Early Wednesday morning, a neighbor rode sixteen miles to give the alarm that a child was lost. Farmers, housewives, ranchers, sheepherders, cowboys, business and professional men, storekeepers, boy and girl scouts, law officers gathered on the town square of Shaffer to hear Sheriff Thompson's instructions as follows:

"Friends, we are all going out to the Bad Lands to find and bring back the little Cornell boy. The best way I know to do this is for all of us to form into one single line and march out there. Each man, woman, and child of us will be spaced a few feet from each other. Every gully and canyon in the way must be searched, every brush must be examined as we go along. This line, friends and neighbors, must not be broken; every waterhole, ravine, and cave must be searched thoroughly. Every square inch must be scanned by us as we go. It is the only way. I don't know how long our search will take, but Alfred Cornell is out in the Bad Lands somewhere, and when we turn back the little fellow will be with us. We can only hope that we shall not be too late. Now let us get going. I have appointed some of you deputies to ride on horseback so that there will be no slip up, and there will be none if I know anything about the people of this state."

The line was formed. At 6:30 Thursday evening, the boy was found kneeling in a water hole, his legs and feet were badly bruised and inflamed. His father and mother rushed to him and took him in their arms.

When that ten-mile line of human beings saw that the boy was found and really alive, a great cheer arose from two hundred and fifty voices!

Present-day statistics indicate that youth is a criminal age. On every hand there is evidence that boys and girls are wandering into the "Bad Lands" of society. Several years ago it was reported that in the United States there were twenty-seven million youth under twenty-one without religious instruction. One in fourteen boys age twelve to twenty is arrested and brought to court. According to reliable statistics, there are many boys and girls who have strayed off in the midst of dangers of immorality and crime. And parents are not walking all night crying for them and hunting them. No neighbor is riding sixteen miles to cry — "A child is lost!" Someone must give the alarm; someone must act as a leader and organize the forces.

Sunday School teachers, one of the greatest joys of future Sunday School work will be to reduce the number of the indifferent and wayward. "And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!"

The third achievement is the joy of winning confidence—even greater than increasing the enrollment of your class, even of finding an indifferent youth, is the joy that comes from winning the confidence of those whom you teach. To have the confidence of a little child is one of the greatest responsibilities and blessings in the world.

After the 4 o'clock meeting last Friday on Temple grounds, I heard a man who, evidently, is a leader of boys, saying: "We are going to the Assembly Hall, boys." As they walked away, two of them had their arms around the shoulders of their teacher, and the others crowded as close to him as possible. A teacher who holds such confidence and respect has the greatest opportunity in the world to shape the young men's lives.

The fourth achievement is the joy of awakening a love for truth. Have you ever told a child a story and watched his or her eyes and the yearning for more? Well, the joy of Sunday School service comes from the realization of the great opportunity to train the mind, to encourage worthy habits, and to foster noble traits of character inculcated by wise parental teaching and example. Often the teacher faces the greater task of overcoming the false teachings of unwise, irresponsible parents. "All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind," says Aristotle, "have been convinced that the fate of empires depends upon the education of youth."

True education "is awakening a love of truth; giving a just sense of duty; opening the eyes of the soul to the great purpose and end of life. It is not so much giving words, as thoughts; or mere maxims, as living principles. It is not teaching to be honest, because `honesty is the best policy;' but because it is right. It is teaching the individual to love the good for the sake of the good; to be virtuous in action because so in heart; to love and serve God supremely not from fear, but from delight in his perfect character." No one can successfully controvert the fact that upon the teacher rests much of the responsibility of lifting society to this high ideal.

The fifth achievement is the joy of character building. This leads us to the paramount duty, and to the real and supreme joy of Sunday School work. Wise parents and leading educators in the nation today realize that good citizenship can be obtained only through character development. The sincere teacher realizes that here is an opportunity to inculcate the virtues that contribute to the building of true womanhood and manhood. "Character is higher than intellect," said Emerson, "a great soul will be fit to live as well as to think."

But the Sunday School teacher's duty is not complete when he teaches only ethical principles. If he would have his children truly happy, he will lead them to have a testimony of the truth of the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ. Happy is the man or woman who can say with Thomas in reverent assurance: "My Lord, and my God!"

Conclusion

All mankind seek happiness. Most people desire to make the most and best of themselves. Few, however, realize that a sure guide to such achievement is disclosed in the following declaration of Jesus of Nazareth: "Whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." This significant passage contains a secret more to be sought than worldly fame or dominion, something which excels in value all the wealth of the world. It is a principle, the application of which promises to supplant discouragement and gloom by hope and gladness, to fill life with contentment and peace everlasting. This being true, its acceptance would be a boon today to this distracted wartorn world! Why, then, is a thing so precious ignored by men and nations? Is the truth of the paradoxical statement, losing oneself to find oneself so elusive that mankind cannot grasp it? Or is it so in conflict with the struggle for existence that men consider it impractical? Even so, the fact remains that he who is "the way, the truth, and the life" has herein set forth an immutable law, obedience to which will ameliorate those social and economic conditions in which "man's inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn."

Specifically stated, this law is: We live our lives most completely when we strive to make the world better and happier. The law of pure nature, survival of the fittest, is self-preservation at the sacrifice of all else—the law of true spiritual life is to deny self for the good of others.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accepts as fundamental this law of life. Faithful members thereof believe that only in its application can true joy be found or a truly great character be developed.

Therefore, in the heart of every true Latter-day Saint the voice of the Lord is ever whispering this recorded revelation: "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;"

"And if it so be that you should labor all your days, and bring save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy in the kingdom of my Father!"

With this end in view, thousands of men and women, serving willingly, offer every week to hundreds of thousands of children and youth instruction and guidance in character-building and spiritual growth. Thousands more are in the M.I.A. and Primary Associations. In addition to this army of officers and teachers, two hundred thousand men ordained to the priesthood have accepted the obligation to devote their time and talents as far as possible to the scattering of sunshine, joy, and peace among their fellowmen. In all such efforts, these men and women are but actuated by the high ideals of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who, exemplifying the teachings of Christ, said: "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of no value to me."

Never was there a time in the history of the world when the application of this principle was more needed. Therefore let sincere men and women the world over unite in earnest effort to supplant feelings of selfishness, animosity, greed by the law of service to others and thereby promote the peace and joy of mankind.

God bless you, fellow workers, as you go forth to experience the joys ahead in Sunday School work, I pray.
