David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The Teacher's Responsibility

I shot an arrow into the air It fell to earth, I knew not where; For, so swiftly it flew, the sight Could not follow it in its flight. I breathed a song into the air It fell to earth I knew not where; For who has sight so keen and strong That it can follow the flight of a song? Long, long afterward, in an oak I found the arrow, still unbroke; And the song, from beginning to end I found again in the heart of a friend.

—Longfellow

These stanzas express beautifully the possible neverending influence of a word or deed. Therein lies the compensation and joy of the teacher, whose name is not emblazoned before the public gaze; but whose instructions, like echoes, "roll from soul to soul, and go forever and forever."

On this Temple Block today, flowers, "sweet letters of the angel tongue," planted in picturesque designs, are blooming on every hand. Tens of thousands of tourists are passing through these grounds. Into the hearts of some of these more observant, thoughtful visitors, the flowers may send tender messages of nature's love of life and beauty. Even the most unresponsive of them would undoubtedly thrill with admiration as they glimpse what the poet felt so fully when he cried:

Your voiceless lips, O flowers, are living preachers—

each cup a pulpit, and each leaf a book.

This gorgeous display of thirty thousand blossoming plants are the result of daily labor and attention of ten or twelve men, to whose consistent effort, indeed to whose existence the ten thousand visitors give scarcely a passing thought.

Nor do these men, these gardeners, work for any such recognition. Their reward is in their weekly compensation and in the satisfaction of seeing expressions of pleasure and admiration on the countenances of visitors. They work quietly and constantly to make the world more beautiful and the result of their labor is a benefit to the multitude.

So in the garden of humanity there are millions of men and women whose lives contribute to the betterment of the world, from whose characters are radiating virtues that might still be lying dormant in their souls had it not been for the noble, unselfish influence of teachers of whom the world has never heard.

Of what infinite value to the community are these guides and trainers of youth who carve and shape the moral atmosphere in which the people live. Flowers shed beauty and fragrance for a brief time, then fade and die and are gone forever, but children, who through instruction from noble teachers become imbued with eternal principles of truth, radiate an influence for good, which, as their own souls, will live forever. "If we work upon marble, it will perish; if on brass, time will efface it; if we rear temples, they will crumble into dust; but if we work upon immortal minds, and imbue them with principles, with the just fear of God and love of our fellowmen,—we engrave on those tablets something that will brighten to all eternity."

Whenever I face a body of teachers, I feel that I am addressing a body of men and women who are representatives of a group who carry the second greatest responsibility in all the world. Parenthood is the greatest; teaching is the next. On the proper education of youth depend the permanency and purity of home, the safety and perpetuity of the nation. The parent gives the child an opportunity to live. The teacher enables the child to live well. The parent who gives life and teaches his child to live abundantly is a true parent-teacher. Today the customs and demands of society are such that the responsibility of training the child to live well is largely and in too many instances shifted from the parent to the teacher. In the ideal state, the teacher would be but the parent's ally, training the mind and encouraging worthy habits and fostering noble traits of character inculcated by wise parental teaching and example. But in reality, the teacher, instead of being merely an ally, must become the fosterparent in training the child in the art of living. If that were all, his responsibility would be great enough. It is not all. Often he faces even the greater task of overcoming the false teaching and the vicious training of unwise, irresponsible parents. In the light of self-evident facts, it is not apparent to every thinking mind that the noblest of all noble professions is that of teaching, that upon the effectiveness of that teaching hangs the destiny of nations. "All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind," says Aristotle, "have been convinced that the fate of empires depends upon the education of youth."

It is the teacher's responsibility to awaken in the child a love for truth, a desire to seek happiness in life through righteous living. Not to give a child happiness by proper guidance along the road of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is to deprive one's self and the world of a blessing. A child misdirected may be the loss to mankind of an eminent scientist, or of a discoverer of new truth, or of a man whose life and vision might have hastened that future day of universal brotherhood and peace. Most truly is a child "a fragile beginning of a mighty end." One of the greatest of life's tragedies is to see such a possible ending shattered in its early beginning. Such a misdirected soul crossed my path recently. He is only seventeen years of age; but thankless, disregardful, disgraceful in his attitude towards his mother and others who love him; tempestuous in his temper, unrestrained in his appetites, dishonest in his dealings, defiant of all restraint, a violator of civil law and of laws of marality. He has a brilliant mind and in some respects is highly gifted, but he bids fair, even before he sees his twentieth birthday, to join that wreckage of humanity which makes up the flotsam and jetsam of human society.

In contrast consider the young Mormon soldier who gave his life for his country in Italy. Instead of spending the money he received from the government for cigarettes, drinking intoxicants, indulging in riotous living, he conserved his earnings to be used in the future for some useful purpose. In case, however, that the should be called upon to sacrifice his life for the cause for which he was fighting, he sent his money home, with a request that should he never return, that his money should be used to support some missionary who would be sent to preach the Gospel of peace.

Why this conscientious, masterful, God-fearing man in one case, and the despoiler of self and the despair of his loved ones in the other instance. Perhaps we cannot rightly say. So many elements enter into the forming and the shaping of a life. However, in these two instances we do know that the two characters differ largely because of environment and early training. One got the ideal; the other failed to see it. Teachers, until your boys and girls get the true ideal as set forth in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, your responsibility is not fully discharged. Your duty, your life's work is "To train them to virtue; habituate them to industry, activity and spirit. Make them consider every vice as shameful and unmanly. Fire them with ambition to be useful. Make them disdain to be destitute of any useful knowledge. Fix their ambition upon great and solid objects, and their contempt upon little, frivolous and useless ones." (John Adams)

To achieve this power and influence, it should be every teacher's ideal to appear before his or her class with:

You teachers are familiar with the famous painting depicting Christ as a youth of twelve years standing before learned men in the temple. In that picture the artist had combined physical strength, intellectual fire, moral beauty and spiritual fervor. The artist pictures him as a perfect youth, an ideal for every boy in the land. I ask you, fellow-teachers, to take the artist's brush and canvas and try to reproduce that picture of perfect youth! You hesitate! You say you have neither the skill nor the training. Very well. Every person who enters the profession of teaching assumes the responsibility not of attempting to put on canvas an ideal picture of youth but of cooperating with every youth under his tuition to make out of a living, breathing soul a perfect character.

The responsibility of the teacher, however, does not end in his duty to teach positively. He enters the realm of what-not-to-do, as well as the realm of what-to-do. In the garden of the human soul, as well as in the fields of human endeavor, there are thorns and thistles as well as flowers and useful plants. Thrice worthy of condemnation is he who would crush in a boy's mind a flower of truth, and sow in its stead the seed of error! Touching this point, the greatest of all teachers has said: "Whose shall offend one of these little ones who believe in me"—that is, cause one of these little ones to stumble—"it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea."

The sculptor might chip the marble block The artist a blot erase; But the teacher who wounds a little child Might never the scar efface. O, hesitate then, unskilled hands To strike the harp of the soul; The discordant tones and the broken strings Might meet you at judgement's roll. —David O. McKay

Wise parents and leading educators in the nation today realize that good citizenship can be obtained only through character development. They recognize, with Emerson, that "character is higher than intellect. A great soul will be fit to live as well as to think." Leading youth to know God, to have faith in his laws, to have confidence in his Fatherhood, and to find solace and peace in his love,—this is the greatest privilege, the most sublime opportunity offered the true educator.

I have mentioned the responsibility of the teacher to appear before her class with a pleasing appearance, second, with thorough preparation, and third, with a prayerful heart. Now let me add one more paramount duty, and that is to teach by proper example. If teachers are true in their desire to make character a true aim in education, arouse faith in God and a desire to maintain the standards of the Church, they will manifest that sincerity in daily action. They will be what they expect their pupils to become. Otherwise their teaching becomes hollow and meaningless, their words and precepts but as a sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. To live an upright life to conform to high ethical standards is the responsibility and duty of every teacher in the land. Greater even than this is responsibility of the Primary teacher. Her profession is higher than that of the teacher in the common school, for in addition to her belief in the efficacy of ethical and moral precepts, the religious teacher assumes the responsibility of leading the youth into the realm of spirituality.

The responsibility and opportunity of the teacher are summarized thus in the 93rd section of the Doctrine and Covenants:

"I give unto you these sayings that ye may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

"For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father."
