David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Eternal Verities

Have you ever sat down and talked with men In a serious sort of way of their views of life, And pondered then on all that they had to say? If not, you should, in some quiet hour, It's a glorious thing to do For back of the pomp and back of the power, Most men have a goal in view.

That's what I should like to do with you graduates tonight—talk with you in a serious sort of way of your views of life.

For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose (forfeit) his own soul (life)? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul (life)? (Matt. 16:26)

In quoting this passage, I have in mind to emphasize the dual nature of man—physical and spiritual. The revised version, substituting as it does, the word "life" for "soul" makes justifiable the conclusion that preserving one's physical life is deemed more precious than the acquiring of an earthly emoluments, or the possession of the wealth of the world.

However, that Jesus had in mind the soul as a spiritual entity is confirmed by Mark who, recording this incident, adds: "Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels." (Mark 8:38)

Luke confirms this thought as follows: "For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast away?

"For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's and of the holy angels." (Luke 9:26)

If we accept the spirit entity of man as real and eternal, how utterly foolish to ignore or to neglect its development by giving most, if not all, of our attention to physical needs, pleasures, and passions.

If one makes the present world with its allurements, riches, honors, pleasures, indulgences, etc., "the object of supreme pursuit," and gain not only what one seeks, but the whole world, yet along with it forfeits one's own soul, one has gambled the only thing worthwhile, and lost. Isn't that true?

Also, if we are in company where the teachings of Jesus are unpopular, if, in order to stand well with others or to avoid criticism we yield to indulgences violative of Christ's teachings, we demonstrate that we are ashamed of him, and merit his being ashamed of us when he "cometh in the glory of his Father with his angels." The tendency to vary from true standards or modify ideals is well illustrated in one of Oliver Wendell Holmes clever bits of literature on "lie" and "truth."

I quote it having in mind a tendency we sometimes have to modify, shape or change true ideals by which we should guide our lives.

When we are as yet small children, long before the time when those two grown ladies offer us the choice of Hercules, there comes up to us a youthful angel, holding in his right hand cubes like dice, and in his left spheres like marbles. The cubes are of stainless ivory, and on each is written in letters of gold—TRUTH. The spheres are veined and streaked and spotted beneath, with a dark crimson flush above, where the light falls on them, and in a certain aspect you can make out upon every one of them the three letters L, I, E. The child to whom they are offered very probably clutches at both. The spheres are the most convenient things in the world; they roll with the least possible impulse, just where the child would have them. The cubes will not roll at all; they have a great talent for standing still, and always keep right side up. But very soon the young philosopher finds that things which roll so easily are very apt to roll into the wrong corner, and to get out of his way when he most wants them, while he always knows where to find the others, which stay where they are left. Thus he learns—thus we learn—to drop the streaked and speckled globes of falsehood and to hold fast the white angular blocks of truth. But then comes Timidity, and after her Good-nature, and last of all Polite behavior, all insisting that truth must roll, or nobody can do anything with it; and so the first, Timidity, with her course rasp; and the second, Good-nature, with her broad file; and the third, Polite behavior, with her silken sleeve, do so round off and smooth and polish the snow-white cubes of truth that, when they have got a little dingy by use, it becomes hard to tell them from the rolling spheres of falsehood.

(Oliver Wendell Holmes,

"The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table")

When the schoolmistress protested that there are better reasons for truth than could be found in mere experience of its convenience and the inconvenience of lying, the author continues,

Yes, but education always begins through the senses, and works up to the idea of absolute right and wrong. The first thing the child has to learn about this matter is, that lying is unprofitable, afterwards, that it is against the peace and dignity of the universe.

(Ibid, page 123)

The power of choice is a God-given gift, and the purpose of life is happiness. Things which pertain to the physical nature are so easily obtained and the pleasure so immediate that many spend most of their time seeking them, and neglecting the permanent joys of the spirit.

We are living in what may well prove to be the most epoch-making period of all time. There is ample evidence on every hand that we are witnessing one of those tidal waves of human thought and emotion which periodically sweep over the world and change the direction of human endeavor. It is a time that demands clear thinking and sound judgment. Whether we are willing to admit it or not, this is revolutionary period. There is social and political upheaval. Thoroughly tested, well-tried principles are being thrown into discard. Long accepted social theories," writes Charles Foster Kent, "have suddenly been moral standards of our fathers are being set aside in theory as well as practice. . . Religious dogmas long regarded as the cornerstones of religion and the church are being disproved or supplanted by the discoveries of modern science."

It is not strange, therefore, that the majority of the men and women in this war-shattered and war-threatening world are unhappy because they feel the foundations beneath them are tottering. As reported in the public press a year or so ago, an experienced United States Congress-man, reputably one of the best lawyers in Congress said: "There isn't a person in this room now who can be certain that he can leave to his children the heritage of the privilege of being free."

Today, if ever, is a time for young people who are not satisfied with merely building "birds' nests" or with temporary desires and pleasures of the moment, to get in mind eternal verities, fundamental truths, and make them life's guiding stars.

If in this unsettled sea of human perplexities, yearnings, disappointments, and despair, we would pause and eliminate from our minds our immediate demands and schemes for livelihood, if we would set aside our desires for personal pleasure resulting from indulgence in gratification of appetites and passions, if we would for an hour or two withdraw ourselves completely from the physical, and sensual, the political, and even the social influence of this human world, and let our souls commune with self and with the Infinite—we should find that only in the recognition and adoption of eternal verities can the yearning of a sincere mind be satisfied and peace and happiness be realized.

The captain of the "Kon-Tiki," when midway in the Pacific Ocean, experienced in reality what I am now suggesting you try to experience in imagination. Floating on a raft with his five companions, a thousand fathoms of water beneath them, a myriad of glittering tropical stars in the firmament above, he writes: "Whether it was 1947 B.C. or A.D. suddenly became of no significance. We lived, and that we felt with alert intensity. We realized that life has been full for man before the technical age also—in fact fuller and richer in many ways than the life of modern man. Time and evolution somehow ceased to exist; all that was real and that mattered were the same today as they had always been and would always be."

The captain seemed to feel what our poet said about truth:

. . . Tis the last and the first, For the limits of time it steps o'er: Though the heavens depart, and the earth's fountains burst, Truth, the sum of existence, will weather the worst, Eternal, unchanged, evermore.

If as I say, we could divest ourselves of all immediate wants and perplexities, and talk with self in a serious sort of way we should find ourselves giving value to like realities. Out of such soul-communion would come a recognition that no matter what physical, material, political, industrial and other changes may occur, no matter how theories of governments may change; how fashions, customs, and ideals may be accepted and abandoned, there remain unchanging verities eternally operative in the universe, ever contributing to the spiritual progress, to the peace, to the happiness of the individual and of the race.

With this recognition would come certain fundamental questions, the answer to which can be found only by reference to eternal truth. A few of these vital problems might be as follows:

FirstThe ever-present reality and mystery of life and immortality of the human soul.

Second The existence of God and our relation to him. Is it possible for man's spirit to be in harmony with that Divine Being?

Third These eternal verities accepted, the question arises what is the noblest aim in life—pleasure, wealth, or character?

Fourth Even human heart yearns for love even more than the body yearns for food. Every normal person seeks a soul mate, and recognizes the family as the true source, for love's expression.

Such questions enter either in a fleeting or contemplative degree the mind of every thinking or contemplating person.

Let us consider for a moment how the history and purpose of the Brigham Young University would answer these vital problems.

Reality and Mystery of Life

It advocates reverence for life in all its own manifestations. Now that means more than I have time to elaborate. Unjustifiably injuring a child or any other human being is a manifestation of an uncultured nature—sadism in any degree is beastly. Cruelty to animals reflects disharmony with nature.

He prayeth best who loveth best All things both great and small For the dear God who loveth us, He made and loveth all.

How sweet association would be—what a peaceful community all persons would live in if we had a kindly attitude—a sincere reverence for life!

One of the most interestingly illuminating chapters on the origin of life is found in a recent work by Mr. A. Cressy Morrison, past president, New York Academy of Sciences, and the American Institute of the City of New York. Says he:

Nature did not create life; fire-blistered rocks and a saltless sea did not meet the necessary requirements. Did Life brood over this earth and over "other earths," awaiting its opportunity to glorify Cosmos with understanding? Gravity is a property of matter; electricity we now believe to be matter itself; the rays of the sun and stars can be deflected by gravity and seem to be akin to it. Man is learning the dimensions of the atom and is measuring its locked-up power, but LIFE is illusive, like space. WHY? Life is the only source of consciousness and it alone makes possible knowledge of the works of God which we, still half blind, yet know to be good. Life is an instrumentality serving the purposes of the Supreme Intelligence. LIFE IS IMMORTAL.

Life pushes forward, building, repairing, extending, and not found in inanimate things. Is this intelligence? Is it instinct? or does it just happen? You can answer this yourself. The writer does not know, but he believes it came as an expression of Divine power, and it is not material.

(A. Cressy Morrison, "Man Does Not Stand Alone," page 44)

From its beginning, the Brigham Young University has had the revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants that "intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

"All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." (D&C 93:30)

What an impressive example of inspiration to the Prophet Joseph Smith. When answering your students' questions on "intelligence" or the origin of life, you teachers are not hampered or hesitant when you give these revelations as eternal verities.

Thus we have the glorious truth that that uncreated, ever-existent intelligence animated spiritual bodies, "for man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

"And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

"The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God; even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple." (D&C 93:33-35)

Thus may be found in this Church university without wonderment or equivocation the source not only of life, but of intelligence, and the answer to the question of human immortality.

I heard your president say on an important occasion last week that this school is destined to be the greatest university in the world and if we maintain these ideals, nothing can prevent its becoming so.

Another thought in this connection: when President Brigham Young called Brother Karl G. Maeser into his office, and said: "We want you to go to Provo to organize and conduct an academy to be established in the name of the Church—a Church school," he at least implies that our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, would be kept in mind as the head, center and life of this institution. How could it be otherwise when the school was to be established in the name of the Church, which is the Church of Jesus Christ!

"The whole question of the very life or speedy death of Christianity," writes George R. Wendling in `The Man of Galilee,' "lies nevertheless wrapped up today as it always has been in the question of Deity of Jesus Christ. Hence the paramount question today is, and always will be, the supernatural character of the great Galilean. The inspiration of the Bible, the doctrine of a future state and other problems which perplex the seeker after religious truth, are all subordinate to this question of the divinity of Jesus Christ. They fasten themselves to it and arrange themselves about it dependently as a spiritual stairway is attached to a massive column leading up to clouds of doubt and darkness or up into the sunlight."

Permeating this school from the day of its opening to the present is the ever abiding testimony given of old, but ever new—

I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth;

And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:

Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me.

(Job 19:25-27)

We come to the second question—The existence of God and our relation to him. Can we get in harmony with him?

One of the fundamental conditions contributive to a person's right thinking and acting is a reverence for God. A growing disbelief in a supreme being among many misguided people is a principal source of crime. When God becomes the center of our thoughts, we become conscious of a new aim in life. To nourish and satisfy the body and its desires as all other animals do, is no longer a chief and of mortal existence. Spiritual attainment, not material possessions, becomes the chief goal. With a sincere belief in God, "Thou shalt-not's" are easily resisted; vulgarity, profanity, indulgence in appetites and passions, cheating, lying, etc. seem below human dignity.

Let us keep in mind, students, that "God and the unseen world are not merely objects of surmise. We know them in experience. In the process of building character we have genuine knowledge of the forces which enter vitally into those characters. We experience a divine power which makes for ideals of wealth and sustains us in our struggle to attain them.

Science deals with the world out there beyond us—it knows only symbols of reality which are interpreted to the consciousness through the senses. But when we deal with what takes place in our own inner consciousness we send the shaft down deeper into reality. There if anywhere we touch reality in completer sense. "By being religious," says Professor James, "we establish ourselves in possesion of ultimate reality at the only point at which reality is given us to equal!"

The question of the possibility of communion with the Infinite is answered in the founding of this great institution. When Dr. Maeser decided to accept the assignment given him to found a Church school, he went to President, Young's office, and addressing the president, said: I am about to leave for Provo, Brother Young, to start my work in the Academy. Have you any instructions to give me?"

"Brother Maeser," answered the president thoughtfully, "I want you to remember that you ought not to teach even the alphabet or the multiplication tables without the Spirit of God. That is all. God bless you. Good-bye."

In those few instructions we hear the echo of the Savior to the Twelve:

"Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.

He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. (John 16:13-14)

The man who first stood at the head of this institution had been given a practical demonstration of the influence of the spirit upon the mind of man, when through the operation of that spirit, he and Brother Budge understood one another though each spoke in a different language.

May I give you what I call a "heart petal" as we sit in sacred communion. When I sat in school a student as you, I wondered about the reality of the gift of tongues and the interpretation of tongues. I did not doubt it because it was part of the Church, but I wondered. Tonight I want to bear you witness that the interpretation of tongues is a reality. I witnessed it in New Zealand at the Hui Tau at Huntly in 1921; again in Aintab when President J. Wilford Booth was interpreting in the Turkish language what I was speaking in English; and a third experience in Holland—when President Zappey was interpreter. And so from experience I knew that such a miracle as related by Brother Maeser and Brother Budge may be actual. This Church school stands for the ideal that we may so live as to be "partakers of the divine nature."

What about the third? What ideal permeates the school regarding the noblest aim of life?

None of the twenty-nine students who were present at the opening of the school on April 24, 1876 is now alive, but fortunately we have on record a statement of one of those older students regarding the early purpose and aim of this institution. He was one of the chief justices of the Supreme Court of the United States when he wrote:

I had heard such enthusiastic praise of the Academy that the reaction to my first view of this building was one of doubt and disappointment. Fortunately the building was not the school, but only the house in which the school lived, and the discovery of the school itself was as though I had opened a rough shell and found a pearl. The soul of this school was Karl G. Maeser. When I came, as I soon did, to realize the tremendous import of that fact, the ugly structure ceased to trouble my eyes, my doubts vanished, and were replaced by the comfort of certainty and a feeling of deep content.

Dr. Maeser's ability to teach covered the entire field of learning, including that of teaching others to teach. Far more important than anything else, he was a teacher of goodness and a builder of character. He believed that scholastic attainments were better than riches, but that better than either were faith, love, charity, clean living, clean thinking, loyalty, tolerance, and all the other attributes that combine to constitute that most precious of all possessions—good character! Good character does not consist in the mere ability to store away in the memory a collection of moral aphorisms that run loosely off the tongue. Seneca gave the world a book of beautiful, fully written moral maxims, but he stood in the Roman senate and shamelessly justified Nero's murder of his own mother. Character to be good must be stable, must have taken root. It is an acquisition of thought and conduct which have become habitual. And acquisition of real substance so firmly fixed in the conscience, and, indeed, in the body itself as to insure unhesitating rejection of an impulse to do wrong.

Twenty-nine students were imbued with that high idea. Today over seven hundred graduates leave the university with faith in the eternal verities of reverence for God and for sacred things; with a knowledge that honesty and fair-dealing are eternal verities essential to man's happiness; that without faith in God and confidence in one's fellowmen "civilization will become bankrupt, order will become disorder, restraint and control will be lost, and evil will prevail."

Fourth, the yearning of the soul for love.

There is another ideal which has permeated this school and which it will always uphold as one of the eternal verities ever operated for the happiness and good of mankind. That is, modesty and chastity among youth are to be cherished and guarded as life itself. This is an ideal associated with love and strikes right at the base of happiness in the marriage relation. It is a common saying throughout the world that young men may sow their wild oats, but young women should be chaperoned and guarded; and be it said to their credit, that generally speaking the young women are protected. The young men, however, are given too free license, if statistics tell the truth. In the Church of Christ there is but one standard of morality. No young man has any more right to sow his wild oats in youth than has a young girl; and she is taught that second only to the crime of taking human life is that of losing her virtue; and that is the ideal among honorable young men. The young man who comes to his bishop to ask for a recommend to take a pure girl to the marriage altar in the temple, is expected to give just the same purity that he hopes to receive.

Reverence for life in all created things—faith in God, in his Beloved Son—an assurance that spiritual communion with them may be actual—the joyous experience of living uprightly—practicing honor, truth, integrity, fair dealing, being true to future wife or husband—these are eternal verities which give happiness and spiritual expansion.

The world needs fundamental truths that never change—the eternal truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

"For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?"

May God help you graduates and all of us to cherish worthy ideals and noble aspirations. Whatever our work, our joys, or our sorrows, let us ever remember that back of the work, back of the joys, and the sorrows, ever glows our ideal. How constantly and consistently we cherish it in our minds and follow it will determine whether we shamble as failures along life's highway or fulfill the divine purpose of our being.
