David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The Ideals of Womanhood

How aptly are the words written thousands of years ago in tribute to another woman, women in general, but I now apply them to Sister Ruth May Fox:

"Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies. The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil. . . " or, in the modern translation, so he shall have gain.

"She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life. . . Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come. She openeth her mouth with wisdom: and in her tongue is the law of kindness. She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her." (Proverbs 31: 10-12, 25-28)

I join with all Israel in saying to Sister Fox, "God bless you for what you have done, for what you are and what your influence will continue to be throughout all Israel."

Perhaps some of you think that the impressive drama presented [Lamps of Glory] is not based on facts. It is. I do not know the instance, but as I understand it, I said in my heart that Esther might have been a young girl in England ninety years ago, and Ronald, her sweetheart to whom she was engaged. Ronald was down in Australia seeking to make his fortune before he would return to England to take his sweetheart as bride, and while he was away she heard the message of Mormonism and with her adopted parents accepted the gospel. While, let us call him Ronald, was in Australia he heard the terrible stories about the Mountain Meadow Massacre and the Danites and polygamy with which he associated these other terrible things. He returned, however, to England and in high anticipation hastened to his sweetheart's home to have her name the wedding day. But she said: "I have something to tell you first. I have joined the Church."

"Well, that is all right. I will join it with you."

"No, you do not understand. I have joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

"Well, that is all right. One church is just as good as another. Name the day."

"You do not understand. I have joined the Mormon Church."

"What?" he said, "I cannot understand how you have been so deceived."

Well, I need not tell you the story. He finally said: "You choose between the Mormons and me."

But the light shone also in her soul, and she said: "If that is your decision, I choose the Church."

When that light gets into the soul it is as a guide, the most precious thing in all one's life. Ronald left England. Back to Australia he went, but stopped on his way in Salt Lake City to see for himself, then continued on and returned a year or so later and investigated for himself. He observed as best he could the great leader, Brigham Young. He sat in the old tabernacle that was built before the present edifice, and he found out that he had been deceived, that it was he who was in error and not Esther. So he returned to England, asked her forgiveness, and they were married.

The adopted parents endowed them richly, comparatively speaking, for those times. And so they prepared to come to Utah. When they got to Liverpool, they learned of an Emigration Fund, which meant that if they would travel in handcarts and not in luxury as they could, seven other families could come for the same price that the voyage would cost them. He turned to Esther and said: "What shall we do?"

She said: "We will deposit our funds and take other families with us."

Unfortunately they were delayed in the east and came with that unfortunate handcart company that was caught in the storms on the plains of Nebraska and Wyoming, and they saw some of those who had been helped by their means placed in temporarily marked graves in the morning before the journey was continued. And out on the plains, sometime in September, a little baby girl was born to Esther, and members of the company held a blanket over mother and babe when the little one was washed and dressed.

I think it was about 1907 that I sat at the table as a guest of that little baby girl born on the plains, and around her, crowning her with glory, were nine children, and it was from her lips that I received in detail the story of her mother and her father as I have briefly sketched it to you. She was Mrs. Leigh of Cedar City.

These two are but typical of many others, illustrating the heroism and faith of the Mormon women.

Looking among my treasures recently, I picked up a piece of old homespun cloth. It was woven by my grandmother. My grandfather clipped the wool from the sheep out of which the cloth was made. There were no factories in Utah then. The nearest factory was over a thousand miles from this city. It was carded and spun into thread by my grandmother who had walked across the plains. It was old and threadbare, but genuine, not a shoddy thread in it.

Recently I saw my daughter and her husband examining a sample of a modern piece of cloth which they wished to use for a special purpose. As she picked the threads apart and examined them closely, she suddenly exclaimed, "Why, this is nothing but paper." Outwardly it outshone in newness and attractiveness the old piece of homespun, but in reality it was shoddy.

What that piece of homespun is to a modern substitute for genuineness, fundamental, unchanging virtues that have stood the test of ages are to promises of pleasure, indulgence, and false ideals of modern society. Those old fundamental ideals are genuine. Some of them which appeal to you today are attractive but false. Outwardly the latter seem glamorous and glorious, but when tested and tried in the scrutiny of experience, there is nothing which remains but the dust of disappointment.

This week I presented the following question to each of ten daughters, "Will you please name for me the outstanding virtues that you admire in your mother?" I did that because I can think of no higher ideal that a daughter should have than her mother, no one whom she should love more. In the words of Tennyson:

"Happy he with such a mother! faith in womankind Beats with his blood, and trust in all things high Comes easy to him; and though he trip and fall, He shall not bind his soul with clay."

When each daughter says in her heart:

"The holiest words my tongue can frame The noblest thoughts my soul can claim, Unworthy are to praise the name More precious than all other. An infant, when her love first came, A girl, I find it still the same, Reverently I breathe her name, The blessed name of mother. —George Griffith Fether

The ideals mentioned by these girls are genuine, everlasting, in an ever-changing world. Summarized they are as follows: "Some of the qualities I appreciate in my mother," writes one, "first, her willingness to inconvenience herself for others." Note the second: "Her faith and trust in me. Third, her faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Fourth, Cheerfulness; her cheerful attitude in face of difficulties. Fifth, sympathy with what I do, and understanding of my problem." And, sixth, "ability to make a lovely home."

Just one other sample:

"Mother has always had complete faith in me. She has a strong testimony, great faith, and has always been active in Church organizations. She has always been kind, gentle, thoughtful, understanding, one to whom I can always turn, and one whom I can always trust, willing to sacrifice all for her children. She has set me the perfect example of clean living, never having touched alcohol, tobacco, or stimlating drinks. She taught me a love, appreciation, and understanding of the gospel while very young. She has always given me encouragement, inspiration, and a desire to live life in its fulness through love and service to my fellowmen."

Note the summary: Unselfishness, honesty, patience, congeniality, neatness and cleanliness, faith, love of the beautiful, trust and faith in her children, a perfect lady.

To each daughter, then, her mother seems:

"As pure as some serene Creation minted in the golden moods Of sovereign artist; not a thought, a touch, But pure as lines of green that streak the white Of the first snowdrop's inner leaves— —Tennyson

Not one of them even imagined, not one visualized her mother with teeth and breath stained with nicotine, nor her clothes impregnated with the vile fumes of tobacco smoke. It is beyond the imagination of any of these girls, as I hope it is beyond yours, even to associate with mother, indulgence in views held by modern society regarding sexual promiscuity. "Strength and honor are her clothing, and she shall rejoice in time to come." Mother is worthy of the confidence, love, and admiration of her daughter because in her youth she ever wore the crown of virtue.

Home is the center from which woman rules the world. It is there she teaches her child self-restraint, develops in him the confidence and strength that spring from self-control. It is there the child learns respect for the rights of others. It is in a well-directed home that men and women first develop a consciousness that true happiness lies in conforming one's life to the laws of nature and to the rules of social conduct.

A married woman who refuses to have children, or who having them neglects them for pleasure or social prestige, is recreant to the highest calling and privilege of womankind. The home is the best place in the world to teach the highest ideals in the social and political life of man; namely, perfect liberty of action so long as you do not trespass upon the rights and privileges of another.

Home is the best place to inculcate true religious ideals. The great need in the American home today is more religion. Parents should make it obvious, both by their actions and their conversation, that they are seriously interested, if not in outward forms, in the fruits of religion. The example of parents should emphasize the need of honesty in our dealings with our family, our neighbors, and all with whom we come in contact—kindness to our employees, fair play to our employers, a good measure to our customers. Talk about these intangibles should become common practice in our homes and offices if we want to succeed in solving family difficulties.

The ideals of true womanhood may sometimes seem as old-fashioned as that old piece of homespun cloth, but they are as unchanging and everlasting as the soul itself. Modern indulgences and pleasures that lead girlhood away from these fundamental principles of happiness are shallow and shoddy, deceiving in their promises and ultimately disappointing.

The highest ideal of our young girls today, as for our mothers who crossed the plains, is love as it may be expressed in marriage and home-building, and this virtue in which love finds true expression is based upon the structural and not the physical side of our being. If marriage and home-building be based upon physical attraction alone, girls, your love will sooner or later become famished and life a heavy, disheartening existence.

This truth is emphasized by the following quotations taken from "Our Home":

"Spiritual love lives by its own right, but the physical lives only by the lease of the spiritual. They can live together only on one changeless and eternal condition and that condition is the supremacy of the spiritual over the physical. . . Let woman remember that this doctrine appeals to her with doubled force. It is through you, O woman, that the world must heed it. Whatever other wrongs you may submit to, whatever rights may be denied you in the social world, remember that in this matter you should proclaim yourself the sovereign ruler. Your voice may be silenced in the roaring mart, you may be pushed aside by the mad crowd, but behind the silken folds that hide the sanctity of wedded joy you are the sovereign divinely ordained. By the necessities and consistencies of your being, by every argument from the exhaustless realm of natural history, by every law of nature and of God, you bear the badge of rightful sovereignty."

"The cords of love must be strong as death Which hold and keep a heart, No daisy chains, that snap in the breeze, Or break with their weight apart; For the pretty colors of youth's fair morn Fade out from the noonday sky, And blushing love in the roses born Alas! with the roses die! But the love, that when youth's morn is past, Still sweet and true survives, Is the faith we need to lean upon In crises of our lives; The love that shines in the eyes grown dim, In the voice that trembles, speaks; And sees the roses that years ago Withered and dried in our cheeks; That sheds a halo around us still, Of soft immortal light, When we change youth's golden coronal For a crown of silver white; A love for sickness and for health, For rapture and for tears; That will live for us, and bear with us Through all our mortal years. And such there is, there are lovers here, On the brink of the grave that stand, Who shall cross to the hills beyond, and walk Forever hand in hand! Pray, youth and maid, that your end be theirs Who are joined no more to part; For death comes not to the living soul, Nor to the loving heart!"

Mothers and daughters, where can be found a group made up of more precious persons, the epitome of all that is beautiful, the personification of all that is good. With all my heart I say, God bless you, and I pray that he may do so, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
