David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Woman's Influence

I realize as I stand before you that I am probably filled with partiality and am highly susceptible to the presence of a group of such noble women. I admit I am partial. Just to meet with seven thousand or more sisters in the Church, actuated by one high ideal, is in itself an inspiration; and as I stand before you I am indeed very thankful that my training and experience through life have made me sympathetic with womankind. I owe that to my sainted mother and the experience in an ideal home with lovely sisters who contributed to the beauty of that home; and later, to the inspiration of a noble wife who has devoted her whole life to her home and her children. I acknowledge, too, the inspiration of the influence of circumspect, pure-minded women with whom I have associated in the Church. I have heard of women who have contributed in their lives to unpleasantness and discord, and who have chosen to revel in that which is low and vulgar, but I know nothing about that side of life and so when I say that this gathering is glorious I mean it. Here we have assembled the purest and best. Someone said, "God could not be everywhere, and so he gave us mothers." Well, that is partially true. God can be and is everywhere present with his Spirit, but I agree that there is no one in life who can make us feel nearer heaven than can mother, a true mother.

It is these thoughts I think, and this training, which have prompted the theme that I should like to present to you at the closing of this great conference, and I should like to preface that theme by reading a paragraph or two from the instructions given to the Relief Society by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Said he on April 28, 1842, when he faced the first group of members of the Relief Society:

I now turn the key in your behalf in the name of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the beginning of better days to the poor and needy, who shall be made to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads.

When you go home, never give a cross or unkind word to your husbands, but let kindness, charity, and love crown your works henceforward.

If the men had been there, I am sure the Prophet would have said, Don't go home and say cross, unkind words to your wife. That is what we say to you men who are here today.

Don't envy the finery and fleeting show of sinners, for they are in a miserable situation; but as far as you can, have mercy on them, for in a short time God will destroy them, if they will not repent and turn unto him.

Let your labors be mostly confined to those around you, in the circle of your own acquaintance, as far as knowledge is concerned it may extend to all the world; but your administering should be confined to the circle of your immediate acquaintance, and more especially to the members of the Relief Society. Those ordained to preside over and lead you are authorized to appoint the different officers, as the circumstances shall require. (History of the Church, Vol. IV, p. 607.)

I commend to you the reading of that entire address as given on that occasion. That blessing and promise of the influence of the Relief Society indicates how highly the Church of Jesus Christ esteems womankind. The placing of women on that lofty pedestal is a far cry from the time when she was bargained for as cattle and other chattels by her so-called superior companion, man. With the turning of that key came the promise that knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth, indicating the mighty influence to be wielded by this organization.

Another point: In emphasizing or referring to the duty and right of women to render aid to the sick, the Prophet said truthfully that none are "better qualified to give such service than our faithful and zealous sisters, whose hearts are full of faith, tenderness, sympathy, and compassion." Truly, "When pain and anguish wring the brow, A ministering angel thou."

One other point: The Prophet said as far as knowledge is concerned it may expand to all the world, and that is being rapidly realized. That thought is indicated graphically on your programs of this conference. There are stars, have you noticed, indicating where organizations of the Relief Society may be found in North and South America, Europe, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and on the isles of the sea, indicating how widespread is this organization in the comparatively short space of one century,—a well-organized channel through which knowledge and intelligence may flow continually. How wide-spread this influence for good is, only a comparatively few realize.

They say that man is mighty, He governs land and sea; He wields a mighty scepter O'er lesser powers that be; But a mightier power and stronger Man from his throne has hurled; And the hand that rocks the cradle Is the hand that rules the world. (Wm. Ross Wallace)

What I am trying to point out and to emphasize on this glorious occasion is that the influence of the Relief Society is rapidly becoming world-wide; consequently, that influence carries with it great responsibilities. Do you remember reading what William George Jordan says about the influence of one individual.

Into the hands of every individual is given a marvelous power for good or for evil,— the silent, unconscious, unseen influence of his life. This is simply the constant radiation of what a man really is, not what he pretends to be. . . Man cannot escape for one moment from this radiation of his character, this constantly weakening or strengthening of others. He cannot evade the responsibility by saying it is an unconscious influence. He can select the qualities that he will permit to be radiated. He can cultivate sweetness, calmness, trust, generosity, truth, justice, loyalty, nobility, —make them vitally active in his character,—and by these qualities he will constantly affect the world.

Nor can the Relief Society escape, even if it would, the responsibility of its ever-increasing influence.

In the quotation that I have just read from the Prophet appears this excellent admonition: "Let your labors be mostly confined to those around you in the circle of your own acquaintance." As far as knowledge is concerned, that will go to the whole world, but your "administering should be confined to the circle of your immediate acquaintance, and more especially to the members of the Relief Society." Too many overlook the immediate needs of those right around us and neglect our duties in our own homes.

In an excellent work entitled "The Simple Life," by Charles Wagner, we find this thought emphasized in the following lines:

First, then, be of your own country, your own city, your own home, your own church, your own work-shop; then, if you can, set out from this to go beyond it. That is the plain and natural order, and a man must fortify himself with very bad reasons to arrive at reversing it.

Then he continues:

Strange infirmity, that keeps us from seeing our fellows at our very doors! People widely read and far-travelled are often not acquainted with their fellow-citizens, great or small. Their lives depend upon the cooperation of a multitude of beings whose lot remains to them quite indifferent. Not those to whom they owe their knowledge and culture, not their rulers, nor those who serve them and supply their needs, have ever attracted their attention. . . To certain wives, their husbands are strangers, and conversely. There are parents who do not know their children: their development, their thoughts, the dangers they run, the hopes they cherish, are to them a closed book. Many children do not know their parents, have no suspicion of their difficulties and struggles, no conception of their aims. And I am not speaking of those piteously disordered homes where all the relations are false, but of honorable families. Only, all these people are greatly preoccupied: each has his outside interest that fills all his time. The distant duty—very attractive, I don't deny—claims them entirely, and they are not conscious of the duty near at hand. I fear they will have their trouble for their pains.

I emphasize this increasing power and influence of the Relief Society and of womankind in general, having one purpose in mind: That increased attention be given and more intensified efforts put forth to maintain and preserve the dignity of motherhood. With all my heart I commend the message of Sister Spafford to perpetuate the truth that home is the true foundation upon which is built the structure of true civilized Christian society.

Now how may this be done? I said my theme was suggested by the training and experience I have had throughout my life with noble women. First then, sisters, continue to counteract by every means possible the false idea growing more and more prevalent that sexual relations before marriage may be indulged in with impunity. Our girls are the future mothers, and they should understand how far from the truth is the claim made now quite generally that there is no more sin in such indulgence than in kissing. I tell you there is. Such teachings emanate from the enemy of true happiness and are the teachings of Satan himself. Every virtuous young, woman, who anticipates the true glory and responsibility of motherhood, senses the evil of such teachings and indulgence. So does every young man who honors fatherhood and has in his heart even a spark of chivalry for future mothers of men. In this principle of chastity in youth lies the basic foundation of happiness in the marriage relation.

Second, continue to apply your influence to give greater emphasis to the fundamental teaching that marriage is for the purpose of building a home and of rearing children. That is the best channel through which love may be truly expressed. In this connection, I refer to a letter that appeared in the Deseret News. In the Deseret News the other night appeared an article written by an unwise, misguided young wife, which indicates a view of life that should never be entertained by a Latter-day Saint girl. She tells how happy she is. She has been married five years. She and her husband are "crazy" about each other. They ski and skate and dance and drive nice places to dinner and go to the symphony and good movies and lectures, and they are having a good time, buying a little home that is beautifully decorated and furnished. She has a good job that pays her well, and he has a job. This girl writes: "Actually, we don't want a family and that is that. We both feel that children would be a kind of foreign element in this little world that is so perfect and so all our own."

I apologize even for reading it to you sisters, but I do commend the writer in the News who told her this, among other things:

You may go against nature for a while when you are young and think you are getting away with it, but all the while she is exacting her fees. The wives who live for themselves and their husbands alone nearly always lose out. They lose their beauty, their alertness, their interest in life. Their faces are so often empty and vacuous, even if pretty. Believe it or not, they very often lose their husbands, who unconsciously grow to miss the things that Nature knows a woman should be giving to her husband.

On the other hand, those who sacrifice and suffer a bit develop the beauty that expression gives to faces, the beauty of responsiveness, of a deep, inner joy that makes even a plain woman attractive—the amazing beauty of fulfillment. And that love you are so anxious to preserve—you haven't the least idea what an enormous quantity of it there is. It grows bigger and stronger and more everlasting with every baby a happily married wife gives to her husband.

Wifehood is glorious, but motherhood is sublime. There are those who can't be blessed with motherhood, but those who can and who take the attitude of this girl are not a credit to their sex.

Third, sisters, apply your influence to have more religion in your homes. Every Latter-day Saint home should have evidence therein of their membership. Children growing up should come in contact with things religious. I ask you now, have you in your home the Church works, ready at hand so that the children going to Sunday School, Primary, Mutual Improvement, and so on, can turn to them when they need help? Have you a religious verse in the bedroom of the boys, or a saying of the Savior? I wonder if you have a good painting of the Savior hanging up over the bed of your boy. Little things like these give to home a religious atmosphere.

Our children hunger for true religion and there is no better place to instill it into their hearts than the home.

Sisters, my heart is full of gratitude to you and blessing that you may continue to exercise the great world-wide influence that the Prophet has blessed you to exercise, and may the exercise of that influence be felt in your own neighborhood. May your daughters so live that their children may say of them, as you and I can say of our mothers, that

The noblest thought my soul can claim, The noblest words my tongue can frame, Unworthy are to praise the name, More precious than all others. An infant, when her love first came, A man I find it still the same, Reverently I breathe her name, The precious name of Mother.

Section Two—Youth, the Home and the Family
