David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Youth and a Better Future

"Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

"For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."

* * * * *

"For there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

Forty-eight years ago I sat as a graduate in the U of U Class of 1897!

I remember with what compassionate feelings—feelings almost akin to pity—I regarded the poor, old, grayhaired men of seventy and seventy-five! As I looked forward to attaining their maturity, what a long distance it seemed between our joyous twenties, and the decrepit seventies!

Now, having reached that milestone, I wonder at the immaturity of youth to think that a man only three score and ten is old! Surely, age must have been older then than now!

Of one thing, however, we may be sure: That

"Years rush by us like the wind, We see not whence the eddy comes, Nor whitherward it is tending And we seem, ourselves, to witness their flight Without a sense that we are changed. Yet time is beguiling man of his strength As the winds rob the trees of their foliage."

It is your life ahead of you, and of the responsibilities it entails that I have in mind as I speak of youth and a better future.

The scriptural passage that I have quoted illustrates three human qualities or virtues characteristic of true leadership. These are (1) a consciousness of a righteous cause, (2) an invincible resolution to uphold it, and, (3) the assurance of the one safe guide.

Notwithstanding the frequent declarations of many who see only calamities ahead of us, it is our intent to consider the making of a better world. It is surprising how many thoughtful people are speaking and writing ominously of the future. Hayden, for example, warningly writes:

"Today, as never before, mankind is seeking social betterment. Today, as seldom if ever before, human society is threatened with disintegration, if not complete chaos. All the ancient evils of human relationships, injustice, selfishness, abuse of strength, become sinister and terrible when reinforced by the vast increase of material power.

"The soul of man cowers, starved and fearful, in the midst of a civilization grown too complex for any mind to visualize or to control."

And Mr. John C. Mirriam, president of the Carnegie Institute, writes, "Changes that have taken place over the whole world in the past two centuries, make it evident that we are approaching a crisis in which either civilization will collapse or we must discover the formulae necessary for establishing such an understanding among nations as will permit continuity in peace and in constructive effort."

I am hopeful that the younger generation will eventually recognize such "formulae." It is at least justifiable to express such a hope in the presence of youth. The future is yours to make or to mar as you choose. The world is sick of strife; it yearns for peace. Only the perverseness of human nature can darken the oncoming years.

Youth—conviction—courage—a combination potentially capable of determining the kind of world we shall live in. Though not the wisest, youth is the best, the most radiant time of life.

"All possibilities are in its hands No danger daunts it, and no foe withstands, In its sublime audacity of faith, `Be thou removed,' it to the mountain saith, And with sublime feet, secure and proud, Ascends the ladder leaning on the cloud."

The Future

Occasionally, even during the tender years, the reality of the present is slightly disturbed by fancy flights of thought into the uncertain future—and by the time graduation comes the fact that you must take a part therein becomes as sure as the course of the sun toward the western sky. Facing that future, as you do today, you might well exclaim with King Henry IV: "O heavens! that one might read the book of fate, and see the revolution of the times!"

Even while the glories of youthful prime gladden your hearts and brighten your hopes with anticipated success, there rests unfelt upon your shoulders the weight of a coming responsibility. Yours the challenge to shape the future. Into your hands and in the hands of a million other youths will be placed the banner of civilization.

Courage

To carry it successfully forward will demand courage, or what Luke calls "the boldness of Peter and John"—that quality of mind which enables one to encounter danger and to overcome difficulties. It is a virtue admired by everybody. Our souls have been stirred, and our eyes filled with tears as we have heard of the military courage of our boys in uniform. We thrill even at spontaneous courage as it leaps forth in time of crisis. But the courage I would have youth possess, as they take their part in the better future, is neither physical nor military—it is the fearlessness to act in accordance with their convictions. Courage to do right whether alone or in public—courage to be true to a trust.

Youth Responsibility

There are approximately a million full-time and part-time college students enrolled in the United States. Nearly forty-five thousand will graduate this May and June. If it were possible to obtain the dominantly motivating idea of that group, we could pretty definitely determine the future of our government. "The destiny of any nation," says Goethe, "at any given time, may be determined by the thoughts of the young men under twenty-five."

In the "Lady of the Lake," when Roderick Dhu would summon his clansmen to battle, he placed the fiery cross in the hands of a valiant henchman. No mountain crest, no trembling bog or false morass could halt this trusted courier in the speedy performance of his assignment. His duty performed, he passed the fiery torch to the second courier, the heir of Duncan's line, who, leaving the funeral rites of his deceased sire, accepted the trust, and even in the face of death paused not an instant until he had placed the symbol in the hands of his successor. Though Norman's bridal vows had just been spoken, Clan Alpine's cause, his chieftain's trust, took precedence.

As to these young men was successively given the charge to summon Clan Alpine's warriors, so there has come successively to youth through the ages, a transferred trust to carry forward the cause of humanity. The passing of this responsibility from one generation to another, unlike Scott's story, has been imperceptible, and lingered along sometimes for years, but the responsibility has been as definite as that which passed from Clan Alpine's courier to courier.

Nor can youth evade that responsibility if they would. When it comes they may as recreants refuse to go forward, or even turn in an opposite direction as traitors to their trust, but onward or backward, each generation marks success or failure in man's struggle upward.

Early Training Determines Progression or Retrogression

Whether youth's contributive acts will be progressive or retrogressive, cultural or beastly, will depend largely upon the kind of training given by those who place the banner in their hands.

A striking example of this has been enacted as if in drama within the last quarter of a century. Blinded by false ideals and fired by vain ambition, a paranoiac, with the power of a once mighty nation behind him, said: "The plow will be the sword, and the bread of posterity will be watered by the tears of war." And again,. . . "What I am after is a violently active, dominating, intrepid, brutal youth. There must be no weakness or tenderness in it. I want to see once more in its eyes the gleam of pride and independence of the beast of prey."

It seems incredible that leaders of a reputably cultured people could, in less than a generation, step back to barbarism and revel in bestiality. And that, too, in an age when advancement in material sciences exceeds all other ages in the world's history.
