David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Civilization Imperiled

As a consequence of that return to barbarism nations grapple at one another's throats in a death struggle. Millions have been killed, wounded, and unaccounted for. Homes have been blown to splinters, and their occupants left to wander helplessly and aimlessly, facing starvation and death. Men defeated have been compelled to labor for their conquerers. Nations once free have lost their independence. Millions of people have been forced to surrender all guarantees of personal liberty. Art galleries, monuments, historic buildings, and cities containing treasures of untold value to humanity have been ruthlessly destroyed. The holocaust of war continues and innocent men, women and children are being maimed, mangled, and murdered. Man has subdued the earth, harnessed the waves, conquered the air. His slightest whisper encircles the globe in a second. He controls the mightiest forces of nature and commands them to contribute to his comforts and whims. But all this material advancement has brought man neither safety, security, nor peace. These marvelous inventions which make New York and London eight-hour neighbors; which enable us to sit in comfortable chairs, and see the struggle of nations and the crumbling of empires—all these are not yet making secure the progress and happiness of man. Something is lacking. What is it?

Unifying Ideal Lacking

They lack the unfailing guide—a divine ideal. "The world has many good people in it today, more, we are ready to believe, than ever before," writes Dr. Batten, the author of "The Social Task of Christianity." "But these people possess no unifying ideal, no organic principle, no coherent view of life, no synthetic program of action. Society is coming to self-consciousness, and is beginning to take note of its troubles and needs. But it has no clear sense of direction, no organizing impulse, no all-inclusive ideal, no mighty impulsion. . .

"The great need of today is some social ideal which shall put meaning into man's life, and courage into his heart, some synthesis which shall unite mankind into one body and marshal them as one army to confront the ills of the world, and to seek the perfection of society."

And Dr. Charles A. Ellwood in "Man's Social Destiny" confirms this view as follows:

"Our civilization is imperiled today simply because it is ill-balanced. Our spiritual culture lags so far behind our material culture in its development that we have no adequate control over the latter. Our science, our education, and our government can do much to help correct this lag in our spiritual development. But in the main this must be done, if done at all, by religion and by the Church. For religion is the creator and the conservator of our social ideals; and the Church is their chief propagator."

Conquest or Chaos

A million young Americans, and millions of others have given their lives that the world may have another chance to live decently. Theirs is the conquest, ours the responsibility. Man makes war—man can end war if he will.

From the hands of those million dead come to the youth now living the banner and charge to carry forward to yet greater conquests.

The dominant motive in man and in nations is still self-preservation, self-advancement, self-comfort without consideration for the welfare of others, material achievements, accumulation of money, accentuation of power at the subjugation, even the enslavement of the individual. From the root of selfishness spring all the pestilential vices that disrupt the harmony of human relationships. Envy, hatred, greed, bigotry, the exercising of unrighteous dominion in governing men and crushing them, unrestrained passion, ungoverned appetites, drunkenness and debauchery—these are enemies to be conquered in the better future.

You may call it a Utopian dream, if you will, but selfishness must be subdued before mankind can experience peace. No peace or freedom can come to this world so long as men live only for themselves. Self-preservation is the first law of nature, but it is not a law of spiritual growth. He who lets selfishness and his passions rule him binds his soul in slavery, but he who, in the majesty of spiritual strength, uses his physical tendencies and yearnings, and his possessions to serve purposes higher than personal indulgence and comfort, takes the first step toward the happy and useful life.

This truth was taught not only "in the beginning" when the gospel was first revealed to man, but also when Jesus began his earthly ministry. On the Mount of Temptation was enacted the first scene in Christ's earthly drama of the abundant life. There he resisted the challenge to gratify his appetite; he turned aside the appeal to his vanity and pride; he scorned the bribe of worldly wealth and power as in spiritual victory he said to the Tempter: "Get thee hence." Only thus by the brilliant triumph of the spirit over the flesh can we hope for a better world.

Human Nature Must Be Changed

Your fellow alumni of four years ago accepted the challenge, and have met in deadly conflict dictatorship and inhuman aggression. Thus far they have won a glorious victory, but many will fight no more. Others are too maimed to continue longer the struggle.

Yours now the task to carry on!

Down through the ages men have retreated before the formidable enemies you now face; and thinkers, and some philosophers declare hopelessly that these enemies cannot be conquered, except only by changing human nature, and that, they insist, cannot be done.

I believe with the English writer, Beverly Nichols, that it can be done, and that "human nature can be changed, here and now."

"Human nature has been changed in the past.

"Human nature must be changed on an enormous scale, in the future, unless the world is to be drowned in its own blood.

"And only Christ can change it. . . "

Need of A Guiding Light

In the incident depicted by our text, Peter courageously declares what we shall think, what we shall declare: That "there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." Molders of a better future need the assurance that Christ is the unfailing guide.

The Nazi creed advanced the conception that a self-centered, "super-race" might dominate the world by the application of material achievements divorced from religious or even ethical considerations. "It accented power, authority, and obedience, but denied human equality and the worth of the individual." Nazi youth fought for these false ideals with fanatical zeal.

Courage alone is not sufficient; a firm conviction is not sufficient. There must be the assurance that the conviction is in harmony with justice, with truth and righteousness.

Dominant Principles in the Better Future

At San Francisco there were representatives from 50 nations earnestly and conscientiously sought to formulate plans that would end war and establish a lasting peace. There assembled were men of different political views, and of varying opinions as to the best form of government. But no matter what their political differences, if they but applied fundamental Christian principles, for example, the age-old formula "do unto others as you would have others do unto you," the objective of the conference would have been attained.

Likewise others of Christ's teachings, containing unchanging principles eternally operative in this changing world, should be applied by all who would work sincerely for a better future. For example, consider how contributive to the ending of war would be the application of individuals and nations of just two of the divine injunctions relating to arbitration and mutual happiness:

"Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.

"But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established." (Matt. 18:15, 16.)

Though man may not overcome selfishness entirely, if, as conflicts arise, he would but subdue it sufficiently to submit to Christ's principle of arbitration, brute force, as manifested in this military conflict would cease.

Again, Jesus taught that men and women fail to live truly, and really amount to nothing unless they have spirituality. The spiritual force underlies everything, and without it nothing worthwhile can be accomplished. "Spiritual needs can be met only by spiritual means. All government, laws, methods, and organizations are of no value unless men and women are filled with truth, righteousness, and mercy. Material things have no power to raise the sunken spirit. Gravitation, electricity, and steam are great forces, but they are all powerless to change the motives of men and women. The wealth of a Rockefeller cannot heal a broken heart, and the wisdom of all our universities cannot turn into the paths of righteousness a wayward soul. Men can be born again only through religion."

Young men and women, the future awaits you! It is yours! If you would end war and give peace to the world, you have campaigns to organize, and conquests to achieve. These are campaigns planned for the establishments of justice—these are conquests of the soul. Whether it is better to walk along the easy road of selfishness and indulgence than to strive through self-mastery and service for the realm of spirituality you must decide. "Whether it is better to serve God than man, judge ye."

In the words of John Oxenham:

"God grant us wisdom in these coming days, To pledge our souls with nobler, loftier life, To win the world to his fair sanctities, To bind the nations in a pact of peace, And free the soul of life for finer loyalties. Not since Christ died upon his lonely cross, Has time such prospect held of life's new birth; Not since the world of chaos first was born Has man so clearly visaged hope of a new earth. Not of our own might can we hope to rise Above the ruts and soilures of the past, But, with his help who did the first earth build, With hearts courageous we may fairer build this last.
