David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

These Are the Tender Years

Who are these children that come to gladden the hearts of man and wife and make them father and mother? More than once I have used this definition: The child is as a sweet new blossom of humanity, fresh fallen from God's home, to flower here on earth.

That many agencies are affecting the child you well know. But in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, first comes the home. Upon fathers and mothers the Lord placed one of the greatest responsibilities that can come to human beings. Hear again what he says:

". . . inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:25.)

I believe that parents generally are doing this, yet I am convinced that there is still much opportunity for improvement in this regard. The outlines of your family evening programs will enable you to do more.

Teach by Example

Make every hour, every moment that you spend together as a family precious indeed. Your example will teach your children more effectively than what you say. Out of our homes come the future leaders of the Church and of the government.

There are little cords of influence that are binding and shaping the little babe's life, the little boy's life, until youth begins to be bound by the cable and later in life by the chain—the chain of habit.

Forces that are throwing out these little cords into the children's lives are the home, the playground, the school, the gang, and society. Unnumbered thousands of people are working today, trying to direct the influences of the school, the playground, society, and business so that these cords will lead youth in the right direction. All these forces are outside the home.

But the first and most important agency in child development and education is the family. "The virtuous home is the basis of all national prosperity."

"The strength of the nation, especially of a republican nation," says one writer, "is in the intelligent, well-ordered homes of the people.

"To make men out of boys, and women out of girls, there is no place like home."

Influences of Home

What are these fundamental home influences in child life? I shall name first physical environment. The physical security of the child is dependent upon the protection largely of his home. A good home involves a fair knowledge on the part of the parents, and especially of the mother, of needed physical care, proper nutrition, hygienic living, preventing disease, adequate shelter, proper clothing, pure food, including water, fresh air, and protection from accident. A good home requires good health habits through parents' instruction and example in eating, and proper exercise. I need not dwell upon this phase of the fundamental conditions of a good home; if we can have properly ventilated homes, if we know what kind of food to give to the children, we are contributing to the health and happiness of the home.

I wish to offer as the second influence opportunities for education. Parents must lead in the cultural development and show a willingness to answer questions. A child who is asking questions is contributing happiness to your life. Fortunate is the child whose parents can leave their work occasionally to encourage him in constructive play or to spend a few hours with him in constructive play or to spend a few hours with him in nature study. Who can tell the cultural value of such association of a child with his mother—a child who beholds the glorious sunset, the beauties of nature, and who sees the snow-capped peaks through his father's or his mother's eyes? In later life he will never look at either without thinking of his parents. These are the tender cords that lead youth into paths of tenderness and humanity.

Let us inculcate into the lives of our children a nobility of soul that leads them instinctively to love the beautiful, the genuine, the virtuous, and as instinctively to turn from the ugly, the spurious, and the vile.

Within the Family Group

These are important, the physical and cultural environment, but I have merely mentioned them to lead you up to what I consider the most important, even though it is the most abstract in a child's life. I refer to the personal influence of the home. The most important factor in child life is in the interaction of personalities within the family group.

Who can measure the influence of the home? Health is important, and physical environment and culture equally important, but most important of all is that combination of personal influence centered in sacredness in the mother. If we can only get the spirit of the gospel in our homes—just get our boys and girls to feel that love for parents and for each other and love for the gospel through mother—our problems are solved.

God help us to put into our homes, to a great degree, the ideals of the gospel of Jesus Christ. To be practical let us have these boys kneel with us more frequently in prayer. That is one practical thing to do. Through family prayer let parents and children come into the presence of God.

Many years ago there was a story told in one of our early school books about some young people who were sailing down the river towards Niagara Falls. A man on the shore cried out to them: "Young men, Ahoy, the rapids are below you!"

But they heeded not his warning call until they realized too late that they were in the midst of the rapids. With all the power at their command they failed to turn their boat upstream, "So," said the man who tried to warn them, "shrieking and cursing, over they went!"

The lesson left an indelible impression upon me, but today it seems incomplete. It is one thing to stand on the shore and cry, "Young men, Ahoy—there is danger ahead," and it is another thing to row into the stream, and, if possible, get into the boat with the young men, and by companionship, by persuasion, by legitimate force, when necessary, turn the boat from the rapids. Too many of us are satisfied to stand on the shore and cry, "There is danger ahead."

This morning, I have in mind giving a warning to all young people relating to three dangers threatening the success and happiness of Youth:

First, the pernicious habit of smoking cigarets.

Second, the increasing number of divorces.

Third, the tendency to hold less sacred the moral standards.

The Habit of Smoking

In 1833 the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation "showing forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days." (D&C 89:2.) It relates to the physical, the intellectual, the moral, and the spiritual nature of man. It deals particularly with the relation of man's appetite to health and vigor. A person's reaction to his appetites and impulses when they are aroused gives the measure of that person's character. In such reactions are revealed the man's power to govern, or his forced servility to yield. That phase of the Word of Wisdom, therefore, which refers to intoxicants, drugs, and stimulants, goes deeper than the ill effects upon the body, and strikes at the very root of character building itself.

Strong Drinks and Tobacco Not Good for Man

The revelation says that strong drinks and tobacco are not good for man. This is a clear, definite statement which has stood the test of well over a century. It was made by a man only twenty-seven years of age, who from the standpoint of human learning, knew but little about physiology, hygiene, or the relation of mind and body to character and spirituality. His knowledge came from inspiration. With a conviction unwavering, with an assurance that the statement would stand all tests and experiments, he declared that strong drinks and tobacco, excepting only when used externally, are not good for man.

During the last one hundred years, the marvelous advance of science has made it possible for man to determine by experiments the ill effect of intoxicants and drugs upon the nerves and tissues of the human body. Observation and experiment have demonstrated their effects upon character. All such experiments and observations have proved the truth of the young man's statement: "Strong drinks and tobacco are not good for man."

Respect for another's rights and property is fundamental in good government. It is a mark of refinement in any individual; it is a fundamental Christian virtue. Nicotine seems to dull, if not to kill completely this trait of true culture, and women unfortunately have become its pitiable victims, and the worst offenders in society. There are still a few public conveyances that carry non-smoking compartments; a few eating places with signs, "No Smoking." In violation of such placards, it is not infrequent, however, to see a woman with utter disregard for the feelings of her fellow-passengers, among the first in an airplane or on a train to light a cigaret.

Many public buildings are often littered with burntout matches and stubs of cigarets and cigars. Most costly fires in hotels, apartment houses and homes are started by burning cigarets carelessly dropped or thrown aside.

If men and women must smoke, and it seems that many are now slaves to that habit, then for the sake of cleanliness and neatness, as well as of consideration for others, let them refrain from marring furniture, carpets, etc., and from strewing ashes and cigaret stubs in buildings where people assemble either for pleasure or instruction.

I appeal to young men and women everywhere to refrain from this obnoxious habit, not only for the effect it has on their character, but also because of the alarming proofs from doctors and scientists that it is one of the chief causes of cancer.

Increasing Number of Divorces

Another threat to our society is the increasing number of divorces and the tendency to look upon marriage as a mere contract that may be severed at the first difficulty or misunderstanding that may arise.

One of our most precious possessions is our families. The domestic relations precede, and, in our present existence, are worth more than all other social ties. They give the first throb to the heart and unseal the deep fountains of its love. Home is the chief school of human virtues. Its responsibilities, joys, sorrows, smiles, tears, hopes, and solicitude form the chief interests of human life.

To make a happy fireside clime To weans and wife, That's the true pathos and sublime O'human life. Robert Burns

When one puts business or pleasure above his home, he that moment starts on the downgrade to soul-weakness. When the club becomes more attractive to any man than his home, it is time for him to confess in bitter shame that he has failed to measure up to the supreme opportunity of his life and flunked in the final test of true manhood. No other success can compensate for failure in the home. The poorest shack in which love prevails over a united family is of greater value to God and future humanity than any other riches. In such a home God can work miracles and will work miracles.

Pure hearts in a pure home are always in whispering distance of heaven.

In the light of scripture, ancient and modern, we are justified in concluding that Christ's ideal pertaining to marriage is the unbroken home, and conditions that cause divorce are violations of his divine teaching.

Marriage is a sacred relationship entered into for purposes that are well recognized—primarily for the rearing of a family.

I know of no other place where happiness abides more securely than in the home. It is possible to make home a bit of heaven. Indeed, I picture heaven as a continuation of the ideal home. Some man has said: "Home filled with contentment is one of the highest hopes of this life."

An ever-decreasing birthrate, and an increasing divorce rate are ominous signs threatening the stability of the home and the perpetuity of any nation. In order to lessen the breaking-up of homes, we should substitute the present tendency toward a low view of marriage by the lofty view which Jesus Christ gives it. Let us look upon marriage as a sacred obligation and a covenant that is eternal or that may be made eternal.

Young people of both sexes should be taught the responsibilities and ideals of marriage so that they may realize that marriage involves obligation and is not an arrangement to be terminated at pleasure. They should be taught that pure love between the sexes is one of the noblest things on earth and the bearing and rearing of children the highest of all human duties. In this regard, it is the duty of parents to set an example in the home that children may see and absorb the sacredness of family life and the responsibility associated therewith.

The number of broken marriages can be reduced if couples realize even before they approach the altar that marriage is a state of mutual service, a state of giving as well as of receiving, and that each must give of himself or herself to the utmost.

The most vicious enemy to home life is immorality.

Of this evil, Victor Hugo writes impressively:

"The holy law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization; but it does not yet permeate it; it is said that slavery has disappeared from European civilization. That is a mistake. It still exists; but it preys now only upon woman, and it is called prostitution."

This corroding evil is just as demoralizing to men as to women. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints there is no double standard of morality. The young man should approach the marriage altar just as fit for fatherhood as his sweetheart is worthy of motherhood.

Chastity, not indulgence during the pre-marital years, is the source of harmony and happiness in the home, and the chief contributing factor to the health and perpetuity of the race. Loyalty, dependability, confidence, trust, love of God, and fidelity to man are associated with this diadem in the crown of virtuous womanhood and virile manhood. The word of the Lord to his Church is: "Keep yourself unspotted from the sins of the world." (See James 1:27; D&C 59:9.)

Foundation of a Noble Character

The foundation of a noble character is integrity. By this virtue the strength of a nation, as of an individual, may be judged. No nation will become great whose trusted officers will pass legislation for personal gain, who will take advantage of public office for personal preferment, or to gratify vain ambition, or who will, through forgery, chicanery, and fraud, rob the government, or be false in office to a public trust.

Honesty, sincerity of purpose, must be dominant traits of character in leaders of a nation that would be truly great.

"I hope," said George Washington, "that I may ever have virtue and firmness enough to maintain what I consider to be the most enviable of all titles—the character of an honest man."

It was Washington's character more than his brilliancy of intellect that made him the choice of all as their natural leader when the thirteen original colonies decided to sever their connection with the mother country As one in eulogy to the father of our country truly said: "When he appeared among the eloquent orators, the ingenious thinkers, the vehement patriots of the Revolution, his modesty and temperate profession could not conceal his superiority; he at once, by the very nature of his character, was felt to be their leader."

Let us in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as citizens of this beloved land, use our influence to see that men and women of upright character, of unimpeachable honor, are elected to office; that our homes are kept unpolluted and unbroken by infidelity; that children therein will be trained to keep the commandments of the Lord, to be honest, true, chaste, benevolent, and virtuous, and to do good to all men. (See Thirteenth Article of Faith.)

Cherishing such ideals, we can with all our hearts say with the poet Longfellow:

Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State Sail on, O Union, strong and great! Humanity with all its fears, With all the hopes of future years, Is hanging breathless on thy fate!
