David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Blueprint for Family Living

Many years ago, President Joseph F. Smith then of the First Presidency, later president of the Church, said in a commencement address at the old Latter-day Saints College: "Educate yourself not only for time but also for eternity. The latter of the two is the more important. Therefore when we shall have completed the studies of time, and enter upon the commencement ceremonies of the great hereafter, we will find our work is not finished, but just begun."

With all my heart I believe that the best place to prepare for that kind of eternal life is in the home. But home life pays earthly dividends as well. I know of no place other than home where true happiness can be found in this life.

Every home has both body and spirit. You may have a beautiful house with all the decorations that modern art can give or wealth bestow. You may have all the outward forms that will please the eye and yet not have a home. It is not home without love. It may be a hovel, a log hut, a tent, a wickiup, if you have the right spirit within, the true love of Christ, and love for one another—father and mother for the children, children for parents, husband and wife for each other—you have the true life of the home that Latter-day Saints build and which they are striving to establish.

In such a home God has placed upon parents the responsibility of instilling eternal principles into the minds of children. Church schools, Sunday Schools, Mutual Improvement Associations, Primary, and priesthood quorums are all helps in government, established here to assist in the upbuilding and guidance of the youth, but none of these—great and important factors as they are in the lives of our youth—can supplant the permanence and the influence of the parents in the home.

The home is truly the first unit of society, and parenthood is next to Godhood. The relationship of the children to the parents should be one which would enable those children to carry out ideal citizenship as they become related to the state and to the larger forms of society. The secret of good membership in the Church or good citizenship in the nation lies in the home. If and when the time ever comes that parents shift to the state the responsibility of rearing their children, the stability of the nation will be undermined, and its impairment and disintegration will have begun.

The character of the child is formed largely during the first twelve years of his life. It is estimated that in that period the child spends sixteen times as many waking hours in the home as in the school and more than a hundred times as many hours in the home as in the church. Each child is, to a great degree, what he is because of the ever-constant influence of home environment and the careful or neglectful training of parents.

A good home requires good health habits through parents' instruction and example in eating, sleeping, and proper exercise.

Home is the best place for the child to learn self-control, to learn that he must submerge himself for the good of another. Then when he gets out into society where he meets with his playmates, he will better realize that he must give them respect and consideration. The home is the best place in which to develop obedience which nature and society will later demand.

Homes are made permanent through love. Oh, then, let love abound. Though you fall short in some material matters, study and work and pray to hold your children's love.

A child has the right to feel that in his home he has a place of refuge, a place of protection from the dangers and evils of the outside world. Family unity and integrity are necessary to supply this need.

I wish to emphasize the fact that our homes should be more attractive and that more of our amusements should be centered in the home.

Establish and maintain your family hours always. Stay close to your children. Pray, play, work, and worship together. This is the counsel of the Church. Unhesitatingly, I affirm that my home life from babyhood to the present time has been the greatest factor in giving me moral and spiritual standards and in shaping the courses of my life. Sincerity, courtesy, consistency in word and in deed, unselfishness are dominant virtues exemplified in the lives of my parents and others in the two homes, my father's and my own, that have proved a safeguard and guidance.

Do you know how I spell Home?

Honor

Obedience

Mutual service

Eternity of the marriage relation

—these spell home, and they comprehend the spirit in which the principles of life and salvation should be taught to children.

The dearest possession a man has is his family. In the divine assurance that family ties transcend the boundaries of death and continue throughout endless ages of eternity, I find inspiration. When the union of loved ones bears the seal of the Holy Priesthood, it is as eternal as love, as everlasting as spirit. Such a union is based on the doctrine of immortality and eternal progress of man.
