David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Ten Contributing Factors to a Happy Home

I should like to name, this afternoon, a few conditions that contribute to a happy home, this not only to the young people, but to you, my fellow parents—husbands and wives.

FIRST: As a contributing factor to a happy home—and this to you young folks—ever keep in mind that you begin to lay the foundation of a happy home in your premarital life. Some young folks say, "We shall sow our wild oats now while we are young, and settle down later." You know, as I do, that if you sow wild oats you are going to reap wild oats. "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7.)

There is spreading generally throughout the world, and too much so throughout the Church, an idea that girls may have the same freedom in promiscuous relations as the world has generally condoned with impunity to men. Do not be deceived! Young men and women should ever keep in mind that chastity during young manhood and womanhood is the highest ideal they can cherish, having happiness and home life in mind.

Resistance—self-mastery during youth—is a contributing factor to manhood. It is not a weakness in man. And I am sure you all agree with me it is the crowning glory of womanhood. It is the foundation of a happy home. It is one of the contributing factors to the perpetuation of our race. I care not what certain sociologists say in regard to the necessity of indulgence. I know the truth whereof I speak when I plead with young men and young women who look forward to the greatest source of happiness in life to keep themselves loyal and true to their future husband or wife.

SECOND: Choose your mate by judgment and inspiration, as well as by emotion. Farmers know the value of breeding. They are very careful to choose the right kind of stock. They know that profit lies in it. Inheritance—breeding in the human family—is just as important or more so. I shall not take time to elaborate upon that.

THIRD: Approach marriage with the lofty view it merits. Marriage is ordained of God. It is not something to be entered into lightly, terminated at pleasure, or ended at the first difficulty that might arise. In our Church we have the highest idea of marriage ever given to man. We admonish young men and young women so to live as to be worthy to enter the House of God.

That means that they have, during their teens and courtship, been true to the ideals of their future wife and future husband. And as they stand and plight each other's troth, they do so with the assurance on the part of the young husband that she who now gives her life to him is as worthy of motherhood as the purest of virgins; and that he to whom she gives her life in marriage is just as worthy of fatherhood; that the source, the spring of life, is pure and unpolluted; and that if children bless that union, those children have a kingly birth, unshackled by disease.

FOURTH: The noblest purpose of marriage is procreation. Home is children's natural nursery. "I love these little people," said Charles Dickens, "and it is not a slight thing when they who are so fresh from God love us."

The Savior himself rebuked his disciples when mothers and children crowded to caress him or touch his garment. "Suffer the little children," he said, "and forbid them not to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven."

You know what a growing tendency there is in the Church now to limit families. Happiness in the home is enhanced by the children around the fireside, climbing on father's knee, receiving the caresses from mother. I think this expresses that better than I. I think it is Frances H. Lee who said:

What's the happiest time of a woman's life? Is it her school-girl days When thoughts and hopes half-formed are rife Amid her glad wild ways? Ah! No, not then. The happiest time is yet to come—but when? What's the happiest time of a woman's life? Is it her virgin prime, When love awakes, ere she's a wife, Is it that golden time? Ah! No, not then. A happier time is coming yet—but when? What's the happiest time of a woman's life? Is it her wedding day, When vows are pledged, and as a wife She's bound to him to aye? Say, is it then? Ah! No, not yet; the time is coming. When? The happiest time of a woman's life? Ah! It has come at last; For hark! I hear a little voice, And footsteps toddling fast; And the happiest hours, I know, are these, When children are playing about her knees.

The FIFTH factor contributing to happiness is this: Let the spirit of reverence pervade the home, so that if the Savior happened to call unexpectedly, he could be invited to stay and not be made to feel out of his element. I am reminded of a young son who had just married, who invited his father to see the new home. He showed him the kitchen, modern equipment, the living room, dining room, the bedrooms, spacious closets and all. As they finished the tour of the house, the father said, "Very good, very good, but I see no signs of God in your home." The young man went back and went through his house and said:

"Father was right. I have no sign of true religion." There was no picture of the Savior; there was no model of religion. He changed some of his decorations. Reverence at the home, right in the beginning, is a fundamental, contributing factor to happiness in that home.

"Prayer in the home will make a man cease from sin, or sin will make a man cease from prayer."

SIXTH: Let husband or wife never speak in loud tones to each other, "Unless the house is on fire."

In naming this fundamental factor, I mention swearing, a vice which should be so foreign from a Latter-day Saint home that even the thought of it should not come into mind.

SEVENTH: Learn the value of self-control. I do not know who wrote the words, but there is a sentence in a poem:

Boys flying kites haul in their white-winged birds, You can't do that when you're flying words. Thoughts unexpressed may sometimes fall back dead, But God himself can't kill them when they're said.

I believe lack of self-control is one of the most common contributing factors of unhappiness and discord. We see something in the order which we dislike. It is easy to condemn it. And that condemnatory word arouses ill-feeling. If we see it, and we refrain from speaking, in a few moments all is concord and peace instead of animosity and ill-will. Self-control—controlling the unruly member, the tongue, is one of the greatest contributing factors to concord in the home, and one which too many of us fail to develop.

Self-control on the part of governing children: I think the children should be properly directed and controlled, not permitted to run around without any limitation to their actions as they affect other members of the household. I think a child should be taught self-control and obedience from the age of three, particularly between the ages of three and five. Modern psychologists and psychiatrists teach differently, but I know medical men of experience who agree that a little child can learn to obey during that early period, and if you parents fail in this, you will have difficulty in later years. Do I mean that you should be cruel to that child? No! It is unnecessary. But it means that when you say "No," you mean what you say.

EIGHTH: Foster home-ties by continued companionship. I do not believe in the saying that "absence makes the heart grow fonder." It is companionship that fosters love, and when you have vowed your troth and made a covenant to be true to each other, do everything to foster that love, to cement it for eternity. There is nothing sweeter in the world than the companionship of husband and wife, and the confidence and love of children in a Latter-day Saint home. Whenever you can, take those children with you on a picnic or a trip; even though once a summer, do so, and let them have the memory of it. Fathers, take your boys with you on a trip if you can. They will remember that, too, through life; and husband and wife, go together whenever possible, rather than seek the companionship of your associates in business—which is perfectly right, and you should do so, but never at the sacrifice of companionship with wife and children.

NINTH: Make accessible to children proper literature, music, and appropriate moving pictures.

TENTH: Finally, by example and precept, encourage participation in Church activity, thus establishing life's two paramount ideals: First, to build character; and second, to render service. Let those children feel that if they would make home happy; if they would just in a small degree, repay the kindness of parenthood and the sacrifices that mother and father have made, they will develop in themselves a noble character—that is all the father asks, that is all the mother asks, and you owe that, young man, to your father and mother. Young woman, you are recreant if you fail to give your parents the satisfaction of seeing you become a pure and worthy girl who will some day contribute to a home as happy as yours is today.

I am reminded of one of the finest things that Edgar A. Guest ever wrote, and I shall take the time to read it:

We've never seen the Father here, but we have known the Son, The finest type of manhood since the world was first begun, And summing up the words of God, I write with reverent pen, The greatest is the Son he sent to cheer the lives of men. Through him we learned the ways of God, and found the Father's love; The Son it was who won us back to him who reigns above. The Lord did not come down himself to prove to men his worth, He sought our worship through the child he placed upon the earth. How can I best express my life? Wherein does greatness lie? How can I long remembrance win, since I am born to die? Both fame and gold are selfish things; their charms may quickly flee, But I'm the father of a boy who came to speak for me. In him lies all I hope to be; his splendor shall be mine; I shall have done man's greatest work if only he is fine. If someday he shall help the world long after I am dead, In all that men shall say of him my praises shall be said. It matters not what I may win of fleeting gold or fame, My hope of joy depends alone on what my boy shall claim. My story must be told thru him; for him I work and plan; Man's greatest duty is to be the father of a man.

Your greatest duty, son or daughter, is to see to it that your life, your character, reflect credit upon your father and your mother. The responsibility of sonship, the responsibility to be a worthy daughter of noble parents are among the greatest in all the world. In the home let the element, the atmosphere breathe forth character which is one of the highest aims in life, and that is developed through Church service, as well as through courtesy and consideration in the home.

Besides service, as I have indicated, you do have your character, but next to that you take home the service you have rendered.

Paraphrasing the words of the Savior:

"There deeds shall thy memorial be.

Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

(From "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief")
