David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The Home and the Church

Out of the homes of America go the future citizens of America, and what those American homes are will largely determine what our citizenry will be in the future. Indeed, Victor Hugo said: "The future of any country may be largely determined by the attitude of its young men between the ages of 18 and 21." Well, before those boys reach that age, their characters are pretty well established. One of our leading statesmen, Herbert Hoover, writing on this very subject a number of years ago, said:

After we have determined every scientific fact, after we have erected every public safeguard, after we have constructed every edific for education or training or hospitalization, or play, yet all these things are but a tithe of the physical, moral, and spiritual gifts which motherhood gives and home confers.

None of these things carry that affection, that devotion of soul, which is the great endowment from mothers.

The home is the best place in the world to teach the child his responsibilities, to give him happiness in self-control and respect for the rights of others. Unhappiness in the child's life, as in the adult's life, springs largely from nonconformity to natural and social laws. The home is the best place in which to develop obedience, which nature and society will later demand. Some mothers foolishly overlook that and let children do as they please. That is all right within certain limits.

Let the child do certain things just as he pleases, so long as he does not interfere with the rights of a little brother or sister; and then the parent has the right to curtail him. A person's individuality is best safeguarded and developed through conformity with social conventions. If he has learned the rules of the game, he may hope to modify them; and until he has learned them, his attempts at modification will be amateurish. If these rules are never learned, then personal individuality is cramped and happiness constricted.

Home Contributes to Happiness

It is easy to understand, then, how the home contributes to the happiness of the child. First, by teaching obedience; second, by teaching him to be considerate of the rights of others; third, by being a place where confidence and consolations are exchanged; and, fourth, by being a place which serves as a haven of seclusion and rest from the worries and perplexities of life. Such a home is possible. There are thousands of such homes in the Church. From those homes go the future citizens of America. Upon every Latter-day Saint rests the responsibility of developing just such a home.

It is the duty of the Church to teach religion. The home should also do it; but the Bible has been taken not only out of the schools, largely it has been taken out of our homes as well. There is quite a laxity in teaching religion in the homes. Family prayers are being neglected.

Parents, if you do not do anything else, kneel down in the morning with your children. I know your mornings are usually busy, getting the children off to school and father off to work; but have some time when you can kneel and invite God into your home. Prayer is a potent force. You will hear some men reason that prayer is only what you think. Well, if it were just what you think, even that would benefit you. Prayer is a potent force, and into the homes of America we need to invite God, for this is a Christian nation.

Sunday Schools Foster Religion

The function of the Sunday School is to foster religion—to give religious education. To inculcate moral and religious ideals in the lives of children was the dominant motive in the mind of Robert Raikes of Gloucester, England, when he first established the Sunday School, and also in the mind of Richard Ballantyne when he organized that school in the little, log house on First West and Third South in Salt Lake City.

Today we have thousands of officers and teachers—every one of whom gives his or her services gratuitously—devoting 52 Sundays every year, and hours of study during each week for the betterment of children and youth: training them to have virtue; habituating them to industry, activity, and spirituality; making them consider every vice as shameful and unmanly; firing them with ambition to be useful; making them disdain to be destitute of any useful knowledge; and leading them into the joy of the Christ-life, into the friendship of God and the guidance of his Holy Spirit.

There is not a home in the Church, not an individual, that may not and should not come within the radiance of one or more of these teachers. The worth of each Sunday School upon the boys and girls, and upon the community, depends first upon the character, preparation, and devotion of the officers and teachers. No teacher who smokes a cigaret can conscientiously and effectively teach children to refrain from the use of tobacco. A teacher has no right to set an unworthy example to those children who trust him. "What you are," says Emerson, "thunders so loud in my ears, I cannot hear what you say."

Choose Spiritual Life

In both the home and in the Church, with all its auxiliaries and priesthood quorums, there is but one ideal, and that is to inculcate high ideals. The mission of the whole Church is to lift our young people, and the older ones, above the animal plane into the realm of spirituality. I think that is the whole mission of life. The Savior has given us the example. He rose above all things physical and temporal and lived in the spirit, and it is our duty to approach that ideal.

Let us choose the spiritual life. Let us conquer the animal in us. The Christ-life beckons. Christ is our Lord, our Savior, our Guide, our Light. He has restored his Church with all its opportunities for spiritual development. Let us be more determined to make beautiful homes, to be kinder husbands, more thoughtful wives, more exemplary parents to our children; determined that in our homes we are going to have just a little taste of heaven here on this earth. And may there come into our homes the true spirit of Christ, our Redeemer, whose reality, inspiring guidance I know to be real!
