David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Responsibility of a Latter-day Saint Home

A few months ago, the Supreme Court of the United States declared unconstitutional the repeating of a prayer in school. It might sound presumptuous for us to judge the Supreme Court on this, but just the thought that this has occurred is a lesson to every member of the Church all over the world. There is greater responsibility upon the home than ever before.

The Supreme Court urged—the one man who dissented, at any rate, urged—that the home should be the place where religion is taught, and I should just like to say a few words on the responsibility of keeping that home a Latter-day Saint home. President Curtis gave me a good text when he related the story of the two boys who went out to get the tenth load of hay. My brother and I were those two boys. Father stopped down by the creek to get a cool drink of water before he joined us with pitching—we pitched the hay in those days with pitchforks. We did not have the modern way of putting up hay by baling it.

We had hauled nine loads into the barn. We were just loading the tenth, which, of course, would go to tithing, tithing in kind. We boys drove just where we left the last shocks of hay, and father walked halfway towards us, then said, "No, boys, drive over on the knoll where the timothy grows." There was wild grass where we left the hay.

I said, "No, sir, take it as it comes," and I meant it, too. I thought that was fair. "Wire grass" was poor hay to pitch when we were feeding cows and horses.

By that time father was up by the rack, and he said, "Drive over on the knoll there where we have better hay, timothy and red top." And I repeated what I had said to him at some distance. I said, "Take it as it comes."

"No, David, this is the tenth load," he repeated. "The best is not too good for the Lord."

Four-Point Guide

That is the best sermon on tithing that I have ever received. But it is more than that. It is a lesson making your home a school of training, making your home a place where the principles of the Gospel are practiced as well as taught; and I name four things which I am going to leave with you, not as a sermon, but just as a guide.

Keep in mind the fact that the best is none too good for the Lord. What does the Lord want? What does he need to make his glory complete? I shall repeat it for you: "This is my work and my glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

What would the Lord be if there were no men, if there were no children? The earth would be created just the same. Creation is going on now, all around us. Sister McKay and I stood down in Mexico one day, a few days after the volcano had erupted in a man's field. We went down there a year later and there was the volcano in a mountain. That is part of creation. You see volcanos all over the world in all places. You can hear of an earthquake even today. It changes the life and existence of men just as happened last week. Creation is going on. But what would mountains be if there were no human beings, if there were only salted seas thrusting themselves against the shore every minute?

Everything in existence is confined to certain laws, physical laws, and they must obey those laws. To only one creature did God give part of himself, and that was the power of choice. That is a wonderful thing—free agency. To every human being he has given the power of choice, not to any other animal in the world. You are free to choose to be a saint, or free to choose to be a sinner, and you are responsible for it. The Lord will not keep you from being a saint; he will do all he can to make you a saint. He will not keep you from being a sinner; he will do all he can to influence you not to be a sinner, but yours is the choice. In making your life, always keep in mind "The best is not too good for the Lord."

Responsibility in Home

Now, what is the responsibility in the home? Children will follow your example. If you are inconsistent, you are teaching them to be inconsistent. If you are untrue, you are teaching them to be untrue. If you are profane, you are teaching your children to be profane. Yours is the choice. Father, making us get the best hay, proved to us boys that he was consistent in his belief in tithes, that he was consistent in his faith in God. He believed with all his heart that God is real, that God is our Father. When he prayed night and morning as he did, he taught his children faith in God, and he set the example. He asked the children in his home to take their turns and pray. Sometimes when he was off in the fields watering his potatoes or his alfalfa he would take time to tell of an experience he had had in Scotland. He told it so naturally that these boys knew that he was telling the truth.

His life was consistent with his teachings, and that I put down as the first example of a happy, successful home, sincerity in your belief in God the Father and his Son and in the Gospel of Jesus Christ and live it in the home.

The unfortunate thing about the statement regarding prayer in school being unconstitutional is that children going to school will be in an atmosphere where divine influence is a thing apart from life. Not to have a prayer in school is not the harm that will result from that unconstitutional act, but the young children will grow up in school feeling that teaching of God, of religion, is a thing apart from life itself.

A child should grow up feeling that he or she could go to the Father and pray for help in studies, in passing examinations, get help in preparing a talk or an essay, to feel that he or she is in the presence of a divine creator, an intelligent being, to whom the young boy or the young girl, the teenager or a young married couple may go and receive divine assistance. So if you have happiness in your home, put down sincerity as one of the fundamentals.

Second, consistency. What you say in the home to your wife, say it as courteously as you would to a stranger outside. If you are tempted to take an oath, do not take it. You would not take it in the presence of your Father in heaven. Why take it in the presence of your children?

Lesson in Boyhood

That lesson, too, came to me as a young boy just as impressively as when pitching the tenth load of hay. I was riding a horse, carrying a bucket with some nails—I will not take time to tell you all about it—but the horse jumped aside, and I fell off, and swore at him. I did not know father was around. But when I got back to the yard, he said, "David, are you in the habit of swearing?"

"No sir." That was true. I was not in the habit of it.

"I heard you say a very profane word. I think you had better unbridle your horse, go up to the house and wash your mouth," making me feel that I had defiled my mouth. It was consistent to his teachings. "You have fouled your language, your mouth, by cursing that mare." Consistency next to sincerity.

And the third I name, self-control.

Fourth, service. Help each other in the house, in preparation of plays, games. Help your ward, take an active part in your ward, serving somebody else, helping to make the world better.

Sincerity, consistency, self-control, service. Do you know, that was taught by the pioneers when they crossed the plains? Every morning the pioneers in the first company, and most companies that followed, knelt down and asked for guidance and protection for that day. If they were in the wagon, they knelt in the wagon. Those who were driving teams knelt there by the side. There was an hour for prayer. That is faith, sincerity.

Prepared for Eventualities

Second, they had to be prepared for eventualities. Every man who carried a musket was to be sure that it was properly loaded, ready to fire in case of an attack of Indians or buffalo. If he was riding in a wagon, he carried it so it would be ready for use. First, prayer, faith, sincerity; second, preparation—preparation for today comes under consistency. Be just as polite in the house as you are in society. Why should you not be? Children, seeing your politeness, your consideration, consistency, will themselves partake of that same consideration.

And the third thing in crossing the plains, President Young said, every man must be just as considerate of his neighbor's cattle as he is of his own. Take just as much care of those oxen that belong to your neighbor as those that belong to you. Make your homes places of harmony, peace and love. Home may become heaven on earth, a taste of heaven on earth, if Latter-day Saints make them ideal.

Let those elements be manifest whenever you are around, especially in the chapel. The whole building is dedicated to God, is his building. Let us take care of it, coming here just as reverently as we are at home when we kneel down to pray. Be consistent. Let that reverence show that we have faith in God. Be considerate of each other, just as the father is considerate of mother, and mother of father, and as children should be of parents.

Our most precious possession is the youth of the land, and to instuct them to walk uprightly and to become worthy citizens in the kingdom of God is our greatest obligation.

Religious freedom and the separation of church and state are clearly set forth in the first amendment to the Constitution of the United States, and no governmental agency can have any supervision, control, or jurisdiction over religion. Though our public schools may emphasize moral, ethical, and spiritual values as essential elements in the public school program, they cannot favor any particular religion or religious system. The teaching of religion is therefore definitely a responsibility of the home and the Church.

In discharging this responsibility, I say again, members of the Church should ever keep in mind two paramount obligations: (1) to put and to keep your home in order; and (2) to proclaim the divinity of Jesus Christ and essentiality of his teachings to the salvation of the human family.

If, upon examination, you were to find that termites are undermining the foundation of your house, you would lose no time to have experts make thorough examination and have the destructive insects exterminated. You would have the weakened materials removed and the foundation strengthened and, if necessary, rebuilt.

Well, more important than the building of your home is the rebuilding and purifying of your home.

"Our home joys," says Pestalozzi, "are the most delightful earth affords, and the joy of parents in their children is the most holy joy of humanity. It makes their hearts pure and good; it lifts them up to their Father in heaven."

Well, you know, and I know, that such joys are within the reach of most men and women if high ideals of marriage and home be properly fostered and cherished.

But there are destructive termites of homes, as well as of houses, and some of these are backbiting, evil-speaking, faultfinding on the part either of parents or of children. Slander is poison to the soul. "Slanderers are like flies that pass all over a man's good parts to light only on his sores." In the ideal home, there is no slanderous gossip about day schoolteachers, about public officials or Church officials. I am more grateful now, as years have come and gone, to my father, who with hands lifted said, "Now, no faultfinding about your teacher or anybody else."

Quarreling and swearing also are evils that lower the standards of the ideal home. I cannot imagine a father or mother swearing in the presence of children or even letting it pass their lips.

Another deterrent to happiness in the home is the refusal to bear the full responsibility of motherhood and fatherhood. Members of the Church who are healthy and normal should not be guilty of restricting the number of children in the home, especially when such action is prompted by a desire for a good time, or for personal gain, or to keep up with the neighbors, or by a false impression that one or two children in a family can be better educated. These are excuses which members of the Church should not harbor, for they are unjustified.

The question of size of families, I know, brings up many problems: the question of woman's career, the false cry of "quality, not quantity," which one writer rightly says should read "extinction, not preservation," or the matter-of-fact question of daily living and getting on in the world.

With the high ideal of marriage as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, members of the Church should have but one goal, and that is to keep in mind the fact that marriage, the foundation of society, is "ordained of God" for the building of permanent homes in which children may be properly reared and taught the principles of the gospel.

The following, I am sure, will strike a responsive chord in the hearts of the majority of parents in the Church. I quote:

Every period of human life is wonderful; the irresponsible age of childhood, the thrilling years of adolescence and courtship, the productive, fighting, burden-bearing era of parenthood; but the most wonderful time of life comes when the father and mother become chums of their grown-up, successful sons and daughters, and can begin to enjoy their children's children. . . .

Youth is confined with restrictions, limitations, schedules, and dominations; adolescence is full of mysteries, longings, and defeats; early fatherhood is absorbed in struggles and in the solution of problems; extreme old age is shadowed by eternal mysteries; but middle age and normal old age, if life has been rightly and fully lived, are filled with the thrills, not merely of success, but of companionship with children and grandchildren.

Every normal individual should complete the full cycle of human life with all its joys and satisfactions in natural order; childhood, adolescence, youth, parenthood, middle age, and the age of grandchildren. Each age has satisfactions which can be known only by experience. You must be born again and again in order to know the full course of human happiness. When the first baby is born a mother is born, a father is born, and grandparents are born; only by birth can any of these come into being. Only by the natural cycle of life can the great progressive joys of mankind be reached.

Any social system which prevents the individual from pursuing the normal cycle of life, from marrying young, from rearing a family before the age of fifty or so, and from obtaining the deep, peculiar joys of middle life and grandparenthood defeats the divine order of the universe and lays the basis of all sorts of social problems.

When a young man and woman of the right biological type marry in the early twenties and are prepared to earn a living and support and rear a family, they have started in the normal cycle of life. They are likely to give society far fewer problems of crime, immorality, divorce, or poverty than are their unmarried companions. They will have children and rear them while they are strong, enjoy them when they are grown up and successful, depend upon them in weakness, and profit by the finest type of old-age insurance ever invented by man or God, an insurance which pays its annuities in material goods when necessary, but which mainly pays in the rich joys of love and fellowship. . . The crowning joys of human experience will come in middle age and onward, through the companionship, love, and honor of children and grandchildren. (R. J. Sprague.)

We appeal to all members of the Church to set their homes in order and to enjoy the true happiness of harmonious family life.
