David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Home and Family — Source of True Happiness

I have confidence in the membership of the Church. That confidence does not waver. I have confidence in the young people. True, some of them tarry, some of them seem to be indifferent; but at heart they are generally pretty well anchored. I have confidence in our parents, generally speaking, they are doing their best to establish homes; and that is the topic about which I should like to speak this morning.

Marriage and Courting

I believe in being happy. It is man's privilege to be happy if he chooses the path that leads to it. I am going to point out, this morning, one of the best sources of happiness in life—the greatest source of happiness. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, on one occasion, that "happiness is the object and design of our existence and will be the end thereof if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments without first knowing them. We cannot expect to know all or more than we now know unless we comply with or keep those we have already received."

That is a fundamental prophetic statement from a prophet of the Lord! Do you note that he does not mention pleasure? That is a wise discrimination. Young folks, note that especially; he does not say that pleasure is the end of existence, the object of life. No, he says happiness; and there is a difference between happiness or joy, and pleasure. Any living thing, particularly in the higher scale of life, may experience pleasure; but happiness comes only to the human soul. I do not know of any better definition of pleasure than that given by Robert Burns. In his "Tam O'Shanter," he describes pleasure and associates it with a scene in which pleasure is frequently experienced. Note his definition:

But pleasures are like poppies spread, You seize the flower, its bloom is shed; Or like the snowfall in the river, A moment white—then melts forever; Or like the Borealis race, That flit ere you can point their place; Or like the rainbow's lovely form Evanishing amid the storm.

That is pleasure. You may experience it, but you may experience, too, the aftermath; and, unfortunately, nearly all the world is seeking pleasure, not discriminating between it and happiness.

So this morning I am going to follow the suggestion about married life and courting and approach it with this idea. Agree with it or disagree with it, as you may, but the truest source of happiness is found in the home. We have operating in the world today one of the most potent forces against the home that we have ever had, I believe, in the history of the world. We sensed it recently as we approached the Iron Curtain, got within the shadow of the Russian sector in Berlin, and moved about in the Russian zone in Germany.

It is a force which is not only trying to substitute the state for the home, but trying to dissuade the minds of youth from believing in the existence of God himself! So I am pleading for homes and appealing to the Latter-day Saint home, not only for your own happiness, but for the salvation of the human family.

Way back, hundreds of years ago, Leonidas said:

Cling to thy home. If there the meanest shed Yield thee a haven or hearth and shelter for thy head, And some poor plot with vegetables stored Be all heaven allots thee for thy board, Unsavory bread and herbs that scattered grow Wild on the river brink or mountain brow, Yet in this fearless mansion shall grow More heart's repose than all the world beside.

I think the old philosopher was right.
