David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The Responsibility of Youth

One hundred years ago, there was not a settlement of civilized man in the Sevier Valley.

It took brave men and women with staunch and loyal hearts to erect the first forts and build the first log houses in this wild unsettled country.

Ten men and two women fell as martyrs to pioneer life.

In imagination tonight I hear the voiceless lips of the young man Peter Ludvigsen say to the young men of today—BE TRUE.

If Jens Petersen, his trusting, heroic wife, and Mary Smith, who were martyred on the morning of March 21, 1867 while on their way from Richfield to Glenwood, could speak to you tonight, they would say—BE TRUE.

Young men and women, yours is not the call to fight the hostile Indians, to build stockades, nor to point the plow for the first time into the sterile, stubborn glebe, but you face problems equally great and stupendous in their effect upon the future welfare of humanity.

In the recent world war, when dictators, drunken with power and intoxicated by desire for conquest, conquered peaceful nations and murdered millions of their fellow beings—who was it that threw themselves in the invaders path and saved humanity from destruction? It was the youth of freedom-loving nations who, many of them with their bodies piled high as an impregnable wall blocked the maddened hordes and drove the would-be destroyers of the rights of man back to a merited, ignominious defeat.

Who is it who now must send out the lifeline to stranded nations and carry forward the banner of peace, liberty and good will as a guide for baffled nations to follow? It is the youth of today who, taught in the ways of morality and in the strength of spiritual attainment, must stand adamant against the false idealogies that would undermine the tried and tested ideals and truths of the pioneers who worshipped the God of truth, and chose the gospel of Christ as their philosophy of life.

The leadership demanded of youth today is not attained by chance, not fostered by indulgence—it demands careful preparation—a preparation that should constantly be impregnated, if you please, by the sweet spirit of four loyalties.

I. Loyalty to Self

By conserving physical strength and youthful vigor.

II. Loyalty to Parents

Our debt to our parents is unpayable except in one way—and that is in emulating their ideals and bringing joy to them in their old age, and satisfaction to those who have gone before in seeing that we keep ourselves clean and wholesome.

III. Loyalty to Country

A great writer has said that "The destiny of any nation at any given time depends on the opinions of its young men under five and twenty."

IV. Loyalty to God and Truth

Our belief in equality and brotherhood is a Christian heritage, and it fades out of the picture when Christian belief is forgotten. We have to educate a race to realize that no man is unwanted, that every soul is unique and has a life to live made up of momentous choices which will make or mar his own life and the life of the community and the universe.

Conclusion

To cherish these loyalties to make popular these ideals, the world needs men and women of unimpeachable character. In the words of Riddell:

"The crying need of the hour is manhood; not legislation, not organization, not agitation, but men, men who can stand in the presence of Christ and truthfully say, `The place that I occupy does not need reforming.' Men, who are ready and willing to begin the reformation of the world in their own hearts. Men who can say to the struggling brother, `Follow me.'"

"If I were a voice—a persuasive voice That could travel the wide world through, I would fly on the beams of the morning light And speak to men with a gentle might, And tell them to be true. I'd fly o'er land and sea, Wherever a human heart might be, Telling a tale, or singing a song, In praise of the Right and in blame of the Wrong."

What is your answer?
