David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Home Building

At the turn of the century in 1901 there was distributed throughout the Church with the approval of the presidency and general board of the Relief Society, a book entitled Woman, one paragraph of which I think is so applicable I am going to read it:

"As for woman, wherever she goes and whatever her mission—for travel or for service—her native instincts draw her homewards.

"She may have unusual power and be distinguished for versatility; she may have artistic ability and attain distinction on the stage or in the studio; she may make bargains behind the counter or `be mighty in ledger and great upon change,' she may serve as shop-girl, toil as fieldhand or in factory, be typist, ticket agent, street car conductor; she may write with the power of George Eliot and Elizabeth Barrett Browning; she may skillfully wield the pen and prove a very magician in journalism and in the nobler literatures; she may possess great persuasive power in the pulpit or on the platform; she may display diplomatic ability in the lobby or cabinet; she may fill the professor's chair or preside over college or university; she may, like Joan of Arc, be the heroine of many battlefields, or, like Victoria, reign with `all the royal markings of a queen,' but wherever a woman is, or whatever a woman does, she is at her best, her divinest best, at home! There is the center of her power. Amiel says, `Woman is the salvation or destruction of the family. She carries its destiny in the folds of her mantle.'"

It is wonderful what a responsibility each wife and mother carries. A successful wife and mother is responsible, first, for the physical welfare of her children. Second, she must have the qualities of a teacher. She should be, indeed is expected to be, not only a disciplinarian but one who wisely guides her children in their quest for truth and knowledge. In this she becomes a confidant—she warns—she protects. Third, she must be a business woman. Fourth, upon her, even more than upon the father, depends the child's guidance in spirituality.

For me to comment even briefly upon these responsibilities would occupy more time than I have at my disposal, so I shall confine my remarks to the second named responsibility—woman's influence as teacher, disciplinarian, guide, protector.

After a lecture by the late Francis Wayland Parker, a great Chicago educator, a woman asked:

"How early can I begin the education of my child?"

"When will your child be born?" asked the educator.

"Born?" she gasped. "Why, he is already five years old."

"My goodness, woman," he cried, "don't stand here talking to me—hurry home; already you have lost the best five years."

Do you know, I believe that it is absolutely true. If mothers would get control of their children throughout childhood and youth, they should get control of the child before he is five years of age. That is fundamental, and it can be done in kindness and in love.

Now, so much for influence, so much for the responsibility and opportunity of mother. I do not want to be a pessimist, but I must speak as I feel, and warn if necessary, and I am going to take you into confidence and speak, however, of something which is just as apparent to you as to anybody.

She of whom you speak, My mother, looks as pure as some serene Creation minted in the golden moods Of sovereign artist; not a thought, a touch, But pure as lines of green that streak the white Of the first snowdrop's inner leaves.

I love to think of my mother just that way. I may be old fashioned, but I think I could not if I felt she had the stain of nicotine in nerve, or sinew, or muscle.

I do not wish to be understood as implying that woman's ability to occupy and to reign in the domestic realm precludes the occupancy of other spheres and the discharge of other duties.

"Other than purely domestic engagements may and indeed must occupy her attention. She must attend church and contribute to the charms of social entertainments. She must be interested in local philanthropic reform. She must pursue courses of reading and research. She may use pen and brush or chisel in the worlds of literature and art. She must examine, according to her endowment, opportunity, and responsibility, political, social, and scientific questions, and according to her ability render service in all. But she must account every other thing as beneath the domestic in importance and power. She must feel that in passing from any one or all of these she ascends when she enters or resumes the domestic life."

"And parents shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:28.)

This command leaves no question as to the responsibility of parents to teach their children—a responsibility too frequently shifted to the shoulders of the Church, the public schools, and officers of the law.

In the present world-wide struggle there are four essential bulwarks, viz.,

The stupendous accomplishments of the United States industries in the short space of two years in building ships, airplanes, manufacturing munitions, and in shipping supplies to allied countries, are little short of miraculous—a record unparalleled in the history of the world!

The home front seems to be cracking! It is of this I am going to speak.

Out of the homes of America go the future citizens of the republic. Upon properly ordered households and the uplifting moral atmosphere of home life depend more than upon any other phase of social life the happiness of the human family. Home, not the state, is the natural protector of childhood. Parents more than teachers, more than officers of the law, are molders of children's moral natures.

One of the foreboding indications of the weakening of the home line is the waning influence of parenthood as shown in the increasing delinquency among the young. Too many parents seem to be neglecting to teach their children "to walk uprightly before the Lord." A few weeks ago Inspector Rolf T. Harbo, of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, told national officers, chairmen, and state presidents of the National Congress of Parents and Teachers that "delinquency among girls under 21 has risen 64% in the first half of [the year past];" and "this increase comes on top of an increase of 95% for the [year past]. . . They blame the rise of youthful crimes on the breakdown of family ties, the irregular working hours of adults with the resultant lack of supervision, the gangs of juveniles formed for unwholesome acts, and a general laxity on the part of adults."

In Utah, as well as throughout the United States, delinquency, particularly among young girls, is increasing. Fifty-two per cent of the delinquents are from broken homes!

For much of this delinquency, we must hold parents responsible. True, the wisest parents sometimes lose control of one or more of their children. Secret indulgences in sinful practices, false teachings, and ideals inculcated by pseudo-philosophers, sometimes counteract wholesome home influences. Even the Lord himself had one-third of his family on one occasion reject the divine Plan of Salvation. But after recognizing all this, the fact remains that "homes are the nursery of all domestic virtues, and without a becoming home the exercise of those virtues is impossible."

How apt, then, the divine admonition: "And they shall teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord."

A man who has entered into a sacred covenant in the House of the Lord to remain true to the marriage vow is a traitor to that covenant if he separates himself from his wife and family just because he has permitted himself to become infatuated with a pretty face and comely form of some young girl who flattered him with a smile.

When we refer to the breaking of the marriage tie, we touch upon one of the saddest experiences of life. For a couple who have basked in the sunshine of each other's love to stand by daily and see the clouds of misunderstanding and discord obscure the lovelight of their lives is tragedy indeed. In the darkness that follows, the love sparkle in each other's eyes is obscured. To restore it fruitless attempts are made to say the right word, and to do the right thing; but the word and act are misinterpreted, an angry retort re-opens the wound, and hearts once united, as two dewdrops that slip into one, become torn wider and wider asunder. When this heart-breaking state is reached, a separation is sought. But divorce is not the proper solution, especially if there are children concerned. Far better to follow the wise admonition of William George Jordan:

"Life is too short and love too great to sacrifice one hour through pettiness. What matters it whose the fault or whose the forgiveness? It is a very poor brand of personal dignity that dares to throw its desecrating shadow between them and the joy of reconciliation and new bonds of love.

"When the realization of the waning of love comes, the two should seek to forget for a moment the differences, the saddening changes, the cemetery of dead memories and buried emotions, and try to get back somehow to some common ground of unity and understanding. They should seek to gather together the trifles of sacred things not yet lost. In the thought of these there may be a vitalizing flame of old love flashing out from the dull gray of the ashes that will burn away the dross of discord and misunderstanding. . .

"Love is the most valuable cargo on the ship of life. It is the greatest thing in this world, and the only thing that will make the next worthy of the living. The ebb-tide of love is the saddest thing in a true individual life. It is a life's folly to let love die if aught we can do will keep it real and living."

To make home life more stable:

(1) Instruct the youth of both sexes that the foundation of a happy home is laid during pre-marital days. Teach young men as well as young women to keep the spring of life pure by conforming their youthful lives to the single standard of morality. When that is done, the bride comes to the man she loves a stainless, priceless jewel. He in turn receives her not as a cheat, but as a man who can meet his bride on the high plane of moral integrity.

I know there are people in the world, some perhaps who are listening to what I am saying, who consider such an ideal old-fashioned, behind the times! They dub those who entertain such ideas as "reactionaries," "standpatters," and "anti-progressives," etc. Well, all I can say is that nature herself is "old-fashioned," as old as love itself; for since history began man has wanted the woman he loved to be his and his alone. But aside from this, the couple who come to each other as true lovers should have no hidden secrets to break forth at a future time to cause embarrassment and perhaps to destroy the temple of love that has been in process of building for years.

(2) Teach the young people that marriage is not merely a man-made institution, but that it is ordained of God, is therefore a sacred ceremony, and should receive their gravest consideration before they enter upon a contract that involves either happiness or misery for the rest of their lives. Marriage is not something which should be entered into lightly, terminated at pleasure, or ended at the first little difficulty that might arise. The least young people can do is to approach it with honest intentions of building a home that will contribute to the bulwark of a noble society.

(3) The ceremony should be consummated not in secret but in the presence of friends and loved ones. Let marriage be solemnized as far as possible at the place of residence, which will minimize the evils of runaway marriages. For members of the Church the temple should be the chosen place in which this sacred obligation is assumed. For the future of Latter-day Saint homes, young men and young women should so live as to be worthy to consummate their union for time and all eternity in the House of the Lord. Regarding this any intelligent person who believes in the persistence of personality after death, in the immortality of the soul, will recognize at once that love, the divinest attribute of the last, will also persist. Death cannot dissolve the union formed by love when that union is sealed by the power of the holy priesthood. Couples having sealed upon them the blessings of the new and everlasting covenant may continue in joy and exaltation throughout the eternities to come.

Under the present stress and strain manifest among social and political groups today, because of the exigencies and horrors of war, the home front does seem to be somewhat unstable, yet the divine institution of marriage must and shall be saved.

Would you have a strong and virile nation?—then keep your homes pure. Would you reduce delinquency and crime?—then lessen the number of broken homes. It is time that civilized peoples realize that the home largely determines whether children shall be of high or low character. Home-building, therefore, should be the paramount purpose of parents, and of the nation.
