David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Peace from Within

There is no happiness without peace. Today, the president of the United States, his cabinet, Congress, the Senate, the House of Representatives, the judiciary, are all seeking peace in the world. Nations are longing for it. Mothers and fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers who have children and grandchildren in the armed forces are praying daily that we might have peace.

Peace is the message that came when the Savior was born a babe in Bethlehem. It was heralded by the angel choir, singing, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:14.)

"Peace," he said to his disciples toward the close of his ministry, "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33)

After his resurrection, when the doors were closed and the ten disciples were in session, as he greeted them, his first salutation was, "Peace be unto you." (John 20:21) And eight days later, when the eleven were there, the same salutation, "Peace." (See John 20:26)

What a glorious thing it is, brethren and sisters, and this is my message: Peace cannot be found in external things. Peace comes from within. "There is no peace except by the triumph of principles," said the wise Emerson. Peace is within the individual soul. There is no peace when one's conscience is seared or when one is conscious of having committed some untoward act.

Peace springs from righteousness in the soul, from upright living. If we are going about in the world to establish peace, let us begin at home, first with each individual. If you want peace tonight, remember yours is the responsibility to obtain it, and it is my responsibility, and it is your privilege and mine to attain it.

May our homes become warm nests where children may be protected and grow into noble men and women; where love may find privacy, old age repose, prayer, an altar, and the nation a sure source of strength and perpetuity.
