David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Some Principles of a Happy Home

"And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the Living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, when eight years old, the sin be unto the heads of the parents.

"For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion. . .

"And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:25-26, 28.)

We are living in a most momentous age. We see on every hand manifestations of commotion. Political institutions are crumbling. Old forms and methods are fast giving way to new ones. Political organizations are being revolutionized, some for better and some for worse. Old fundamental principles of government are tottering. Some have been replaced by theories that are not tenable, others are not practicable, and some that are infamous. In the midst of this world commotion, the home, the fundamental institution of society, is also threatened. Some, inbued with false philosophies, have attempted to strike at the sacredness and the perpetuity of family life. And wherever we find the evidence of these undermining false philosophies, the responsibility of saving this sacred institution, the home, devolves largely upon us—for we know that the family ties are eternal.

There is nothing temporary in the home of the Latter-day Saints. There is no element of transitoriness in the family relationship. To the Latter-day Saint the home is truly the basic unit of society; and parenthood is next to Godhood. The secret of good citizenship lies in the home. The secret of instilling faith in God, faith in his Son, the Redeemer of the world, faith in the organizations of the Church, lies in the home. There it is centered. God has placed upon parents the responsibility of instilling these principles into the minds of children. Our schools, our Church organizations, and some worthy social institutions are all helps in the upbuilding and guidance of the youth, but none of these—great and important as they are in the lives of our youth—can supplant the permanence and the influence of the parents in the home.

There are a few fundamental principles which we should ever keep in mind; first, the eternity of the marriage relation. Oh, may our youth throughout the land realize that they have within their grasp the possibilities of that form of marriage which will contribute more to their happiness in this world and to their eternal union and happiness in the world to come than can be obtained anywhere else in the world. Let our young men and women look forward with pride, with eagerness, to the time when, in worthiness, they may go to the House of God and have their loved ones sealed by the bonds of the eternal priesthood for time and all eternity.

Second, let us hold to that first word in the second part of the fundamental law of humanity, the Ten Commandments. Those first few commandments refer to our relationship to God; the last few to our relationship to humanity. The second part begins with the word honor—"Honor thy father and thy mother." (Ex. 20:12.) Let us cherish in our homes as we cherish the lives of our children themselves, that word honor with all the synonyms—respect, reverence, veneration; honoring mother, honoring father, seeking to have our children honor us as we honor and revere God, our Eternal Father. Let the element of honor, devotion, reverence permeate the home life.

Third, let us never lose sight of the principle of obedience. Obedience is heaven's first law, and it is the law of the home. There can be no true physical force, but through the element of love. There is no "home" without love. You may have a palace and yet not have a home, and you may live in a log house with a dirt roof, and a dirt floor, and have there the most glorious home in all the world, if within those four log walls there permeates the divine principle of love, love that draws from husband to wife and from children to parents that blessed obedience and compliance that makes life worthwhile.

I believe firmly that parents fail to get obedience from their children during the first five years of childhood. I believe that during that most important period of child life the parents sow the seeds of obedience or disobedience. Some of us fill that period of child life with too many don'ts, failing to make the child realize that a request from father, a request from mother should be complied with. Mother says: "Don't touch that," to the little child. The little child toddles along and touches it. What is the result? The seeds of disobedience are sown. You don't have to punish the little child. Lovingly, kindly, but firmly, teach the child that there are rules in the house which should be obeyed. Mothers, fathers, treasure sacredly and sense keenly your responsibility to the child during those first five plastic years of its life.

With these home elements I desire to mention another, and that is mutual service, everyone working for the others. If some pernicious theories were permitted to prevail and take out from the home the relationship of parents to children and children to parents, and children to each other, they would deprive humanity of one of the greatest means of teaching the true spirit of Christ—sacrifice for one another, salvation through service. Oh, that home is most beautiful in which each strives to serve the other in unselfish service.

Honor, obedience, mutual service, eternity of the marriage relation—these spell home, and they comprehned the spirit in which the principles of life and salvation should be taught to children.
