David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Three Realms in Which Woman's Influence Should Ever Be Paramount

We are living in a changing world. We are in the midst of it, so near us that many of us fail to realize or discern while changes are being brought about. I noticed this recently when we were being driven from the airport in London to our hotel, about twenty or twenty-five miles distance. I noticed the difference in transportation. Sixty years before this recent visit, I crossed on a steamboat to Great Britain. It took, as I remember, about seven-and-a-half days. That morning we had been only fourteen hours from New York, and we were delayed by head winds and the pilot thought it best to land at Shannon, Ireland, to refuel. As I say, it took fourteen hours. Think of the progress during those sixty years! Then another thing, as we were being driven to the hotel, I was surprised at the number of autos, or rather, at the absence of the fine Clydesdale horses that I saw sixty years before, drawing heavily loaded lorries. Not one did we see during that entire trip that morning. All had given way to the advance in building and driving of automobiles, trucks, etc. Another thing, I was surprised to see a lady policeman—women policemen. Sixty years before that, even thirty years so far as I was concerned, we hadn't thought that was a field for women to enter. And I learned, while I was in London, of the efficiency of women as women policemen.

In 1930, there were over eight million women workers gainfully employed. Today, as we have learned, there are twenty-eight million. There has been a vast increase in women workers during the last twenty-five years in various occupations in which, formerly, only men participated. And this great increase is particularly among married women.

Now I don't know that there is any objection to women entering the fields of literature, science, art, social economy, study and progress, and all kinds of learning, or participation in any and all things which contribute to the fullness of her womanhood and increase her upbuilding influence in the world; but I do know that there are three areas or realms in which women's influence should always be felt. No matter what changes take place, these three realms should be dominated always by the beauty, the virtue, and intelligence of womankind.

I should like to refer to those three. The first has been covered impressively by Sister Spafford, and that is the realm of home building. Next to that is the realm of teaching, and the third, which has already been emphasized, the realm of compassionate service. "Someday," writes one of our leading columnists, "when women realize that the object of their emancipation is not to make them more like men, but more powerfully womanly, and therefore of greater use to men and themselves, and society, this implicit demand and need of women for a world based, not on mechanical but on human principles, may break through as the most important influence upon history, and bring with it a renaissance of liberalism and humanism."

Nor is it necessary to convince us of the potency of home influence in shaping character. There are certain trusts to which it is only necessary to call attention and minds instinctively assent to them. Some of these trusts are that the home sentiment is second only to religion in influencing the human mind, and all else may be forgotten, but the experiences of childhood will remain undimmed on the walls of memory. "Napoleon understood well the nature of home and its influence, when he said, `The great need of France is mothers.'

"In democratic countries like the United States and Canada, where the fate of the nation is in the hands of the people, the future of the nation is in the hands of the children. They must be fitted for their high responsibilities by the influences of home. These countries should fear the disloyalty and contention of the fireside more than nefarious plots of scheming politicians. If boys wrangle and contend at home, if they cannot discuss with dignity the little questions that arise in their daily intercourse with one another, be sure they will not honor the nation when they take their places in Senate, Parliament, or Congress to discuss the great problems that confront the civilization of the twentieth century.

"Now, if home may be so powerful an influence for good, how important becomes the cultivation of the home sentiment. To be destitute of this sentiment is almost as great a misfortune as to be destitute of the religious sentiment. Indeed, we believe that one cannot possess a true exalted love of home while there is wanting in his character that which unawakened may yield the fruit of a godly life." (And I cannot think of a member of this Church, particularly one who holds a prominent position, being cruel to his wife, especially before children. I think he is not a good member of the Church; he is not a good Christian. And for a man to strike a woman, as I have heard recently, is just beastly.) "What a mighty responsibility rests upon him who assays to make a home, for the founding of a home is as sacred a work as the founding of a Church. Indeed, every home should be a temple dedicated to divine worship, where human beings through life should worship God through the service of mutual love,—the highest tribute man can pay to God." (Our Home, page 38.)

One of the greatest needs in the world today is intelligent, conscientious motherhood. It is to the home that we must look for the inculcation of the fundamental virtues which contribute to human welfare and happiness.

Womanhood should be intelligent and pure, because it is the living, life-fountain from which flows the stream of humanity. She who would pollute that stream by smoking tobacco, using poisonous drugs or by germs that would shackle the unborn, is untrue to her sex, and an enemy to the strength and perpetuity of the race.

The laws of life and the revealed word of God combine in placing upon motherhood and fatherhood the responsibility of giving to children, not only a pure, unshackled birth, but also a training in faith and righteousness. They ought to be taught "to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old." To those who neglect this in precept and example, the Doctrine and Covenants says, "the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:85.)

There seems to be sweeping over the nations of the earth at the present time a wave of disbelief in God, of disregard for agreements, of dishonesty in personal as well as in civil and international affairs. There is a reversion to the rule and law of the jungle in which might makes right. David Harum's silver rule, "Do unto the other fellow what the other fellow wants to do to you, and do it first," too often supplants the Golden Rule, "Do unto others as you would have others do unto you."

Political poison is being administered to the youth of America by advocates of communism professedly interested in fostering liberty, peace, and democracy, but who insidiously attempt to influence youth associated with what they call the National Youth Administration, or American Student Union, and various other organizations, as some other poison being administered, secretly, as we have learned recently, even in the mission field by cultists who do not hesitate to lie and misrepresent supposed principles of the gospel.

In an article recently printed in a current magazine appears this statement: "There are a great many more young communists in universities in this country than most of the adult population even dares to realize. That is because," continues the quotation, "parents do not bother to ask their children what their beliefs are."

There is one effective source which can counteract such teaching, and that is the teaching of an intelligent, Christian mother. The times cry for more true religion in the home.

Now I should like to say a word about teaching. Every mother is a teacher, she cannot help it. Either good or bad, the mother's image is the first that stamps itself on the unwritten page of the young child's mind. It is her caress that first awakens a sense of security; her kiss the first realization of affection; her sympathy and tenderness, the first assurance that there is love in the world. Her influence, either good or bad, implanted during the first years of his childhood, lingers with him and permeates his thoughts and memory as distinctively as perfume clings to each flower. In her office as mother, she holds the key to the soul, and she determines his character.

But mother is not the only one who exerts an influence as teacher. Often it is a maiden aunt who many times exerts a greater influence that the mother; yet her labors, "gleaming hopes, and obscure sacrifices, her solitary broodings and vicarious ambitions, have seldom received attention from the historian or the biographer. As a molder and shaper of the unpromising material of nephews and nieces, she has been allowed to live, toil, and die unpraised."

Read Emerson's life and see how his aunt's influence shaped his course and made a sickly boy one who is recognized as the greatest thinker in America.

And now I should like to say a word about the young girls as teachers. If we can make our girls think that they are living in a realm where they have power to shape the destiny of teen-agers, it would be a wonderful thing in society. I do not know whether we can, but I shall give a hint. One of the greatest safeguards for a teen-age girl is a consciousness that by her words and acts, she contributes to the betterment or degradation of society—that in protecting or defending herself from the questionable advances of a scheming young man, she honors herself and woman-kind by resistance rather than by indulgence. She can do this by answering his flattering words of pretended love by saying in her own words, "No man will injure one he loves." Thus, in her early career, she becomes not an enticer but a teacher, her natural and noble calling.

Next to motherhood and teaching, woman attains her highest glory in the realm of compassionate service. One of the most impressive instances in the Bible is the history told by one or of one to whom I apply the title, "A Relief Society of the Ancient Church" whose life was full of "good works and almsdeeds which she did." Her name was Tabitha, "which by interpretation is called Dorcas" (which means gazelle, beautiful).
