David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Marriage—a Sacred Relationship

It is possible to make home a bit of heaven. Indeed, I picture heaven as a continuation of the ideal home. Some man has said: "Home filled with contentment is one of the highest hopes of this life." He is not far from it.

I could not find the little maid Content, So out I rushed, and sought her far and wide; But not where Pleasure each new fancy tried, Heading the maze of rioting merriment, Nor where, with restless eyes and bow half bent, Love in the brake of sweetbriar smiled and sighed, Nor yet where Fame towered, crowned and glorified, Found I her face, nor wheresoe'er I went. So homeward back I crawled, like a wounded bird, When Lo! Content sat spinning at my door; And when I asked her where she was before— `Here all the time,' she said; `I never stirred; Too eager in thy search, you passed me o'er, And, though I called, you neither saw nor heard.' (Alfred Austin)

Yes, truly the "Maid Content" is in the ideal home. Thinking men generally have come to that conclusion today. Scientists say that civilization is to be measured at different stages largely by the development of the home. Historically they tell us about practices of different forms of marriage among early peoples and races. Most of them are united in the conclusion that the family stands forth as the highest form of associated life. It is the natural unit of all future civic development, for in the home we find content.

"There is something wrong," said one man, "with our present-day marriages." The fault, he thinks, lies in the fact that men marry without any thought of fatherhood. They choose their mates from the "pin-up" girls rather than ask the question, "Will she be a good mother to my children?" and she, looking for a hero instead of thinking "Will he make a good husband and father?"

This author continues: "One current fundamental thing becomes plain: Nobody teaches fatherhood in America. And yet it is the basic reason for the very existence of males! . . . To take the place of fatherhood and, to some extent, of motherhood also—our society has invented endless forms of child appeasement: radio programs and comic books, movies and kindergartens and summer camps—parent substitutes of every possible sort. . .

"If the home is the foundation of the nation and of society, which it is, we as a people had better begin making real homes and real families. It has become increasingly popular to regard youngsters as a bore and to seize every possible means to escape their company. Children raised by such couples will inevitably be bored by everything in marriage except pleasure. But the good life is not a pleasure hunt. If we want to be happy, we must pursue happiness, not pleasure. And the measure of a happy person is his ability to be tough with himself and tender with others.

"If we are to give marriages their proper start, we must change the ideas and values of those who are to marry. The question of the young man must not be: Who's the cutest number I know? The young woman must not ask: Who will treat me like a bride forever? The question most likely to yield the right lifetime answer is this:

"Is she the best mother I can find for my children? He the best father?

"Or phrase it: Would I want to be her child? His?"

Such is the expression of one who senses the responsibility of the home as a place in which to rear children. That is the point I am asking, and if we keep that in mind—not look upon marriage as a means of selfish indulgence—we are going to save many misunderstandings, for father and mother lose themselves in the lives of the little babes that come. In the lives of little children they find content and true happiness.

Here, to young folk particularly, and to all of you, and to the nation, I should like to say a word about divorce because there are too many who are wrecking their lives upon the shoals of broken homes. I used to think that the man was entirely to blame. I grew to manhood thinking there was no unfaithful woman. My mother was my ideal, my sisters, and my wife. And for all marital troubles in life, I blamed the man. I am deeply sorry that during my schooldays I had to change that ideal. Here are some of the usual causes for divorce: infidelity on the part of one or the other, habitual drunkenness, physical cruelty or violence, union of an innocent girl with a reprobate. I mention these as conditions which seem to justify in some cases a separation. If we could remove them I would say there never should be a divorce. It is Christ's ideal that home and marriage should be perpetual—eternal. To the Pharisee's question, "Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife" the Savior answered: "Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female.

"And said, for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

"Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." (Matt. 19:3-6.)

Marriage is a sacred relationship entered into for purposes that are well recognized. It is claimed by some observers that our present modern marriages tend to frustrate these purposes. Modern living conditions, writes one, contribute to these frustrations.

"Formerly a married woman had a home to care for, often several children. Today, in many parts of our country, a married woman continues either to follow her vocation or to spend her time seeking new stimulations—no children to care for—no house to clean—no meals to cook. Under such conditions her leisure-time activities become her all-absorbing interests—interests which often lead her away from her husband rather than to him."

Here is a paragraph from a letter I received only last week: "The first year of our marriage seemed to go very well, but after our baby was born, it seemed like things started going on the rocks. My husband seemed to resent the attention I paid to the baby. When the baby was cross, instead of trying to make things easier for me by helping me with what I was doing so I could go and take care of the baby, or care for the baby himself, he would lose his temper, yell at the baby, shake the baby basket and scare the child."

After reading that, I rode to Ogden and entered a business store. An old friend came up and said, "I should like to ask you a question. My daughter is having trouble with her husband. They have three children, three boys. He has fallen in love with an 18-year-old girl."

"Were they married in the temple?" said I.

"Yes."

"Well, if I were you I would see her parents and tell them the danger that the girl is in. She and your daughter's husband are standing on a precipice."

I will not relate the entire circumstance, but I am going to say this: that that condition with that couple is one in which a husband has an opportunity to prove himself either a man or a monkey; one in which he proves whether his character is that of a lion or a rat.

A married man's trifling with a young girl's affections, a flippant attitude toward marriage, the ill-advised suggestion of "companionate marriage," the base, diabolical theory of "free sex experiment," and the ready-made divorce courts are dangerous reefs upon which many a family bark is wrecked.
