David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Temple Marriage

Before dwelling upon the significance of the temple marriage, I should like to make a few remarks about marriage in general. We read in the Doctrine and Covenants that "marriage is ordained of God for man." Note that expression. "Wherefore it is lawful that he should have one wife and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation." (D&C 49:15, 16.)

In this revelation is set forth clearly the significance of marriage in the Church of Jesus Christ. Marriage is not something to be entered into lightly, terminated at pleasure, or ended at the first difficulty that might arise.

To the Latter-day Saint, marriage is a divine ordinance, and we look upon the home as the best security of civilization, and upon properly conducted homes in which intelligent parenthood directs, as the best means of the improvement of mankind. I think we make no exception. It is in such homes that the virtues that produce true manhood and beautiful womanhood are fostered. That, my dear young people, is the kind of marriage and the kind of home that we shall have in mind as we consult together this evening.

Marriage, therefore, in the light of revelation is an institution with the stamp of divinity upon it, and no person and no state can deprecate that institution with impunity. When Jesus referred to marriage, he associated with it the eternal idea: "What God hath joined together let no man put asunder."

One writer said, "In this human life, changeable, ephemeral, evasive, failing, frail, there is only one thing that ought to last forever, till death," then he adds, and beyond death—marriage, the only link of eternity in the perishable human chain." (Papini)

Marriage is almost a universal desire. Every young person at one time or another, particularly when he or she is in the later teens, is looking forward to the consummation of that ordinance. Hency C. Link, psychologist, corroborates this idea in these words: "Within the past three years I have, in connection with certain nationwide studies among college students, asked the young women such questions as: `What career in life is most important to you? Do you consider marriage and helping a husband in his career more important, less important, or equally as important as an independent career of your own?'"

I wonder how you girls would answer that tonight.

"From ninety to ninety-five per cent of the college women have answered that a career as a wife and mother was their primary aim, and that helping a husband in his career was more important than a career of their own. The growing belief among college women that the making of a home, the raising of a family, and furthering the career of a husband were in themselves a career of major importance indicates a wholesome return to fundamentals."

The same author quoted in an article in a current magazine, asked this: "If you had to choose one of the following: An interesting job, an independent income of $500 a week, a happy family and home life—which would you choose?

"Eighty per cent answered: A happy home and family life."

I offer that as encouragement under present conditions, when our great economic changes are threatening the home, necessitating wives to work, mothers to leave their children with baby-sitters or groups organized to take care of babies. We must not get away from the fundamental facts that the home is the basis of civilization, and Latter-day Saints have the obligation to build ideal homes and rear exemplary families to the world.

I am happy to greet you young men and young women who are now just entering your later teens, and who cherish, I hope, the ideals to which I now briefly refer.

The problem of choosing a proper, congenial mate is very vital. In regard to this I suggest in general that you follow the advice of Sandy, the Scotchman, but not his example. His friend MacDonald came to Sandy and said, "I'm verra much worried, Sandy. I dinna ken whether to marry a rich widow, whom I do not love, or marry a puir lass of whom I'm verra fond."

And Sandy said, "You'd better follow the promptins o' yer heart, MacDonald."

"All right," said MacDonald, "I'll do it. I'll marry the puir lass."

"In that case," said Sandy, "would you mind giving me the address of the widow?"

Young men and young women, the achievement of a happy marriage begins in childhood and youth. The opportunity of marriage begins in your early days in school. The young girl who learns to play the violin is more likely to find a good mate than one who sits at home, refusing to go out in society.

The boy who participates in athletics is more likely to find a mate than one who sits by the radio. In other words, associations are conducive to happy marriages, because you become acquainted, one with another. You have more opportunities for choice.

In this connection, think for a moment what the Church offers to its members, particularly to the young boys and girls.

I was riding on a steamer that left Australia about 20 years ago, and a couple from California who had learned from the purser that there were two Mormons aboard — introduced themselves to President Cannon and me.

After asking a few questions, the woman said, "Will you pardon me if I ask you a personal question?"

"Certainly, and I answer without your asking. I have only one wife."

She said, "How did you know I was going to ask that?"

"Oh, I could see from your expression, and apologetic approach."

Well, we soon explained our attitude toward plural marriage, and then to my surprise she said, "Well, if that is not a fundamental tenet of your religion, what is?"

"Why," I said, "we are Christians."

She said, "Well, so are we." Then she made an important query: "In what way does your teaching differ from the teaching of other Christian churches?"

I am glad you are attending seminary so that you can answer that question intelligently. It is not so easy as at first it seems. If you say "Baptism," that is not a distinguishing feature. "Laying on of hands?" That is not a distinguishing feature. "Teaching of faith?" That is not a distinguishing feature. "Repentance?" No.

"Book of Mormon?" Yes. That is a distinguishing feature. Time will not permit to tell you about the conversation carried on during the next two or three hours. But one distinguishing feature of the Church we said, is divine authority by direct revelation. There are two other great churches who claim divine authority but not by direct revelation.

Then the gentleman said, "If your Church is guided by direct revelation then we have the right to expect to find in your organization the answer to the spiritual needs, social needs, and other needs of the human soul."

I said, "That is right. Name a need."

He hesitated. He wore in the lapel of his coat a button that indicated his membership in a secret order. I said, "What does that signify?"

"Brotherhood and fraternity."

"Is that a need?"

"It is."

"All right, if so we should find it in the Church of Christ." Then I mentioned the quorums, and contrasted his group with the groups and opportunities offered by the quorums. After that, "Name another need."

After hesitating a moment, he named education, saying "There should be every opportunity for education in your Church."

"That is right." Then we named quorums as educational groups as well as opportunity for fellowship and fraternity, for boys and men from 12 to 100 years of age. We mentioned all the auxiliaries as opportunities of education for every man, woman and child in the Church, with 50,000 teachers devoting their time every week free of charge and books furnished at minimum cost to the students—courses of study given, to over 500,000 men and women with an opportunity to meet every week, and have instruction free of charge. Where can you duplicate it?

All this in addition to the public school; and public schools in Utah rank second, third, and fourth among all other states in the Union. In addition to that the Church fosters an educational system, in which there are seminaries, institutes, colleges, and a central university.

Think of it, young men and women! Notwithstanding all this there are hundreds of young people in our Church who hesitate to take advantage of those opportunities for education. And there are hundreds of parents who fail to realize what the Church offers for the cultural development of their sons and daughters.

That is one reason for my asking how many miles you have traveled tonight to commend you and that young man particularly who rises at three in the morning to do his work and get to his seminary class, and the young girl who leaves her home at six or seven o'clock in the morning. I congratulate you, and commend you, and commend the parents. If only from the standpoint of education our parents should see that their children attend seminaries and institutes because students get training in spirituality along with their day school training. Parents are recreant who neglect to take advantage of opportunities thus afforded. But that is another theme. I mention it tonight, because of the opportunity seminaries and auxiliaries furnish young men and young women to choose their future mates.

Regarding the value of such, may I repeat: "The girl who learns to play tennis is more likely to find a husband than the girl who does not. The boy who takes part in school dramatics is more likely to find a wife than the boy who prefers listening to the radio or reading about romance. Children who practice musical instruments and get into school orchestras or are able to amuse their friends will have wider opportunities for selecting mates than do those who only listen.

". . . Those who are active in scout groups, go to Sunday School, belong to young people's societies, and who obligate themselves to groups of people, even though they do not like all the individuals, are more likely to marry than are the stay-at-homes."

That is the idea of a man who approaches the subject of marriage purely from a psychological standpoint.

Yes, I believe in seminaries, and auxiliary associations, and particularly priesthood quorums, merely as an adjunct to this question of marriage.

One more thought before I come to the real theme: How may you know when you are truly in love? That is a question which worries you. A young boy, thinking that he is in love with a girl, will dream about her, and piningly yearn for her company. Six months later, however, he may meet another young lady with whom he is sure he is in love. Girls also have their "Prince Charmers," and wonder with which ones they are truly in love.

Just in passing I will say if you think a girl is the sweetest, most beautiful creature on earth, ask yourself the question, "Does she inspire me to do my best? Do I feel that I want to accomplish something in life in order to be worthy of her; or does she appeal only to my baser nature? If the latter, you are not in love. You are infatuated. If the first, she is probably worthy of your closer attention. Young lady, does he inspire you to wish, with Portia, that you were 170 times more beautiful, a thousand times richer? That is what Portia wished when Bassanio chose the casket that held Portia as the prize. In other words, you distinguish between the one who just arouses your baser nature, and the one who inspires you to do your best.

Second, look for distinguishing qualities. First, note whether he or she is unselfish. Be careful not to choose a selfish person. Marriage is a state in which each must give, not take entirely. You have heard sometimes about the introvert. Avoid him, or avoid her. It is best to choose the extrovert, or one who is willing to serve, to give.

Third, see whether he controls himself, whether or not he has mastery over his temper, whether he has mastery over his tongue. Self control is a great virtue. It is a contributing factor to a happy home. There will be many times after you marry when you will be provoked to say something with passion and condemnation. If you have self-control you will not speak the condemnatory word, because there may be a retaliatory reply, which may result in a quarrel. Refrain from saying those things which will cause a wound in the heart of the other.

Fourth, I would name reverence. Has he reverence for sacred things? Has he deference for old people? If he is irreverent, if he mocks at that which is sacred, you will be wise not to choose him for a mate. Is he profane? Does he take the name of God in vain? I think I would avoid him. Profanity is a vice, indulgence in which lowers the moral standard of the home.

Next, if I were you, I would look to see whether or not he has the ability to succeed financially. You have to live with him; he has to support a family. You probably have to help him. But the man should be the supporter. The man should be the provider. Girls, you look for the young boy who is ambitious. I use that word in the sense of emulation—that he is going to try to make something of himself, and will do his best.

But young man, don't put off marriage too long simply because you think you cannot supply the young girl with the comforts she had in her own home. You will find the young girls are willing to help.

That brings me to the next point in general, and that is the rearing of a family. Marriage is for the purpose of rearing families, having children. That is fundamental, and I am sorry to note a tendency even among our own people to limit the number of children in the family. I was very much interested in the following from one who has not the ideals that we have:

"Man has concocted many theories and notions about marriage—among them the theory that each couple has the right to decide whether to have children. Regardless of theories, the chief purpose of sex and marriage is children. This is a law of human nature, which cannot be defied with impunity. A couple entering marriage without planning to have children soon is courting disaster from the beginning.

"Having children is a physical process by the experience, but the experience is a spiritual one as well. It involves continuous self-sacrifice of many kinds, possibly even the sacrifice of immediate security. It is through the choice of spiritual values, where they conflict with material values, that true security is to be found.

"Probably the most popular as well as the most dangerous theory about love is that it is something one falls out of as well as in to. This ignores the truth that love, no matter how it starts, is something that must be consciously created. Lasting love depends on permanent sex compatibility, and this in turn depends heavily on having children. When the experience of sex is subordinated to the birth and care of children, it takes on a new spiritual significance. This is the basis for true and lasting love, a continuous process of creation and self-sacrifice centered around raising a family.

"Having a child is the final and strongest pledge of a couple's love for each other. It is an eloquent testimony that their marriage is a complete one. It lifts their marriage from the level of selfish love and physical pleasure to that of devotion centered around a new life. It makes self-sacrifice rather than self-indulgence their guiding principle. It represents the husband's faith in his ability to provide the necessary security, and it demonstrates the wife's confidence in his ability to do so. The net result is a spiritual security which, more than any other power, helps to create material security as well."

Now, what about marriage in the temple? The eternity of the marriage covenant has its base in the eternal truth of the immortality of the soul.

By great thinkers generally, Jesus is recognized as the greatest philosopher, greatest teacher, that ever walked the earth. He accepted the immortality of the soul without question.

To members of the Church, he is God made manifest in the flesh. He lived before he came. He accepted the hereafter as you accept your sleep tonight, or the sunshine tomorrow. He said: "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you." He did not argue it. To him it was an accepted fact. Upon the eternal truth of immortality rests the value, the importance, of marriage in the temple.

Now, will you please name the most divine attribute of the human soul? Without hesitancy you will answer LOVE. If your spirit lives after death, as it does, then that attribute of love will persist also, just as sympathy, just as reverence, and every other virtue that you have. That is reasonable, is it not?

All right, if love, then, is as eternal as the spirit, and you love that girl whom you take to the altar, do you not want to have her for time and eternity? To that question there is only one answer. And if death comes to separate you, and you look upon the sweetheart as living in the world beyond, do you not have that same love for her that you had here? Whom should you like to meet when you go to the other side? Whom will you love when you go to the other side?

I asked that of some critics one time, and a woman answered, "Why, we should love everybody." Yes, we should love everybody here also, but I love my wife, by whose side I have sat at night watching a little sick child. I love those children for whom we have worked and struggled, and who have reciprocated that love, and if earthly things are typical of heavenly things, when I shall meet those loved ones over there, I shall think more of them than of persons from India or Russia whom I have never met.

Temple marriage is basically appealing; it is scientifically sound, and any young man who takes his sweetheart to a temple should go there with the understanding that their union is to be just as eternal as the love that has brought them to the altar, and there is no question about it.

Before you can get married in the temple, it is required that you have lived a clean life. You have the assurance, young lady, that the man whom you are about to marry is bringing to you a clean body. Each of you has the assurance that the source of life is unpolluted.

To summarize: Young men and young women who would live the happiest lives would do well to prepare themselves to be worthy of that form of marriage which God has ordained—the union of a man and woman worthy to have their marriage consummated in the temple of the Most High. There as true lovers kneel to plight their troth, each may cherish the assurance of the following:

First, that their married course begins in purity. The children who come to bless the union are guaranteed a royal birth so far as inheriting a clean body is concerned.

Second, that their religious views are the same. The difficulty of rearing children properly is aggravated when father and mother have divergent views regarding doctrine and church affiliation. (Another great advantage of seminaries, auxiliaries, Sunday School, etc., you meet those of your own Church.)

Third, that their vows are made with the idea of an eternal union, not to be broken by petty misunderstandings or difficulties.

Fourth, that a covenant made in God's presence and sealed by the holy priesthood is more binding than any other bond.

Fifth, that a marriage thus commenced is as eternal as love, the divinest attribute of the human soul.

Sixth, that the family unit will remain unbroken throughout eternity.

Boys and girls, God bless you to keep your lives unpolluted, that you may go in prayer to God and ask him to guide you in choosing your mates, and when chosen, that you will both so live that you can enter the House of God, and if he were present and asked you about your lives, you could answer him honestly, "Yes, we are clean."

A marriage begun on that basis, will bring you the happiness, the sweetest joy in this life, or throughout eternity.

Section Three — Holidays
