David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Easter

Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him. (Mark 16:6)

Easter—How Designated

One week from today there will be celebrated throughout Christendom the greatest event of all history—the resurrection of Jesus Christ. This event is celebrated at Easter, a spring festival that antedates Jesus' advent on earth. According to the present designation of Easter, it is just as appropriate to celebrate the event this day as one week later. This Christian celebration is an adoption of the Pagan celebration given in honor of Astarte, or Eostre, a Saxon goddess corresponding to the Ashtoreth of Syria. Unlike Christmas, the celebration of Christ's birth, Easter does not come on a specified day of the month, but varies with changes of the moon. Easter is the first Sunday after the full moon that comes upon or next after the 21st of March. If the full moon comes on Sunday, then Easter is the Sunday following, thus making it possible for Easter to occur on any day from March 22 to April 25. It seems to me that there is little or no justification for the continuance of this shifting of the Easter date.

It would be much more sensible if all nations would adopt what is known as the "World Calendar," a twelve-month scheme in which "the year would consist of equal quarters, each having a month of 31 days followed by two months of 30 days. Every quarter would have 13 even weeks, and would begin on Sunday and end on Saturday." There would be an extra day at the end of each year, known as "supernumerary Saturday" or "year end" day. If this new calendar were introduced at the close of this year, next year and every year thereafter would begin on Sunday, and any given date, including July 4, July 24, Thanks-giving, Christmas, and everybody's birthday would invariably fall on the same day of the week. Perhaps then a definite date might be agreed upon for Easter. The representatives of fourteen nations or more have already endorsed this new "World Calendar."

However, as I say, it is not the day, but the event itself that is really important. Did Christ take up his body and appear as a glorified, resurrected being? Establish this fact and you prove that man is an immortal being.

Jesus of Nazareth, Though Crucified, Still Lives

Of the lonely, ignominious death of Jesus, Lloyd C. Douglas writes as follows: "Demetrius, a slave and friend to his master Marcellus, forced his unwilling feet to advance slowly towards three crosses where hung three condemned men. The gruesome scene stunned him, and he came to a stop. The two unidentified men were writhing on their crosses. The lonely man on the central cross was still as a statue. His head hung forward. Perhaps he was dead, or at least unconscious. Demetrius hoped so.

"For a long time he stood there, contemplating this tragic sight. . . The lonely man had thrown his life away. There was nothing to show for his audacious courage. The temple would continue to cheat the country people who came in to offer a lamb. Herod would continue to bully and whip the poor if they inconvenienced the rich. Caiaphas would continue to condemn the blasphemies of men who didn't want the gods fetched to market. Pilate would deal out injustice—and wash his dirty hands in a silver bowl. This lonely man had paid a high price for his brief and fruitless war on wickedness. But—he had spoken: he had acted. By tomorrow, nobody would remember that he had risked everything—and lost his life—in the cause of honesty. But—perhaps a man was better off dead than in a world where such an event as this could happen. Demetrius felt very lonely too."

For what are men who grasp at praise sublime, But bubbles on the rapid stream of time, That rise, and fall, that swell and are no more, Born, and forgot, ten thousand in an hour?

In Influence Christ Lives Today

To live is not merely to breathe, to eat, to sleep, to gratify appetite and passion. Only to do such things is to exist—but not to live. To live is to have joy, to experience high thoughts, noble aspirations, to sense the happiness in friendship, the ecstacy of true love, the inspiration that comes from the consciousness of communion with God through his divine spirit. Measured by this standard, Jesus, though crucified in ignominy nearly 2000 years ago, is alive today. The memory of his childhood is an inspiration to youth. His teachings guide and comfort millions. His perfect life and godlike character are ideals that uplift the world.

You may say, "Well, so is the life of Buddha, of Socrates, of Plato, of Confucious, and hundreds of other great men whose influence continues to persist throughout the ages."

This I grant you, and in so doing emphasize the fact that death is not victorious in ending the true life of a noble human being who truly lived in a mortal state.

But to live thus is not immortality, nor does it bear directly upon the resurrection of Jesus from the grave. What we celebrate today is the persistence of Christ's personality during the time and following the placing of his body in the borrowed tomb.

That the literal resurrection from the grave was a reality to the disciples who knew Christ intimately is a certainty. In their minds there was absolutely no doubt. They were witnesses of the fact. They knew, because their eyes beheld, their ears heard, their hands felt the corporeal presence of the risen Redeemer. Of the value and significance of such nearness and intimacy Beverly Nichols, author of "The Fool Hath Said," writes:

"The authors of the epistles were within hailing distance, historically, of Christ; at any rate when their ideals, which they afterwards transmitted to paper, were formed. The winds had already had time to efface the sacred print of his steps in the sands over which he walked. The rain had hardly had time to wash away, with its callous tears, the blood from the rotting wood of the deserted cross.

"Yet, these men knew—I can't go on using the word `believe,' which is far too vapid and colorless—that God had descended to earth in the shape of a certain man, that this man had met an obscene and clownish death, and that the grotesque mode of his dying had redeemed mankind from sin. They knew, moreover, that he had risen from the dead on the third day and ascended into heaven."

At Jesus' death, the apostles were stricken with gloom. When he lay dead their hopes all but died. Their intense grief, the story of Thomas, the moral perplexity of Peter, the evident preparation for a permanent burial, combine to illustrate the prevalence of a fear that the redemption of Israel had failed.

Notwithstanding the often repeated assurance of Christ that he would return to them after death, the apostles did not seem fully to comprehend it. At the crucifixion, they were frightened and discouraged. For two and a half years they had been upheld and inspired by Christ's presence. But now he was gone. They were left alone, and they seemed confused, fearful, helpless; only John stood by the cross.

The world would never have been stirred by men with such wavering, doubting, despairing minds as the apostles possessed on the day of the crucifixion.

The Seal of Genuineness

What was it that suddenly changed these disciples to confident, fearless, heroic preachers of the gospel of Jesus Christ? It was the revelation that Christ had risen from the grave. His promises had been kept, his Messianic mission fulfilled. In the words of one universal writer, "The final and aboslute seal of genuineness had been put on all his claims, and the indelible stamp of a divine authority upon all his teachings. The gloom of death had been banished by the glorious light of the presence of their risen, glorified Lord and Savior."

On the evidence of these unprejudiced, unexpectant, incredulous witnesses, faith in the resurrection has its impregnable foundation.

Let us listen again to the testimony of these eye witnesses, whose honesty is not questioned even by skeptical criticism.

Mark

One of the first to put his testimony in writing was Marcus, whose original Jewish name was John. He was a cousin of Barbarus. There is no record to show that he joined the Church while Christ was living. There is reason to believe that he was a convert of Peter's who affectionately refers to him as "Marcus my son." (1 Pet. 5:13). His mother was a believer, and with her the apostles lodged at least soon after the resurrection, if not before, and it is not improbable that Jesus himself was in her house on the night of the betrayal. Mark, then, was old enough to know and to have personal acquaintance with the men who were eye witnesses of the resurrection. It is highly probable that he was the young man who rushed to the Garden of Gethsemane with only a loin cloth wrapped about his naked body. Certain it is that he was closely associated with Peter from whom he heard at the time, not years after, all the details surrounding Jesus' death, burial, and comingforth from the tomb. His authorship of the second Gospel has never been disputed by the Christian churches, and even the scathing modern, negative criticism is disposed to regard him as the author of at least the main part of the present gospel.

The First Empty Tomb

Mark does not himself recount any appearance of the risen Lord, but he testifies that the angel at the tomb announced the resurrection, and promised that the Lord would meet his disciples. From Mark we hear the glorious proclamation of the first empty tomb in all the world. For the first time in the history of man the words "he is dead" were substituted by the divine message "he is risen." No one can doubt that Mark was not convinced in his soul of the reality of the empty tomb. To him the resurrection was not mythical, not problematical, not questionable—it was real; and the appearance of his Lord and Master among men was a fact established in his mind beyond the shadow of doubt. To the proclaiming of this truth he devoted his life, and if tradition can be relied upon, he sealed his testimony with his blood.

Luke

Another who records the testimony of the eye witnesses was Luke, a gentile, or, as some think, a proselyte of Antioch in Syria, where he followed the profession of physician. (Col. 4:14). Even some of his most severe modern critics have placed him in the first rank as an historian, and his personal contact with early apostles makes his statements of inestimable value.

Acts, eleventh chapter and twenty-eighth verse implies that he was present when the Prophet Agabus delivered his famous prophecy before the Church of Antioch. It is believe that before he joined Paul at Troas (Acts 16:10), he was a convert to the Christian faith, and in all probability already a missionary. His significant expression, "Had called us to preach the gospel unto them," implies that his conversion did not begin when he joined Paul on the latter's second missionary journey.

Luke's Testimony

What he writes was the result of personal inquiry and investigation, and was drawn from all available sources. Particularly, he interviewed and recorded the declarations of those "who from the beginning were eye witnesses and ministers of the Word." He avers that he "accurately traced all things from the very first," so that he might "write them in order." This means that Luke obtained the testimony of these "eye witnesses" directly from themselves, and not from previous narratives.

According to all trustworthy testimony, we have the Gospel of Luke as it came from his hand. In chapter twenty-four, Luke testifies to the divine message: "Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen."

He records also the visitation of two disciples who were on their way to Emmaus. These returned to Jerusalem and declared: "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared unto Simon." To the reality of the appearance of Jesus to the Eleven, Luke testifies as follows:

"And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.

"But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.

"And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and who do thoughts arise in your hearts?

"Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:36-39.)

Authorship Admitted

Luke is also the author of the "Acts of the Apostles." His authorship is now admitted even by some who were leaders in doubting it. During the last half century modern criticism has subjected to the severest scrutiny every ancient document that purports to contain any witness of the resurrected Christ. As a result many have been thrown aside as spurious, including the "Acts of John," "Acts of Andrew," "Acts of Peter," but the "Acts of the Apostles" has emerged from that criticism with its authenticity established. Statements and historical references within the book at one time doubted as to their truth and reliability have been proved to be accurate.

With equal assurance as to their accuracy we can accept his statements and witness in regard to Peter's and Paul's, and other apostles' testimonies regarding the resurrection, "to whom also Christ showed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God." Who can doubt Luke's absolute confidence in the reality of the resurrection.

From Peter, Luke undoubtedly obtained this:

"Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know:

"Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain:

"Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death: because it was not possible that he should be holden of it." (Acts 2:22-24)

"This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses." (Acts 2:32)

Paul's Personal Testimony

It is true that neither Mark nor Luke testifies to having personally seen the risen Lord, and therefore, some urge that their recorded testimonies cannot be taken as first-hand evidence. That they do not so testify, and yet are convinced that others did see him shows how incontrovertible was the evidence among the apostles and other disciples that the resurrection was a reality. Let us now consider a document that does give the personal testimony of an eyewitness to an appearance of Jesus after his death and burial. This personal witness also corroborates the testimony not only of the two men whom I have quoted, but of others also. I refer to Paul, whose Jewish name was Saul, a Jew of Tarsus, educated at the feet of Gamaliel, a strict pharisee, and who, before his conversion, was a bitter persecutor of all who believed in Jesus of Nazareth as having risen from the dead. The story of Saul's conversion follows:

"Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?

"I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

"Which thing I also did in Jerusalem: and many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them.

"Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief priests.

"At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and them which journeyed with me.

"And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

"And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

"But rise and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee." (Acts 26:8-16.)

Reasoning and Analogy

Later Paul gives direct evidence in his letter to the Corinthian Saints. Nobody even questions Paul's authorship of this document. Its genuineness has been attested, and it stands today as the oldest authentic written testimony of the resurrection of Jesus Christ and of his appearance among men. In that immortal chapter, he anchors the faith of the saints to the resurrection of Christ as an historic fact, "shows how all essential it is to the Christian hope, and then proceeds by reasoning and analogy to brush aside certain naturalistic objections to the great doctrine."

His direct and confirmatory testimony of Christ's appearances follows:

"For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures;

"And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures:

"And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve:

"After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

"After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.

"And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.

"For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God." (1 Cor. 15:3-9.)

Time will not permit, nor is it necessary, to quote other witnesses. So impressive and conclusive is the evidence that sincere and upright men declare that—

"The resurrection of Jesus Christ is a certainty. If any fact, not merely of Christianity, but of history, stands on an impregnable foundation, this does."

To summarize: The direct evidence of this may be stated as follows: First, the sudden and marvelous transformation in the spirit and work of the disciples; second, the practically universal belief of the early church as recorded in the Gospels; third, the direct testimony of Paul.

We affirm, then, with Spurgeon that "no fact in history is better attested than the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. It must not be denied by any who are willing to pay the slightest respect to the testimony of their fellow-men, that Jesus, who died upon the cross, and was buried in the tomb of Joseph of Aramathea, did literally rise again from the dead."

How Many Believe?

It would be interesting, this Easter morning, to know just how many who call themselves Christians, and who have attended Christian churches that day, truly and sincerely believe in the literal resurrection of their Lord. Many—too many—do not, and among them are ministers who profess to accept the New Testament as their authority to preach the gospel. They claim that it is not essential to Christianity to believe in the "resurrection story," nor the dogma "of the virgin birth." Some call belief in these, childish.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stands with Peter, with Paul, with James and with all the other apostles who accepted the resurrection not only as being literally true, but as the consummation of Christ's divine mission on earth.

Eighteen hundred years after Jesus died upon the cross, Joseph Smith declared: "I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

"It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other—THIS IS MY BELOVED SON. HEAR HIM!"

Since Christ lived after death, so shall all men, each one taking that place in the next world for which he is best fitted. Since love is as eternal as life, the message of the resurrection is the most comforting, the most glorious ever given to man; for when death takes a loved one from us, we can look with assurance into the open grave and say, "He is not here; he is risen."

Jesus Christ, our Lord, has revealed and made possible the immortality of the soul.
