David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Independence Day

Approximately two weeks ago, I visited the old Pennsylvania State House in Philadelphia, now called Independence Hall—it is the scene of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, July 4, 1776. About eleven years later the Federal Convention completed its work on the Constitution and referred it through Congress to the individual states for ratification. It was the seat of government for the United States from 1790 to 1800.

I had just reread in the daily press the experiences of Robert A. Vogeler imprisoned behind the Iron Curtain as an American spy. This American business man, after nearly a month of treatment at the Bethesda Naval Hospital, gave the following chronological account of the prison ordeal which began with his arrest November 18, 1949 by communist police:

Thrust into the Secret Police prison at Budapest, his first 78 hours were passed under repeated grilling and without sleep. Then he collapsed.

"Then I was presented with a so-called confession of the sabotage which in fact was a partial statement of normal reasons why the telephone plant had not been up to snuff," Vogeler related. "Before I signed the statement, we argued it word by word, line by line."

Afterward Vogeler said he underwent 12 days of further grilling which lasted 18 hours a day.

Whenever he appeared to approach exhaustion, he said he was given coffee and cigarettes which "obviously contained strong stimulants that allowed me to speak, to protest, or to write again."

For one 10-day period he said he was not allowed to wash and lived on black bread and water. When he refused to abandon denials, he said he was kept 10 days in a wet and unheated cell on bread and water under continual grilling and observation.

One experience included being dumped naked into a pail of ice water. He said he lost 20 pounds during his imprisonment.

Thanking the American Press for "keeping the case alive," Vogeler said this was a "case history" of communist methods, and advised that "it can happen to you."

"I wish everyone could understand this," he said, "no price is too dear to pay for our way of life."

Later I read the harrowing experiences of Elinor Lipper during eleven years in Soviet Prison Camps. The following is an account of her arrest by the Soviet secret police:

I started up. Was it a dream, or had someone knocked? There it was again, once, twice, three times—a loud, harsh insistent knocking. A man's voice called out, "Open the door!"

I had to get something on—quickly. I could not find the sleeves of my robe. Why was I trembling so? I had committed no crime.

Again the threatening voice: "Open the door!"

Three officers entered. The stripes on their uniforms showed that they were members of the NKVD, the Soviet political police.

They handed me a paper. I could make out a few international words—"Order . . . Arrest . . . "

I was stunned.

Instead of taking the elevator, the men walked me down six flights. I took my last automobile ride through the streets of Moscow inside a prison van that carried me swiftly into the unknown. My stomach contracted with fear; my forehead was wet with cold perspiration. Were they going to kill me? If I had been arrested for nothing, I could be shot for nothing.

I clambered out of the van and entered the huge vaults of Butyrka Prison. The first day of eleven years of imprisonment had begun!

I had read also of the accounts of the arrest and imprisonment of communist spies here in America who would overthrow our government. That morning New York was stirred with the disclosures of the sale of narcotics among the youth, which stunned the nation more than the disclosures of the Kefauver investigation committee on the relation of organized crime with politics. Communist infiltration into key positions in government and in scientific laboratories, have filled loyal citizens with distrust. One United States senator recently remarked that he believes "the evil and insidious materialism of the communists is a greater danger to us than their guns."

A company of tourists following an official guide at Independence Hall left the room, and for a few moments I stood there alone. I let the curtain of the present period drop, and in retrospect I went back to the scenes prior, during, and following the historical year 1776. I tried to get the spirit of those revolutionary times, and noted the principles that actuated the men to resist the tyranny of King George the III. There came to my mind while standing there the question asked James Russell Lowell by the French Historian Guizot—"How long will the American Republic endure?" Lowell's answer was—"As long as the ideas of the men who founded it continue dominant."

Individual Liberty

Basic among those ideas was individual freedom. Prior to the Declaration of Independence, I saw a group of men in the Old State House rise in consternation when a voice shouted: "Caesar had his Brutus, Charles the First, his Cromwell, and George the Third"—"Treason, Treason!" shouted the men in the Assembly. "And George the Third may profit by their example!" Then I recalled Patrick Henry's speech climaxed by his fervent appeal: "Is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course others may take, but as for me, give me liberty or give me death!" And, later,—"Yes, were my soul trembling on the wing of eternity, were this hand freezing to death, were my voice choking with the last struggle, I would still, with the last gasp of that voice, implore you to remember the truth. God has given America to be free."

Thomas Jefferson, who wrote the Declaration of Independence, was actuated by that same love of liberty, for later when president of the United States he wrote: "I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man."

Fifty-six men signed that document July 4—fifty-six men representing all walks of society. Most of them were well educated—all in the strength and prime of manhood. The average age was 44 years. Samuel Adams, 58; John Hancock, 39; R. H. Lee, 44; Benjamin Harrison, 36; John Adams, 40; Thomas Jefferson, 33; Benjamin Franklin, 70; Roger Sherman, 55; R. R. Livingston, 29;

"And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor."

Faith in God

And that brings me to the second principle that actuated the lives of the fathers who founded our Constitution—faith in God.

During the critical time when the representatives of the colonies were trying to frame the Constitution, Benjamin Franklin arose and stated his faith in an overruling Providence, and in the power of prayer, and then said:

I have lived, sir, a long time, and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth: That God governs in the affairs of men. And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without his aid?

We have been assured, sir, in the sacred writings, that "except the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it." I firmly believe this; and I also believe that without his concurring aid we shall succeed in this political building no better than the builders of Babel. We shall be divided by our little partial local interests; our projects will be confounded, and we ourselves shall become a reproach and byword down to future ages. And, what is worse, mankind may hereafter from this unfortunate instance, despair of establishing governments by human wisdom and leave it to chance, war, and conquest.

I therefore beg leave to move that henceforth prayers imploring the assistance of heaven, and its blessings on our deliberations, be held in this assembly every morning before we proceed to business, and that one or more of the clergy of this city be requested to officiate in that service.

In his farewell address Washington said:

"Of all the dispositions of habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports." Stating that neither property nor reputation nor life is secure when people are not sincerely religious.

Actuated by these two fundamental and eternal principles—the free agency of the individual, and faith in an overruling Providence, those fifty-six men who signed the Declaration of Independence, those who drew up the Constitution of the United States gave to the world a concept of government which, if applied, will strike from the arms of down-trodden humanity the shackles of tyranny and give hope, ambition, and freedom to the teeming millions throughout the world.

Recently Graham Patterson gave an urgent warning to all Americans to be on guard against the scheming of those who would take from us the freedom so dearly bought. In this warning he quotes Edward F. Hutton as follows:

Why do we enjoy the highest level of personal freedom the world has ever known? Why do we have the finest system of free education anywhere to be found? Why is it that staples here are luxuries in other lands? Why is our standard of living the envy of everyone everywhere? Why have we come to own 60% of the earth's modern industrial plant capacity?

Why do our people possess more autos, more radios, more washing machines, more of so many things, than the people of any other country?

After all, we are plain ordinary human beings. Why then do we have so many more of God's blessings? One impelling reason I think lies in the simple fact that we believe in the rights of man and have lived under a government of laws as distinguished from a government of men. We enjoyed the safeguards of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, whose word, until recently, we believed was immutable and inalienable. The protection, the confidence, the assurance provided by the Bill of Rights opened up the faucets of human ambition and let loose an avalanche of new incentives. Men free to inquire, to reject, to choose, to risk and to create!

Till 20 years ago the Bill of Rights, generator of the genius of America, was taken for granted. For two decades now it has been under attack. . . by those who assert, though without proof, that they can improve upon our system of government. The plan seems to be to impose upon the people political control of the daily activities. Under communism you lose your liberties immediately and perhaps your life. Under socialism, you lose your liberties a little more slowly but just as surely.

Today the Bill of Rights is in jeopardy. If it could speak, I believe it would have this to say: I am your Bill of Rights. Don't take me for granted. As man brought me to life, I can be slain by men, and will be slain unless you, the plain people of America, organize to defend me.

I am freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly. I am privacy and sanctity of your home. I am your guarantee of trial by jury, and I am the custodian who guards your property rights. I am your signed lease to spiritual, mental and physical freedom.

My existence depends on how vigilantly you watch those who administer your government. Put every law proposed in Washington into the crucible of my ten commandments. Your question must always be: "Not what does a law give me, but what does it take away from me?"

We, the plain, humble, God-fearing people, made this republic what it is. Let us unite our voice in defense of the Constitution and Bill of Rights.
