David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

The First Harvest Festival

The first harvest festival in the Rocky Mountains occurred August 10, 1848. It preceded the arrival of President Brigham Young and the twenty-five hundred or three thousand people who accompanied him in the month of September.

The most pressing problem of the pioneers was to provide food and clothing. Much of this at first was obtained by trading. Some of it was obtained by negotiations with fur-traders. In a letter signed by General Rich to one of these companies is itemized a list of things needed by the Colonists. Among the articles required were: "Sugar, coffee, tea, bleached and unbleached domestic cotton cloth, cotton drillings, unbleached and colored calico, broadcloth, cashmeres, full cloths, satinets, moleskin, blankets, iron, steel, powder, hardware, leather, and such like articles."

It is well-known that one of the first tasks undertaken by the settlers was to plant potatoes.

In October of 1847, a 5000-acre tract, known as the Big Field, was fenced, and 2000 acres of it plowed and seeded to fall wheat, and in the early spring of 1848, the rest was sown to cereal and corn. That spring there was plenty of moisture, and everything looked promising, so the settlers looked forward to a bounteous harvest in August. But their hearts fell when two killing frosts in the month of May, blighted, and in some instances killed, their grain and many vegetables. Then in the latter part of that month the crickets came. These are described by Anson Call as about one and one half inches in length when full grown, heavy and clumsy in their movements, with no better power of locomotion than hopping a foot or two at a time. "The Cricket has an eagle eye, a staring appearance, and suggests the idea that it may be the habitation of a vindictive little demon."

"Every day," says Sarah Rich, "women and children went into the fields with tin pans, sticks, bells, and anything that would make a noise, to scare them away; while the men folks dug ditches, filled them with water, and then drove the crickets into the trenches."

All their efforts, however, were in vain to stem the tide of these devastating creatures. Finally the settlers gave up, and began to appeal to God for succor and help. The story of their salvation is now epic. The crops in the Big Field were saved.

In appreciation and thanksgiving, the saints held the harvest festival. The affair was held in the Bowery, built in the Autumn of 1847 by the returning Mormon Battalion Boys. You and I have seen similar boweries erected on the 24th of July in our country towns in which meeting houses were too small to accommodate the celebrants. It consisted of posts set in the ground in a quadrangle; these were bound together by poles at the top; and the whole was covered with brush, to keep out the sun. Benches were carried from the meeting house and the school house, and people brought chairs with them from their homes. Around this bowery, hoisted on poles, were large sheaves of wheat, rye, barley, and other products of the field. But a most significant feature of these celebrations was the liberty pole. Nearly every private record of that day refers to it. It had more significance than a means of flying an emblem. On the liberty pole on that day was "a white flag, an ear of corn, a sheaf of wheat, rye and oats." I have been informed that at some of the early forts, as was probably the case at this celebration, the liberty pole was a spot on which justice was administered. In December, 1847, the presidency of the Church appointed a committee to work out some rules of conduct with penalties attached. "General Charles C. Rich was chairman of this committee." In his biography appears the following:

First there was a rule requiring that every man able to work must do so. It is necessary, the ordinance read, "for every man in our community to use the utmost exertion to cultivate the earth in order to sustain himself and family." If any man would not work, he was hailed before a judge or judges and pronounced a "vagrant." Thereupon an inventory of all his property was made by proper authorities; this property was administered for the benefit of his family, and the man himself was set to work and his wages given to his dependents. Other laws appertained to theft and robbery, drunkenness, and adultery and fornication. For a violation of any of these rules the last was called into requisition. "A certain number of lashes on the bare back, not exceeding thirty-nine" was the punishment. In all cases, except the infraction of the seventh commandment, a fine might be imposed instead of flogging, which was decreed by the judge at his discretion, and ranged from five dollars in the case of violence to five hundred dollars; for adultery and fornication, both a fine and the lash were meted out to the culprit. Where one had robbed or stolen, he was required to restore four times the amount he had taken, but this did not release him from the strap. It is interesting to note that not a few judges in our time have lamented the disappearance from our penal laws of the lash as a means of punishment. I have not been able to find, however, that the lash was ever applied during these years in the Mormon commonwealth.

The following quotation from two diaries will give us graphic description of that celebration. August 10, 1848, a feast in honor of the first harvest in Great Salt Lake City was held in the fort, of which Elder Parley P. Pratt writes as follows:

On the 10th of August we held a public feast under a bowery in the centre of our fort. This was called a harvest feast; we partook freely of a rich variety of bread, beef, butter, cheese, cakes, pastry, green corn, melons, and almost every variety of vegetable. Large sheaves of wheat, rye, barley, oats, and other productions were hoisted on poles for public exhibition, and there was prayer and thanksgiving, congratulations, songs, speeches, music, dancing, smiling faces and merry hearts. In short, it was a great day with the people of these valleys, and long to be remembered by those who had suffered and waited anxiously for the results of a first effort to redeem the interior deserts of America, and to make her hitherto unknown solitudes "blossom as the rose."

* * * * *

Sister Melissa I. Lambson, in writing from Great Salt Lake Valley about the harvest feast, says:

I must tell you something about our feast. Long before harvest many were out of bread, so since we had plenty we had a large bowery built and all gathered together; a liberty pole was raised. There was firing of cannons, band of music, a number of cheers and the harvest song sung, prayer by Brother Parley P. Pratt, speaking by several, the ground cleared by Brother Grant for tables. He called for good dishes of corn, beans, beef, squashes, beets, carrots, cucumbers, water, buttermilk, etc.; all made ready, the bugle sounded, a blessing was asked by Brother Taylor. When done eating the bugle sounded again, the table was taken away and dancing commenced. On the liberty pole was a white flag, an ear of corn, a sheaf of wheat, rye, and oats.

The harvest song referred to is as follows:

Let us join in the dance, let us join in the song, To thee, O Jehovah, new praises belong, All honor, all glory, we render to thee; Thy cause is triumphant, thy people are free. The Gentile oppressed us, the heathen with rage Combined all their forces our hosts to engage, They plundered and drove us full many a day; They kill'd the chief shepherds, the sheep went away Afar in the desert and mountains to roam, Without any harvest, without any home. There, hungry and thirsty, and weary and worn, They seemed quite forsaken, and weary and worn, But lo! in the mountains new sheepfolds appear! And a harvest of plenty, our spirits to cheer. This beautiful vale is a refuge from wo, A retreat for the Saints, while the scourges o'er flow. Let us join in the dance, let us join in the song, To thee, O Jehovah, new praises belong, All honor, all glory, we render to thee, Thy cause is triumphant, Thy people are free! Though storms of commotion distress every realm, And dire revolution the nations o'erwhelm; Though Babylon trembles and thrones cease to be, Yet here in the mountains thy people are free. The states of Columbia to atoms may rend, And the mob, all triumphant, bring peace to end,— The `Star Spangled Banner' for ever be furled, And the chains of a tyrant encircle the world. Yet we'll join in the dance, and we'll join in the song, To thee, O Jehovah, new praises belong, All honor, all glory, we render to thee; For here in the mountains thy people are free.

TWO GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF THE PURITANS

For all that God in mercy sends: For health and strength, for home and friends, For comfort in the time of need, For every kindly word and deed, For happy thoughts and pleasant talk, For guidance in our daily walk, For all these things give thanks. For beauty in this world of ours, For verdant grass and lovely flowers, For song of birds, for hum of bees, For the refreshing summer breeze, For hill and plain, for streams and wood, For the great ocean's mighty flood, For all these things give thanks. For the sweet sleep that comes at night, For the returning mornin's light, For the bright sun which shines on high, For stars that glitter in the sky— For these and everything we see, O Lord, our hearts we lift to Thee, And give Thee hearty thanks. Ellen Isabella T.

Thanksgiving Day is a religious festival in the United States, celebrated in New England, as you know, from the first settlement by the Pilgrims.
