David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Thanksgiving

The term "Pilgrim" is applied here in America to those who first settled at Plymouth, Massachusetts, in the month of November 1620. I think it was on the 9th of November. The Pilgrims who landed on that bleak New England shore at Cape Cod were Separatists. They were not the Puritans—the Puritans settled in Massachusetts. But the Separatists, whom we designate now as Pilgrims, settled at Plymouth.

Origin of Thanksgiving

Thanksgiving Day originated one year later—1621—when Governor Bradford appointed the day for public praise and prayer after the first harvest. This is what one account gives of that first thanksgiving:

"In the fall of 1621 the first harvest of the colonists was gathered. The `corn' yielded well, and the `barley' was `indifferently good,' but the peas were a failure, owing to drought and late spring. Encouraged with the harvest of their fruits, but needing more eatables for feasting, the leaders sent four huntsmen for food of the forest, and at their return, `after a special manner,' the Pilgrims rejoiced together, feasting King Massasoit and ninety men for three days, and partaking of venison, wild turkeys, water fowl, and other delicacies for which New England was then famous."

The first Thanksgiving was but a formal manifestation of the spirit of praise and thanksgiving that actuated the hearts of the pilgrims during that first terrible winter in the new country.

To recall the circumstances of that first terrible winter may serve as a means of increasing our spirit of thanksgiving for what we possess, and awaken a sense of true gratitude for our present surroundings, and for the privilege of living in this age.

History tells us that of the 102 immigrants that landed on the bleak, rocky coast of Cape Cod in the winter of 1620, nearly half died before the following winter barely set in. In December six died; January, eight; February, seventeen; March, thirteen—a total of 44 in four months. Today in our comfortable homes, surrounded with peace and plenty, it is well for us to pause and try to imagine the suffering of the survivors both from destitution and inclement weather. One account tells us that the most of the brave people were not inured to hardships; among them were delicately nurtured men and women. They staked and laid out two rows of huts for the nineteen families that composed the colony; but within the first year they had to make seven times more graves for the dead than houses for the living. Notwithstanding all their trials and hardships, these brave founders of a great and glorious race had so much to be thankful for that they had to appoint "an especial day on which to give special thanks for all their mercies."

May I say here that our attention was called last evening, or the night before, to the fact that the Indians are suffering from want of the necessities of life. Sister McKay and I have driven through the Navajo Indian Reservation, and we have seen the condition of those who live in the hogans. They are not wickiups; they are just little round adobe houses, or huts. Some of these Indians will not survive this winter. I think it is well for us on this Thanksgiving Day to recall the fact that it was the Indians who kept the Pilgrims from starving that first winter. The Pilgrims had insufficient food. They saw some mounds into which they dug and found corn, and they appropriated it to their own use. They reported it, however, to King Massasoit, and told him that as soon as they learned to whom the corn belonged, they would recompense them for it.

Today we should not only express our thanks in words and in song, but have in our hearts a deep gratitude for the integrity, fortitude, and faith of the Pilgrims.

I think I would call your attention to only two of their virtues, two guiding principles which I shall emphasize with a view of applying them to our lives.

Two Guiding Principles

As we read the history of the New England fathers, we cannot help but be impressed with their many sterling virtues, nor can we shut our eyes to their weaknesses. Today I wish to express gratitude for their strength of character and for the attributes of true greatness which they exemplified. First, you students know that they chose the right with invincible resolution. Second, they resisted the sorest temptations from within and from without. Third, they bore the heaviest burdens cheerfully. Fourth, they were most fearless under menace and frowns, and Fifth, their reliance upon God and truth was most unfailing. These traits, says Channing, are the marks of true greatness.

As I say, I am going to emphasize only two of their virtues—faith and their love of freedom.

Governor Bradford, I think the day after they landed, probably the 11th of November, gave an address to that little company. I think they were still on board the May-flower, for you know they drew up a plan of government by which they were to be guided after they landed. Note the concluding paragraph:

"May not and ought not the children of these fathers rightly say, Our fathers were Englishmen which came over this great ocean, and were ready to perish in this wilderness; but they cried unto the Lord, and he heard their voice, and looked on their adversities."

Faith in God was real to them—not just a mere essence.

Right in this connection may I call your attention to the first official proclamation of a Thanksgiving Day in this country. It was signed by George Washington. Note, too, how that element of divine faith is emphasized:

Whereas, it is the duty of all Nations to acknowledge the Providence of Almighty God, to obey his Will, to be grateful for his Benefits, and humbly to implore his Protection and Favour; and whereas both houses of Congress have by their joint Committee, requested me "To recommend to the People of the United States, a Day of Public Thanksgiving and Prayer, to be observed by acknowledging with grateful Hearts the many Signal Favours of Almighty God, especially by affording them an opportunity peaceably to establish a Form of Government for their safety and Happiness."

Now, therefore, I do recommend and assign Thursday and the twenty-sixth Day of November, next, to be devoted by the People of these States, to the Service of that great and glorious Being, who is the beneficient Author of all the good that was, that is, or that will be: That we may then all unite in rendering unto him our sincere and humble thanks for his kind Care and Protection of the People of this Country previous to their becoming a Nation;—for the signal and manifold Mercies and the favourable Interpositions of his Providence in the Course and Conclusion of the late War; —for the great Degree of Tranquility, Union, and Plenty which we have since enjoyed; for the peaceable and rational Manner in which we have been enabled to establish Constitutions of Government for our Safety and Happiness, and particularly the national one now lately instituted; —for the civil and religious Liberty with which we are blessed, and the means we have of acquiring and diffusing useful knowledge; —and in general, for all the great and various Favours which he hath been pleased to confer upon us. And Also, that we may then unite in most humbly offering our Prayers and supplications to the great Lord and Ruler of Nations, and beseech him to pardon our National and other Transgressions;—to enable us all whether in public or private Stations, to perform our several and relative Duties properly and punctually; —to render our national Government a Blessing to all the people, by constantly being a government of wise, just, and Constitutional Laws, directly and faithfully obeyed; —to protect and guide all Sovereigns and nations (especially such as have shown kindness to us) and to bless them with good Government, Peace, and concord; —to promote the Knowledge and practice of true Religion, and Virtue, and the increase of Science among them and us; —and generally to grant unto all mankind such a Degree of temporal Prosperity as he alone knows to be best.

Given under my hand at the City of New York, the third Day of October, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Eighty nine.

Here may I make an application of this principle of faith and belief in God to our present conditions today. You brethren and sisters know what the Lord has said regarding the perpetuation of this great country—that its perpetuity, its stability depends upon that principle of faith exemplified by the Pilgrims.

Wherefore, this land is consecrated unto him whom he shall bring. And if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity; if so, it shall be because of iniquity; for if iniquity shall abound cursed shall be the land for their sakes, but unto the righteous it shall be blessed forever.

Wherefore, I, Lehi, have obtained a promise, that inasmuch as those whom the Lord God shall bring out of the land of Jerusalem shall keep his commandments, they shall prosper upon the face of this land; and they shall be kept from all other nations, that they may possess this land unto themselves. And if it so be that they shall keep his commandments they shall be blessed upon the face of this land, and there shall be none to molest them, nor to take away the land of their inheritance; and they shall dwell safely forever.

We read further down—

But behold, when the time cometh that they shall dwindle in unbelief, after they have received so great blessings from the hand of the Lord—having a knowledge of the creation of the earth, and all men, knowing the great and marvelous works of the Lord from the creation of the world; having power given them to do all things by faith; having all the commandments from the beginning, and having been brought by his infinite goodness into this precious land of promise—behold, I say, if the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of him that is just shall rest upon them. (2 Ne. 1:7-10.)

So the perpetuity of this land and nation depend upon faith. I pause to point out the fact that any power or any influence that will destroy directly or indirectly this principle of faith in God is an enemy to your constitution and to mine. There is an influence that will undermine the very basic structure of this great nation. Now, I am going to be specific, because I know young men and women are being influenced.

The government of Russia rejects God. It takes its place on the side of Atheism, and answers with disbelief, should one ask what he thinks about God: "I have no need for such an hypothesis." Communists seek to eradicate from the minds of millions, naturally deeply religious, all belief in God, all interest in Church or its activities, all hope, aspiration, and faith outside the political doctrine of a few who have seized the national power. Now you see why I want to emphasize this dominant trait of the pilgrim fathers—Faith. We can govern ourselves accordingly. We should love the stars and stripes, and accept the constitution of these United States as divine. Don't you hesitate to stand on the right side.

Now just a word about that second dominant trait—the love of freedom. Now let's go back again to these Pilgrims, away back at the beginning of the century—1604-5-6. Shakespeare was writing his plays at that time. There were at least four classes or parties in England—(1) The Catholics who remained true to Rome, (2) Members of the English Church who had drawn away from the Catholics. (3) The Puritans who, as I say, were the founders of the Massachusetts Colony, and (4) The Separatists, the founders of the Plymouth Colonies. The Puritans and Separatists withdrew from the English Church, because they thought the English Church had not gone far enough from the Catholic Church. The persecution of these sects or groups was very intense, particularly under James the First who is described as "the greatest pedant that ever sat upon the English throne." He was "arbitrary, capricious, tyrannical, and unprincipled, he trampled upon the most solemn oaths, and seemed never better pleased than when torturing or anathematizing the victims of his vengeance. Hence at Hampton Court Conference, at the close of the second day, speaking of the Puritans, he said: `I shall make them conform themselves, or I will harry them out of the land, or else do worse.'"

There is tyranny for you!

Finally he issued a proclamation, July 16, 1604, ordering the Puritan Clergy to conform before the last of November, or to dispose of themselves and families in some other way, as "unfit for their obstinacy and contempt to occupy places."

Well, the Separatists waited awhile, and finally one group under a man by the name of Robinson took a boat to Holland where they might worship free of this autocracy. The others were harried and persecuted. There was one group at Scrooby and one at Gainsborough. So after much suffering they finally decided to go because they couldn't stand it any longer. Accordingly, one group, under Robinson as I have already told you, settled in Holland, and then the others decided that they would have to go.

They endured persecution, were driven from their homes, their leaders were imprisoned. Finally, they said they would leave Holland. The King said they couldn't leave—that "It is conformity we demand." So they schemed to leave by night, and they hired a ship wholly to themselves, and made agreement with the master to be ready at a certain day, and take them and their goods on board at a convenient place. After long waiting and large expenses, they were finally taken on board at night only to learn that they had been betrayed. Governor Bradford in his account says: "But when he had them and their goods aboard, he betrayed them, having beforehand plotted with the searchers and other officers so to do who took them, and put them into open boats, and there rifled and ransacked them, searching them to their shirts for money, yea even the women further than became modesty; and then carried them back into the town and made them a spectacle and wonder to the multitude, which came flocking on all sides to behold them."

I think it is well for us to picture their plight three hundred years ago.

Well, later, they got a Dutchman who said "I will take you over." He made an appointment to take them in at a place a good distance from any town. The women and children with the goods were sent to the place in a small barke, which they had hired and the men were to meet them by land. They were there a day before the ship came, and the sea being rough, and the women very sick, asked the seamen to put into a creek that was nearby where they lay on the ground at lowwater. The next morning the ship came, but they couldn't move because the tide was out. In the meantime the ship master sent his boat out to the men and got them aboard the ship. Just as they got aboard, the master of the boat saw horsemen with guns and other weapons coming toward them, and he knew what it meant—the officers had found them. So, Governor Bradford, says: "The Dutchman seeing this, swore his country's oath, `sacramente,' and having the wind fair," sailed away with the husbands aboard, and the women and children left stranded. Imagine their deplorable state! They had nothing with them excepting the shirts on their back, and their wives and children left helpless. They should have made the trip in seven days, but they were out fourteen days because of a terrible storm which threatened to engulf them. Governor Bradford gives his account of this storm:

And afterward endured a fearful storm at sea, being 14 days or more before they arrived at their port in seven, whereof they neither saw sun, moon, nor stars, and were driven near the coast of Norway; the mariners themselves often despairing of life; and once with shrieks and cries gave over all, as if the ship had been founded in the sea, and they sinking without recovery. But when man's hope and help wholly failed, the Lord's power and mercy appeared in their recovery; for the ship rose again, and gave the mariners courage again to manage her. And if modesty would suffer me, I might declare with what fervent prayers they cried unto the Lord in this great distress, (especially some of them), even without any great distraction, when the water ran in their mouths and ears; and the mariners cried out We sinke, we sinke; they cried (if not with miraculous, yet with a great height or degree of divine faith), Yet Lord thou canst save, yet Lord thou canst save; with such other expressions as I will forbear. Upon which the ship did not only recover, but shortly after the violence of the storm began to abate, and the Lord filled their afflicted minds with such comforts as every one cannot understand, and in the end brought them to their desired Haven, where the people came flocking admiring their deliverance, the storm having been so long and sore, in which much hurt had been done, as yet masters friends related unto him in their congratulations.

This will remind you of Paul on his way to Rome.

Now, that is what the Pilgrims suffered and endured for the love of freedom. It is merely an illustration. I know that they became just as guilty of intolerance as those who had persecuted them, but that only reflects upon their clear sense of justice, and it does not lessen in any way the heroism in their defense of freedom.

Conditions in U.S. That Threaten Freedom

Will you tell me—is there an enemy today in our country that threatens our freedom in this country? I am not very much worried about our leaders hastening war. I think our men who are guiding the destiny of the nation at the present are just as eager for peace as you and I. Have you ever talked to a man or woman, or to a veteran, who really wants war? Now it may be that war will come. If wolves come to my door and threaten to take the lives of my loved ones, I would fight, and if human wolves attack this great country, we shall fight, but we are not going to attack any other country. So I am not going to say anything about that. But there is another element, and it is the conflict between capital and labor. A few years ago capital said—Get as much as you can and pay as little. That is wrong. Labor had to fight. But what of today? Labor says—Do as little as you can and get as much as you can. And that is wrong. We see in that condition a threat to the freedom to work. It is a God-given right to work. Our attention has been called to an article in the New York Times. It contains a laborer, a father of five children. An employee for twenty-three years of the National Silver Warehouse Company. He belonged to local Union 65, CIO. This union recently authorized an assessment equal to one week's wages to set up a $500,000 strike fund. This workman refused to make the payment. Maybe his children needed the groceries a week's wage would buy. The union forced his reluctant employer to fire him, although he was "an excellent and reliable worker."

Commenting upon this a leading figure of our nation says: "The greatest of all civil rights is the right to live. But men can live only if they work. All other rights mean little if the right to work is not enforced." He continued:

Does this man have the right to work? If he is too poor to kick in with a week's wage, does he have to give up a job with 23 years' seniority? Do he and his family have to go on relief? Do I and other taxpayers have to support them?

Do you think a union should have the power to follow this man into the ballot box and force him to mark his ballot as it desires? If not, what difference is there in principle between doing that and forcing him to kick in a week's wage to be used in a political campaign against his will? Or if he refuses, as he did, to be forced to lose his job and his children's bread?

That is the element that I see is threatening the freedom, not of religious worship, against which the Pilgrims fought, but against man's right to live, the right to choose whether he joins the union or not. Here in Utah it is time for us to take the proper stand, and to safeguard our rights as given in the Constitution of the United States. We can find faults. We need to find the right way.

I suggest a share in the profits. That is what should be done. Let the men who work share in the profits of their labor. A share in the profits is being carried on by a little firm in this city. There are thirteen employees in this little organization the manager says:

We decided upon a simple division of profits: 1/3 to capital and 2/3 divided equally among workers and management. If the profits for half a year were $21,000, Capital would get $7,000, and the workers (if there were 13, and counting management as I) would get $14,000, or $1,000 each, paid in cash. Of course an audited and certified copy of our half-yearly balance sheet is posted on the wall for workers to study, giving them complete confidence.

There are no strikes in that place!

I was happy when we were visiting the three million dollar plant of the Thermoid Rubber Company to have the president of that establishment say: "That is just what we are going to do. The workers will share in the profits, and will be amply paid for what they do, and will share with us."

This is the answer. Faith—faith in God, in Jesus Christ, and to us in the restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. A love of freedom to worship and to work, to think, to live. To feel a sense of possession of what we have is ours, and no autocracy or government will say we will take that. I like the spirit that a man's home is his castle—for him, his wife and his children. I am thankful for our government, grateful for the Church, grateful for friends, for men and women whom we can trust this Thanksgiving Day. It is a glorious morning. Grateful for the nation, for the Church, for every individual who lives under that flag.

I am sorry for the information that has come to us concerning the Indians from whom we have taken this land. Let us help them, and the Church has already planned to send help to them. Today a truckload is on its way. We are not waiting for bureaus and regulations. We are going to help those little kiddies who are hungry. I am grateful for a Church that will do this. And so, in conclusion, let us all unite and say:

We thank Thee, O Father, for all that is bright— The gleam of the day and the stars of the night, The flowers of our youth and the fruits of our prime, And the blessings that march down the pathway of time. We thank Thee, O Father, for all that is drear— The sob of the tempest, the flow of the tear; For never in blindness, and never in vain, Thy mercy permitted a sorrow or pain. We thank Thee, O Father of all, for the power Of aiding each other in life's darkest hour; The generous heart and the bountiful hand And all the soul-help that sad souls understand. We thank thee, O Father, for days yet to be; For hopes that our future will call us to Thee. Let all our eternity form, through Thy love A heart of Thanksgiving in the mansions above. (Will Carleton)

God grant that this prayer will be in each heart this day throughout this entire land.
