David O. McKay, Steppingstones to an Abundant Life ( 1971)

Christmas

"And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night.

And lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

"For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."

Such is part of the first glorious Christmas message!

Salt Lake City this Christmas Eve is brilliant with light radiating from a million electric lamps.

Christmas Eve in Bethlehem two thousand years ago was dark, excepting perhaps for a few torches seen here and there.

Yet in that humble though historic town was heralded the first Christmas story and in it the Light of the world was born.

How different the world conditions then from what they are tonight—no railroad, no auto, no steamboat, no radio, and a man would have been considered "beside himself" had he even mentioned the possibility of carrying passengers in an air transport, or of hearing a voice on the opposite side of the earth.

Yes, in material things, in science and invention, the world has made marvelous progress, but what about its advancement in the true values of life—those, for example, proclaimed by the heavenly hosts—belief in and reverence for Deity—peace—brotherhood.

I like to think that man has made advancement in these fundamental matters though he lags, far, far behind his phenomenal material and scientific accomplishments.

The announcement of the first Christmas is the sweetest story ever told—the sweetest story because of the eternal principles enunciated—the "glad tidings of great joy"—were to be "unto all people." The Light of the world was to shine in every heart.

Incidents associated with the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem beautifully illustrate this fact. When the weary, travel-worn couple, Joseph and Mary, entered their old home-town of Bet Lahm, they anticipated securing comfortable lodgings, but "there was no room for them in the Inn." Only mothers can realize Mary's keen disappointment and fearful anxiety as she and Joseph left the Inn and again entered the darkness to seek lodgings elsewhere. The city was crowded, but among the throngs there were no friends to help, no familiar faces to alleviate their heavy feelings of loneliness—an expectant mother in need of the best, the most comfortable of accommodations, yet not an open door, not even a couch on which to rest!

Well, to quote a modern writer, Herbert Spough: "Providence has a way of overruling the best laid plans of men, and turning their errors to fit the greater, divine plan. The hour has struck for the advent of the world Deliverer, and the Lord of all is ushered into the world in a stable.

"How the guiding hand of the Ruler of worlds directed the stage setting of this greatest of world dramas time has borne testimony."

Humble shepherds informed by revelation said: "Let us now go even unto Bethlehem and see this thing which has come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us,. . . and they found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger."

Wise men from the east, were guided to him through the channel of learning—"and when they were come into the house (not the manger) they saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and fell down and worshipped him: and when they had opened their treasures they offered unto him gifts: gold and frankincense and myrrh."

When, after eight days, Mary, in conformity with the Mosaic law, took her child to the Temple, Simeon, a "just and devout" man, receiving witness by the Holy Ghost, recognized the babe as "the Lord's Christ." Taking him in his arms, he blessed God and said: "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation."

Thus was it shown even on the first Christmas that all people—the humble, the learned, the rich, the great—who sincerely seek the Christ will find him and become of one mind in a divine brotherhood of which the Lord is the acknowledged head.

Racial and social barriers, economic differences are overcome in the presence of Christ. Even hatred and bitterness, enmity and strife give way to the spirit of good will.

A striking illustration of this fact occurred in Flanders Field in World War I. On December 24, Britains and Germans had fought as only hated foes can fight, and as a result comrades had been wounded and others stilled in death.

When, next morning (December 25th) the sun shone in the trenches, someone cried to the enemy: "This is Christmas Day!" Then followed an exchange of greetings—cautiously, even suspiciously at first. In a few moments bayonets and bombs were laid aside, and between the trenches foes fraternized for a brief period as friends. For a few hours the spirit of Christmas entered their hearts, and they acted as sensible human beings.

If such could prevail for a day on the battle field, surely it is not inconceivable that Christian men can some day make such relationships permanent in the daily affairs of life.

Jesus knew no nationality; neither was he a respecter of persons. "Moses was a Hebrew; Socrates, an Athenian, Buddha, a Hindu; Mohammed, an Arab; Gladstone, an Englishman; Luther, a German; and Lincoln, an American; but Jesus belongs to us all. He is the universal man—the one perfect character."

As he said on the shores of Galilee, so he says to all people in this day: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."

"Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek, and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls."

This Christmas Eve, as darkness envelopes the earth, each of you will retire with absolute confidence that the night will pass and on Christmas morning the earth will be filled again with the light of day. Of this you have not a shadow of doubt.

This old world is enveloped in the darkness of bigotry, intolerance, disbelief in God, and suspicion of fellowmen resulting in ill will and discord. For four thousand years and more the human race has groped in this darkness vainly seeking a light that would dispel it. Blindly have they brought upon themselves the evils of antagonism, the misery of contention, the bitterness of strife, and the horrors of war.

As absolute as the certainty that you have in your hearts that tonight will be followed by dawn tomorrow morning, so is my assurance that Jesus Christ is the Savior of mankind, the Light that will dispel the darkness of the world, through the Gospel restored by direct revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

O Living Christ who still Dost all our burdens share Come now and dwell within the hearts Of all men everywhere.

For this I earnestly pray in his name whose birth the Christian world commemorates.
