Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

FOREWORD

Robert J. Matthews has been our valued mentor, friend, and colleague for many years, and it is in the spirit of tribute and profound appreciation that we have obtained this humble scholar's permission to make the essays comprising this volume available for publication. As a beloved teacher and writer, Brother Matthews has had a marked impact upon gospel scholarship in the Church. He worked for many years in the Church Educational System as a seminary and institute instructor and a research and curriculum editor. In addition, for over twenty years at Brigham Young University he has given diligent service as chairman of the Department of Ancient Scripture, dean of Religious Education, and latterly as one of the senior editors of The Encyclopedia of Mormonism.

In his writings, his symposium addresses, his classrooms, and his life, Brother Matthews has borne fervent testimony of Jesus Christ and of the marvelous work and a wonder set in motion through the latter-day seer, Joseph Smith. Few persons in this dispensation have been as conversant with all of the standard works of the Church as Robert Matthews. He has written and spoken scores of times on subjects pertaining to the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

His life's work and consuming passion, however, have been Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible. It was in the summer of 1944 that Brother Matthews listened to a radio address given by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, in which the Apostle quoted a passage of scripture from the King James Version (John 1:18), noted that the translation was incorrect, and then cited the same passage from the Joseph Smith Translation. At that point in his young life (he was eighteen years old), Brother Matthews had never heard of the Joseph Smith Translation. And yet there came a fascination-much more than a simple curiosity-with this work of the Prophet Joseph, a fascination which over the years ripened into a thorough, scholarly study of the translation. It was Robert J. Matthews who, for over fifteen years, persisted in his request to the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints to examine the original manuscripts of the Joseph Smith Translation. Permission was finally granted in 1968, and Brother Matthews was able to continue his important studies, now more richly informed through access to the original documents prepared by Joseph Smith and his scribes almost a century and a half earlier.

Much of what we know about the Joseph Smith Translation today-the accuracy of the printed editions made by the RLDS church, key dates for the Genesis chapters that appear in the Pearl of Great Price as the book of Moses, its tie to the ongoing history of the Church and the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, and the work of translation itself as a major branch of the Prophet's calling-much of this we know because of the labors of Robert J. Matthews. Years of earnest and detailed study resulted in the publication in 1975 of his significant volume, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary. In 1984 Elder Bruce R. McConkie referred to Brother Matthews as "the world authority on the Joseph Smith Translation." [^1] On another occasion, to a group of religious educators, Elder McConkie said: "I am pleased to say that here at Brigham Young University we have the world's foremost authority on the Joseph Smith Translation. His contributions in this field of gospel scholarship rank with the best works published in our dispensation. He is of course Brother Robert J. Matthews, the dean of Religious Education. His published work, 'A Plainer Translation': Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary, is deserving of your careful study." [^2] Because so much of what Brother Matthews has taught and written over the years has dealt with the clarifying and elevating influence of latter-day revelation upon the Bible, the title of this work, A Bible! A Bible! seemed most appropriate.

Though he has remained active in symposia and seminars, and though he has prepared articles for Church periodicals or chapters for others' books during the last two decades, Robert J. Matthews-largely because of his heavy administrative and editorial assignments-has not enjoyed those blocks of uninterrupted time so necessary for the organization, writing, and preparation of a book. Because we have found his insights into life and into the power of the gospel so seminal and life-changing, we have chosen to assemble for publication those writings that we believe represent some of his most pertinent and profound thinking. Brother Matthews's personal sense of modesty and humility would not have allowed him to do this himself. But we prevailed upon him to allow us to do so. We are grateful for the enthusiasm and encouragement of Russell Orton and Cory Maxwell at Bookcraft Publishers, and particularly for the sensitivity and keen editorial eyes of George Bickerstaff and Garry Garff.

Each person is responsible for what he says or writes. In that regard, this work is a private endeavor and not a production of or endorsed by either Brigham Young University or The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We believe, however, that Brother Matthews's understanding and doctrinal interpretations are in harmony with the scriptural canon and the words of living Apostles and prophets.

Most of the chapters herein originated as talks given at different times, to different audiences, and in varying circumstances. They represent the teachings of a perceptive mind and a great man. It is our prayer that the doctrine taught and the expressions made in these pages will bring as much soul-satisfaction and depth of insight to the reader as they have brought to us.

ROBERT L. MILLET LARRY E. DAHL

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Doctrinal Restoration," in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), p. 22.
[^2] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Bible: A Sealed Book," Supplement to the Eighth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1984), p. 5.
