Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

3 LATTER-DAY REVELATION ON OLD TESTAMENT PATRIARCHS [^1]

This chapter will discuss the contribution of latter-day revelation to a correct understanding of what the ancient patriarchs were like and of what they taught. The Bible gives us a great amount of historical information about these things, but it is often vague in doctrinal content. It is a cardinal principle of the Church that many plain and precious things have been removed deliberately from the text of the Bible since the time it was originally written. The most serious things that were removed were the doctrinal things. The angel in 1 Ne. 13 said that "many plain and precious things" were "taken away from the book," and also "many covenants of the Lord" were "taken away" (vv. 26-28). It appears that most of the extractions occurred in the first century A.D.; thus, since that time the Jewish and the Christian worlds have not had a completely adequate Bible. Even so the Bible is wonderful and is a force for good and for righteousness in the earth. But think of how marvelous it must have been and of the added message it must have contained when it was complete and doctrinally much richer than it is now.

Consequences of the Removal of Portions from the Bible

Two problems arise when information is taken out of a record. First, there is the loss of that which is removed. Second, and in some cases more significant, when one piece of information is lost it often renders some of the remaining information unintelligible or even misleading. Many of the parts now missing from the Bible were vital to a correct understanding of the historical, intellectual, and doctrinal milieu in which the ancient prophets and patriarchs lived. Without those missing parts the picture is fragmented and vague, if not distorted. My purpose is to discuss a number of things that are found only in latter-day revelation that nevertheless pertain to the biblical story. These are things that we would not know if we had only the Bible.

Some may feel that these things are not important, since the Bible provides a general outline of Old Testament events and concepts. But, to illustrate how the incomplete biblical record, standing alone, has led to some less-than-adequate interpretations, let us consider some entries from two standard reference sources on the Bible. First, from the dictionary section of an edition of the Bible published by Cambridge University Press, we have the following under the entry "Fall":

This word denotes the first entrance of sin into the world, as described in Gen. 3. The story which is there told should probably be regarded as allegory rather than as literal history. The Bible does not teach that man was originally created perfect, i.e., with all his moral faculties perfectly developed, but that at a certain point in the history of the race the development took a wrong turn, which was not in accordance with God's original purpose. Man consciously set himself to act in opposition to the will of his Creator. This deliberate act of self-assertion produced in the race a natural inclination towards what is wrong, a taint which is handed on from one generation to another, and which is generally called "original sin"; we are all "by nature born in sin." [^2]

The second reference source, Harper's Bible Dictionary, offers this definition of the Fall: "The lapse from innocence and goodness, the first apostasy: the loss of Adam's position of integrity, virtue, and innocence, after his sin, as related in the Genesis accounts of the Eden tragedy. . . . There is no Old Testament doctrine of the Fall. But the Fall and the atoning grace of Christ are the core of the New Testament theology of Paul." [^3]

And now, on the subject of the offering of sacrifices, the dictionary in the Cambridge edition of the Bible states: "No Divine command can be quoted for the institution of sacrifice; the desire to offer some thank-offering was instinctive in man. . . . The earliest sacrifices [were] those of Cain, Abel and Noah. . . . The idea of propitiation became prominent later on, after the Mosaic Law had brought in a fuller knowledge of sin, and had produced a deeper sense of guilt." [^4]

In contrast to the above statement about the origin and purpose of sacrifice, the Lord has revealed that he commanded Adam to offer sacrifice and told him to use the firstlings of his flock for this purpose. An angel later came and explained to Adam that this animal sacrifice was a similitude of the forthcoming sacrifice of Jesus Christ. (See JST, Gen. 4:5-8; Moses 5:4-10.) Furthermore, latter-day revelation speaks of the Fall as an actual event, not as an allegory, and presents it as a necessary part of the eternal plan. No doubt the scholars who prepared the two dictionaries cited above were good, God-fearing Christian men, but they simply did not have the benefit of a complete Bible or of latter-day revelation.

It is true, as Harper's Bible Dictionary states, that the Old Testament, as it has come down to us, contains virtually no doctrine of the Fall, but that is because almost all traces and doctrinal discussions of it have been removed from that record. Latter-day scriptures attest that at one time the Old Testament, especially the book of Genesis, had a very clear doctrine of the Fall, beginning with God's revelation to Adam on the subject. We know from these scriptures that the ancient biblical prophets taught the concept of the fall of Adam and the atonement of Christ. This is especially evident in the Book of Mormon and in the Joseph Smith Translation.

While it is true that nearly all of the doctrines of the gospel are at least mentioned in the Bible, they are not presented in an organized form or in logical proximity to one another; rather, they are scattered throughout the Bible in such a manner that they are not easily recognized nor properly associated. After a person has learned the gospel and become acquainted with the plan of salvation from latter-day revelation, he can then see traces of the plan and discover references to it in the Bible; but he can't construct the plan and fit it together initially from the Bible alone.

Twenty-five years ago another teacher and I were standing along a roadway in Washington State with plans to photograph Mount Rainier, which stood in the distance. There was a considerable amount of mist in the air, and the view was hazy and obscured. This other teacher told me he could put a filter on his camera that would remove much of the haze from the scene as it would appear in the photograph, providing us with a clearer shot of the mountain. That was a new idea to me, but I liked it. In a similar way, as we look through the lens of latter-day revelation, we can see the ancient patriarchs with much of the mist and obscurity removed. I believe we can filter out some of the accumulated fog, and smog, and distant haze-the fog of mistranslation, the smog of neglect or unbelief, and the haze of fragmentary records.

Sources of Information on Ancient Patriarchs

The chief sources of information on the ancient patriarchs, as well as on other gospel matters, are the standard works of the Church and the writings and teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. A brief comment about each of these is in order.

The Bible

The Bible is an old book and has been available to man over many years. The prophets who wrote it made it plain and doctrinally strong. They made it clear that they knew of and worshipped Jesus Christ as their Redeemer. The prophets are dead, the original manuscripts are gone, and all the copies have suffered many changes and losses at the hands of men. Some losses were unintentional, but some were intentional. The intentional losses are the most serious because they involved the systematic removal of basic doctrinal passages.

The Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon is also an old book, as old as the Bible, but the plates upon which it was written were kept hidden in the ground, out of the reach of man for over fourteen hundred years; therefore it did not suffer the kinds of changes and alterations that occurred to the Bible. One of its values is that it demonstrates that the same doctrines known by the biblical writers were known by the Book of Mormon writers and compilers. In fact the Book of Mormon says that God speaks the "same words unto one nation like unto another" (2 Ne. 29:8). Likewise, both records mention many of the same important persons and events. The Book of Mormon has come forth as a second witness for Jesus Christ, as a companion to the Bible, making known many of the things that have been taken away from the Bible (see 1 Ne. 13:39-40).

The Doctrine and Covenants

The Doctrine and Covenants is a new book, containing revelations from the same Lord who gave revelations to the prophets who wrote the Bible and the Book of Mormon. In addition to new and important divine information, this latter-day book of scripture contains many of the same doctrines that the two older books contain, and it speaks often of the ancient biblical prophets.

The Pearl of Great Price

The Pearl of Great Price contains, among other things, two translations by Joseph Smith of ancient material. The first is taken from his translation of Genesis and is called the book of Moses. The second is a translation of records containing the writings of Abraham and is called the book of Abraham.

The Joseph Smith Translation

The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible is a document con-raining thousands of additions to and clarifications of the King James Version. In his calling as a prophet and seer Joseph Smith began and carried forth this work of translation under the express direction of the Lord. Many of the doctrinal revelations now in the Doctrine and Covenants were received as a consequence of the Prophet's work on this Bible translation.

Joseph Smith's Writings and Teachings

The writings and teachings of Joseph Smith are also valuable for our study at hand because this man was such a great prophet and restorer, the recipient of so much direct revelation from God. Many of the ancient biblical prophets visited him personally, and he understood the work of the Lord that has taken place on this earth from the beginning. The Lord said of Joseph Smith: "I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world" (D&C 35:18). Joseph Smith's teachings about the work of God and the history of the prophets back to Adam are very important to us, if we want to know about things as they really were.

Latter-day Sources Provide Greater Understanding

An interesting phenomenon of gospel study is that the more you know, the more you want to know. Abraham said he wanted to be a "greater follower of righteousness" and to possess a greater knowledge (Abr. 1:2). Likewise, Moses yearned for another chance to commune with God, for, said he, "I have other things to inquire of him" (Moses 1:18). Once a person is awakened to a basic knowledge of the doctrine and laws of God, his soul thirsts for gospel knowledge even more vigorously than his body craves food.

A second interesting aspect of studying the gospel is that the more a man or woman learns, the more he or she is able to learn. Thus the latter-day revelation contained in our standard works and in the teachings of Joseph Smith opens up the vistas of understanding and spiritual joy like nothing else can.

In providing this understanding, our modern scriptures are fulfilling ancient prophecies. In 2 Ne. 3:12 we read that the writings of the fruit of the loins of Judah (the Bible) and the writings of the fruit of the loins of Joseph (the Book of Mormon) shall come together in the last days. That is a parallel passage to Ezek. 37:15-17, which states that the stick of Judah and the stick of Ephraim shall become one in our hands. But notice the special wording of the Book of Mormon passage: these writings "shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines." The growing together of these records consists of more than their being placed together under one cover or in a zippered carrying case. The word grow implies action. Something that grows is dynamic. Thus, these scriptural records grow and get better in the sense that studying them together yields a greater understanding of vital gospel subjects. That is what happens when we use latter-day revelation to understand the Bible.

I have come to the firm conclusion that the Lord wants us to know the doctrines of the gospel, and to know them well. One purpose of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is to bring us to a knowledge of "the very points of his [the Redeemer's] doctrine" (1 Ne. 15:14). And in the Doctrine and Covenants we read that "the true points of [the Lord's] doctrine" are to be brought forth "that there may not be so much contention" (D&C 10:62-63). Those who have only the Bible in its imperfect, altered condition are, in the words of the angel in Nephi's vision, in an "awful state of blindness" (1 Ne. 13:32), because they lack the greater gospel knowledge that latter-day scriptures can offer them.

We will now take a specific look at what latter-day revelation tells us about Adam (and Eve, his companion), Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and Moses.

Adam and Eve

It seems only proper that we begin with Adam and Eve. We cannot enter into an extensive biography; rather, we will deal with a few specific items of historical and doctrinal importance.

Location of the Garden of Eden

The existence of the Garden of Eden is taught in each of the standard works and is a frequent topic in Joseph Smith's teachings. The Bible does not indicate where it was located, and the popular conclusion is that the garden, if it existed at all, was somewhere in the Near East or Asia. Latter-day scripture does not categorically pinpoint the location of the Garden of Eden, but it does place Adam in the Western Hemisphere-stating that he dwelt at Adam-ondi-Ahman-and speaks particularly of Spring Hill in Daviess County, Missouri, as the place where Adam shall come to a future council meeting (see D&C 78:15; 116:1; 117:8). Drawing on this information, early Latter-day Saints concluded that the area now called the state of Missouri is the place where Adam and Eve dwelt after their expulsion from the garden.

I do not know of an existing document containing a specific declaration in the words of Joseph Smith in which he gave the exact location of the Garden of Eden, but several secondary sources report that he did so. Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Joseph Fielding Smith all said that Joseph Smith taught that the Garden of Eden was located in Jackson County, Missouri, where the city of Independence now is.

According to Wilford Woodruff, President Brigham Young once said: "Joseph, the Prophet, told me that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri. When Adam was driven out he went to the place we now call Adam-ondi-Ahman, Daviess County, Missouri. There he built an altar and offered sacrifices." [^5]

Speaking in Provo, Utah, in 1863, Heber C. Kimball discussed several things about Adam and about the redemption of the earth. As one of his points he said: "The spot chosen for the garden of Eden was Jackson County, in the state of Missouri, where Independence now stands; it was occupied in the morn of creation by Adam and his associates who came with him for the express purpose of peopling this earth." President Kimball further commented that "the Prophet Joseph frequently spoke of these things in the revelations which he gave, but the people generally did not understand them." [^6]

An interesting scriptural maxim, or formula, states that the "first shall be last; and the last shall be first." Of course that has a lot of meanings and can be applied to a number of things. However, when applied to the establishment of the city of New Jerusalem, the idea can be quite instructive. The Lord revealed that the New Jerusalem and its temple should be located where Independence now is (D&C 57:1-3; 84:1). On the basis of the "first last, and last first" principle, we can reason that the Lord's City in the last dispensation should be located where the work of saving men on earth all began, in the Garden of Eden-that the first place should also be the last place.

President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that the Garden of Eden was located where the New Jerusalem will be established: "In accord with the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we teach that the Garden of Eden was on the American continent located where the City Zion, or the New Jerusalem, will be built. When Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden, they even-really dwelt at a place called Adam-ondi-Ahman, situated in what is now Daviess County, Missouri." [^7]

The Family of Adam

As to the family of Adam and Eve, Genesis gives the names of Cain, Abel, and Seth as though these were the earliest children. It does not explicitly say they were the first; it simply does not mention any before them, which leads the reader to assume they were the first. Later, Gen. 4:17 mentions Cain's wife, with no explanation of who she is. This has been a problem to some students, since no daughters of Adam and Eve are mentioned in the record before this. However, in the Joseph Smith Translation (JST, Gen. 4:1-3; Moses 5:1-3) we read that Adam and Eve had many sons and daughters and that these had children also, making Adam and Eve grandparents before either Cain or Abel was born. Whom did Cain marry? The Joseph Smith Translation identifies her as a daughter of one of Cain's brothers (JST, Gen. 5:27; Moses 5:28).

In the King James Version of Genesis, no mention is made of how Adam and Eve felt about the Fall and their having been cast out of the Garden of Eden. But the Joseph Smith Translation (JST, Gen. 4:9-12; Moses 5:10-11) records that both of them rejoiced because of the great new life and spiritual opportunities available to them as a result of the Fall. We don't know how they felt about their situation immediately after they were cast out, but after they were taught the gospel they rejoiced because of the Fall.

It is only from latter-day revelation that we learn that Adam and Eve would have had no children without the Fall. The Bible does not explain this, and therefore many have looked upon the transgression of Adam as a bad thing, believing that, if Adam had not transgressed, the earth would have kept its paradisiacal status and the entire human family could have lived in paradise without sin and death. These theorists do not realize that none of the human family would have been born if Adam and Eve had not fallen. (See 2 Ne. 2:23; Moses 5:11; 6:48.)

Furthermore, we learn from latter-day scripture that Adam could read and write, that he had a perfect and pure language, and that a book of remembrance was kept. Adam and his immediate posterity kept this record, and they taught their children to read and write in the "pure and undefiled" language. (JST, Gen. 6:5-6; Moses 6:5-6.)

Enoch, seven generations and nearly a thousand years later, made reference to this book of remembrance (JST, Gen. 6:49-50; Moses 6:45-46), as did Abraham another thousand years after that (Abr. 1:28-31). Abraham reported that he had in his possession detailed and informative written records kept by his ancestors back to Adam. Those records contained information not known to mankind today.

There is nothing in the King James Bible that would suggest the existence of such a set of records, or of such a highly developed and literate society among Adam and his immediate family. Yet in latter-day revelation these subjects are not simply alluded to or hinted at; they are a major thrust of the revelation about Adam.

Adam and the Gospel

Latter-day Saints have the opportunity to view Adam in a much clearer light than do those who are dependent on the Bible alone. We read in chapters 4 and 5 of Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis (Moses 5-6) that Adam offered animal sacrifice with faith toward the coming Messiah, was visited by angels, was taught the doctrines of the Fall and the Atonement, was baptized with water, and held the priesthood.

We learn from the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith that Adam was visited by Christ and that Adam possesses the keys of every dispensation as the father and patriarch of the human race. None of this is discernible from the present biblical record. The Prophet taught that Adam "is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men. . . . He . . . is the head, and was told to multiply. The keys [of the priesthood] were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship [to God], and they [those who have held keys] to him. . . . Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next." [^8]

Joseph Smith also provided the following significant information concerning Adam:

I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation. [^9]

[Adam] is Michael, . . . the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning . . . to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed. . . .

. . . [God] set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them. . . .

These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord. [^10]

This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood; every man holding the Presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the Presidency of them all, even Adam; and Adam receiving his Presidency and authority from the Lord. [^11]

None of these concepts taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith could be discerned from the biblical record alone, yet these teachings constitute basic, indispensable information about Adam that we need to know if we are to understand much about him and the plan of God for this earth.

In a modern revelation Adam's son Seth is spoken of as a "perfect man," in the express likeness of Adam's person, and as being so much like Adam that he "could be distinguished from [Adam] only by his age" (D&C 107:43). This certainly attests to the physical perfection and beauty of Adam and Seth. However, there is more that we can learn about this. In January 1843 the Prophet Joseph, speaking of his brother Alvin (whom he regarded very highly and who had died some years before), said he "was a very handsome man, surpassed by none but Adam and Seth." [^12]I do not know Alvin's exact physical dimensions, but several members of the Smith family were tall. Joseph Smith, Sr., was six feet three; Hyrum and Joseph were six feet; and their brother William is said to have been six feet four. We have every reason to believe, therefore, that Alvin was tall and long limbed like the other men in the family. Handsomeness is, of course, a relative term; yet Joseph Smith believed Alvin to be, by nineteenth-century standards, a handsome man, and by those same standards he judged Adam and Seth, who the Lord said were perfect men, to be even more handsome than Alvin. If by relatively modern standards, then, Adam and Seth were very handsome-and this is speaking of their whole appearance-it follows that they did not have caveman physiques, only one step removed from the apes. Joseph never would have thought a Neanderthal type was more handsome than his beloved brother Alvin. I think we are safe to conclude that, by our standards today, Adam and Seth were upright, straight, tall, and well proportioned.

Furthermore, Joseph Smith was not guessing at Adam's appearance, for in 1839 he had said, "I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman." [^13]And Oliver B. Huntington's diary quotes the Prophet as having said that Adam was "such a perfect man, great and stout, that he never stumbled or fell a joint [sic] to the ground." [^14]Elder John Taylor, who knew about Joseph Smith's acquaintance with Adam, said: "If you were to ask Joseph what sort of a looking man Adam was, he would tell you at once; he would tell you his size and appearance and all about him. You might have asked him what sort of men Peter, James and John were, and he could have told you. Why? Because he had seen them." [^15]

Enoch

Enoch is a famous patriarch, frequently spoken of in the Church, yet the Bible gives very little information about him. Today we speak of Enoch and his city of Zion, which was translated and taken from the earth nearly five thousand years ago. We also know that Enoch's city will return to the earth in the last days to be joined with the New Jerusalem, which will be built upon the earth in Jackson County, Missouri. We speak of Enoch's city having the ideal social and economic system, whereby there were no poor among them. None of this information is given in the Bible; all of it is dependent upon latter-day revelation. The Bible tells us that Enoch was translated, but it says nothing about a city of Enoch and nothing of Enoch's ministry as a preacher of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

In addition to the information above, we learn from Joseph Smith that Enoch, after his translation, became a ministering angel to people on other planets of a terrestrial order. The Prophet also said that Enoch came as a ministering angel and instructed Paul. [^16]

Enoch's Ministry

Although the Bible gives us to understand that Enoch was a righteous man, a man of faith, it does not tell us categorically what Enoch did. From the Joseph Smith Translation we learn that Enoch was a missionary and a successful expounder of the gospel of Jesus Christ, including the fall of Adam, and that he had great visions of eternity, the spirit world, the Judgment, and related things.

One of the greatest statements concerning the fall of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ-and the effect of the Atonement in freeing little children from so-called original sin-was given by Enoch and is found in the Joseph Smith Translation or in the book of Moses. Here we learn from Enoch that Adam was taught that, for a remission of any sins he committed after he became mortal, he would have to exercise faith in Jesus Christ, repent, and be baptized in water. But for the transgression in the Garden of Eden, apparently Adam was forgiven without these things. The passage reads as follows:

But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent.

And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the girl of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world. (JST, Gen. 6:51-56; Moses 6:50-54.)

There is no other passage or reference that surpasses this for clarity. Since these are the words of the Lord to Adam, cited by Enoch and contained in the writings of Moses, we know that all three of these prophets were acquainted with the doctrine of Christ relative to the Fall and the status of little children.

Latter-day revelation also tells us that Enoch was present at a great conference held at Adam-ondi-Ahman three years before the death of Adam. The proceedings of the meeting, including the prophecies of Adam uttered at that time, were all written at the time in the book of Enoch and are yet to be revealed to us. (D&C 107:53-57.)

We learn further that Enoch saw many things in vision, the breadth of which extended from the premortal spirit world, through mortality, up to and including the Millennium, and beyond. Among the many things he saw were Noah and the Flood, the crucifixion of Jesus, the resurrection, and the restoration of the gospel in the last days. (See Moses 6-7.)

Enoch was the great-grandfather of Noah, and in his vision of Noah and his family he saw that Noah built the ark and that the Flood came "upon the residue of the wicked" (Moses 7:43). Enoch received a promise that his (Enoch's) posterity would never be completely destroyed but would continue on the earth as long as the earth should stand. "And the Lord showed Enoch all things, even unto the end of the world" (Moses 7:67). None of these critical items is in our present Bibles.

An interesting and highly spiritual event in which Enoch witnessed the God of heaven weeping is recorded in Moses 7:28-41. At first the patriarch was surprised and expressed his astonishment that the Lord, who had so many creations and so much power, should weep. The Lord explained that he wept because of the wickedness of his children: they were without natural affection; they hated one another; they would not receive him to be their Father and God; and their wickedness would bring about their own suffering and the sorrow of heaven. Then Enoch also wept with the Lord. This is a most touching and spiritual scene, and we are indebted to the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis (part of which can be found in the book of Moses) for the account of this remarkable event.

Enoch was translated-which means his life in the flesh was extended in such a way that he did not die-some three thousand years before Christ's mortal ministry. We learn from modern revelation that Enoch underwent a change equal to death and was resurrected at the time of Jesus' resurrection. Such a change, although occuring "in the twinkling of an eye," was a real and necessary step in Enoch's progression, and that great patriarch-as is the case with all those translated before the time of Christ-is now a resurrected being.

It was with Enoch as with all of the patriarchs and prophets: he was baptized, confirmed, ordained, and endowed in the regular order of the gospel and its ordinances.

Noah

We have already spoken somewhat of Noah, but there are a few other things we should note concerning this patriarch.

Noah's Ministry

The Genesis story of the Flood is well known to Bible readers. It is mentioned in both the Old Testament and the New Testament; it is also spoken of in the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. However, strange as it may seem, our present book of Genesis does not give a single word of what Noah preached to the people for the 120 years he warned them of the coming deluge. Not one word! Chapters 6 through 8 of Genesis tell the story but say nothing about what Noah preached. These chapters recount what the Lord said to Noah but fail to tell us what Noah said to the people.

However, we learn from the Joseph Smith Translation (Moses 8:23-24) that Noah preached faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost. He also warned the people that if they did not accept the gospel of Christ the floods would come upon them. This is an important item to bear in mind. It was not for rejecting a weather report that the people were destroyed, but for rejecting the first principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Noah was not merely a weather prophet; he was a prophet of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The New Testament compensates only slightly for this deficiency of information in Genesis. We read in an epistle of Peter that Noah was "a preacher of righteousness," but we find no direct word about his preaching the gospel of Christ (2 Pet. 2:5).

Because of latter-day revelation we know that Noah-like all the other prophets-was baptized, confirmed, ordained, and endowed according to the same gospel and the same ordinances found among us in the Church today. We don't know who baptized Noah, but we learn from the Doctrine and Covenants that Noah was ordained at the age of ten years by his grandfather Methuselah (D&C 107:52).

Noah and the Restoration of All Things

We learn from the Prophet Joseph Smith that Noah is Gabriel and that this patriarch stands next to Adam in the hierarchy of the priesthood. In saving things through the Flood and repopulating the earth, Noah was like a second Adam. [^17]

Since we know that Noah is Gabriel, we also know that Noah was the angel who came to Zacharias and to Mary and announced the forthcoming births of John the Baptist and of Jesus (Luke 1). We learn further from modern revelation that this same person, who also bears the title of Elias, has an assignment to bring to pass "the restoration of all things" in the last days (D&C 27:6-7). No doubt he is second to Adam in this function. Adam, you recall, presides over all dispensations. Thus, Noah seems to have a special responsibility under Adam to help bring about the restoration of all things, and consequently both patriarchs have a special relationship to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Melchizedek

Like Enoch, Melchizedek has been almost lost from the pages of the Bible, yet he is and was one of the greatest of prophets and patriarchs. Alma says of him, "There were many before him, and also there were many afterwards, but none were greater" (Alma 13:19).

Melchizedek's Ministry

In Genesis little is said of the ministry of Melchizedek, but from the Joseph Smith Translation we learn that he was valiant even as a youth and that he wrought great miracles by faith. Latter-day scripture indicates that he had the same priesthood, the same covenant, and the same faith as Enoch, and suggests that he was translated, even as Enoch. (JST, Gen. 14:25-40.)

We also know from modern revelation that in the ancient Church the priesthood of the Son of God was named the Melchizedek Priesthood, and this because of his great faith and righteousness and in order to avoid the too frequent use of the name of Deity (D&C 107:1-4).

Latter-day revelation makes it clear that Melchizedek believed in Jesus Christ and preached His gospel. For example, Alma says that Melchizedek was a high priest after the order of the holy priesthood. Alma also explains that high priests were ordained "after the order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father." (Alma 13:7-9, 14; see also D&C 107:2-3; JST Gen. 14:25-40.) Because of latter-day revelation we know that Melchizedek, like the other ancient patriarchs, had faith in Christ, was baptized, received the gift of the Holy Ghost, was ordained, and was endowed in accordance with the same gospel and the same ordinances we know in the Church today.

In the old, sixth-century church of Saint Apollinare Nuovo in Ravenna, Italy, there is an interesting mosaic showing Melchizedek at an altar with bread and wine. This is a depiction of Gen. 14:18. However, the mosaic goes beyond this: on one side of the altar is Abel offering a lamb; on the other side is Abraham with his son Isaac; above the whole scene is the rainbow, reminiscent of Noah and his ministry; and through the clouds, reaching down from heaven, is the hand of God. This unique piece of art brings together many notable prophets in a redemptive motif that points to Christ. The fact that this mosaic exists shows that somebody in Ravenna in the sixth century A.D. had ideas about Melchizedek. It suggests a unity of purpose in the ministries of Abel, Noah, Abraham, and Melchizedek. Christianity and Judaism have all but lost sight of Melchizedek today, probably because the Bible now contains so very little about him. Later Christian art does not emphasize Melchizedek; therefore, we have to go back to the earliest centuries to find evidence of a tradition about him.

The Prophet Joseph explained that it was Melchizedek who taught Abraham the gospel of Jesus Christ and who also ordained Abraham to the priesthood (D&C 84:14). [^18]

Gen. 14:18 reports that Melchizedek brought forth bread and wine for himself and Abraham. However, the Joseph Smith Translation rewords this verse as follows: "Melchizedek . . . brake bread and blest it; and he blest the wine, he being the priest of the most high God." This wording suggests that there were two blessings, one for the bread and one for the wine. That would be unusual procedure for a regular meal. It almost suggests a prefigurement of the sacramental emblems of the atonement of Jesus Christ, which would take place many centuries later.

There can be no mistaking the evidence from latter-day scripture and from Joseph Smith's teachings that Melchizedek was a prophet of Jesus Christ.

Abraham

I have repeatedly pointed out in this paper that Adam, Enoch, Noah, and Melchizedek each had the gospel of Christ, with the same baptism, the same priesthood, and the same endowment that are found in the Church today. There are several ways to establish this in the case of Abraham, but let us focus on the following statement from the Prophet Joseph Smith:

According to Paul, (see Gal. iii:8) the Gospel was preached to Abraham. . . . Our friends may say, perhaps, that there were never any ordinances except those of offering sacrifices before the coming of Christ, and that it could not be possible for the Gospel to have been administered while the law of sacrifices of blood was in force. But we will recollect that Abraham offered sacrifice, and notwithstanding this, had the Gospel preached to him. That the offering of sacrifice was only to point the mind forward to Christ, we infer from these remarkable words of Jesus to the Jews: "Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad" (John viii:56.) So, then, because the ancients offered sacrifice it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but served . . . to open their eyes, and enable them to look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior, and rejoice in His redemption. [^19]

It would be difficult to find words any clearer than these to show that, indeed, Abraham and all the ancient patriarchs knew of the great gospel plan.

Moses

The New Testament leaves no question that Moses knew of the coming of Jesus Christ and wrote of him (see John 5, 6, 7; Luke 24:25-27). However, the Old Testament references regarding such things are not that clear. Even so, our present Old Testament offers at least some evidence that Moses knew of Christ, more evidence than it offers in the case of the earlier prophets. Latter-day revelation's account of the glorious vision of Moses makes it clear that this great prophet knew of Christ (see Moses 1). In this vision Moses learned much about the work of Jesus Christ as creator; he learned that Jesus is the Savior, the Only Begotten of the Father (Moses 1:6-21,32-33 Just as Genesis is an introduction to the Old Testament, chapter 1 of Moses is an introduction to Genesis.

In addition, we learn from a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith that Moses was ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood by his father-in-law, Jethro. This same revelation gives a priesthood lineage from Adam to Moses. (D&C 84:6-17.)

The Continuity of the Lord's Work

From our examination of how latter-day revelation contributes to an understanding of the Old Testament patriarchs, we can clearly discern the continuity and unity of purpose in God's work among his prophets from Adam's time down through the centuries. This is one of the most significant contributions of latter-day revelation.

Common Elements Among the Ancient Patriarchs

Modern scriptures teach us that, beginning with Adam, all of the prophets and patriarchs had the gospel of Jesus Christ and that it was the same gospel then as it is now. Adam received the same gospel, the same ordinances, the same endowment, the same celestial marriage, and the same covenants that members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints receive today. Furthermore, these prophets knew of each other. The earlier ones met together, and the later ones knew they were engaged in the same divine work that the earlier ones were, and for the same purposes. This continuity and unity are no longer evident in the Bible. I have no doubt they were there in the beginning, but they have become obscured.

The patriarchs from Adam to Methuselah were all on the earth together and knew one another, and they were all in the meeting at Adam-ondi-Ahman mentioned earlier in this chapter. An unbroken line of ordination existed from Adam to Methuselah, from Methuselah to Noah, and from Noah to Moses.

The Joseph Smith Translation informs us that when the Lord called Noah, instructed him concerning his ministry, and commanded him to build an ark, he also told him that he (Noah) had the same priesthood and covenant that was given to Enoch (see LDS edition footnotes for Gen. 6:18; 9:9, 11, 16).

The Prophet's Bible translation also tells us that later, when the priesthood and covenant were given to Melchizedek, this patriarch was told that these were the same that Enoch possessed (JST, Gen. 14:25-40). Still later, modern revelation informs us, as Abraham was called and ordained, the Lord told him: "And remember the covenant which I make with thee; for it shall be an everlasting covenant; and thou shalt remember the days of Enoch thy father" (see LDS edition footnote for Gen. 13:14).

These passages from the Joseph Smith Translation, plus the priesthood genealogy lists of D&C 84:6-17 and 107:40-52, contribute the following to our understanding: (1) they certify the credentials of the ancient patriarchs, showing that they were called of God and ordained under the hands of living priesthood bearers; (2) they certify that the patriarchs all received the same covenant and were engaged in the same sacred work and purposes of God; and (3) they demonstrate that the work of God is standardized and unified, that there was unity and organization anciently as there is today. These concepts cannot be discovered by examining our present book of Genesis alone, for it tends to treat each patriarch and prophet independently as well as scantily.

Every Dispensation was Governed by the Gospel Law

To appreciate the continuity of the Lord's work throughout time, we should understand that everything is governed by a law that was formulated and existed in the premortal life before the world was created. The plan of salvation existed then, and the same plan is still operating; nothing has been added, nothing taken away. We read in the Doctrine and Covenants: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated-and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

We read further in that same modern book of scripture:

For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. . . .

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment-that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord. (D&C 132:5, 8-12.)

Once we know the laws of the gospel, it is not necessary that every point about each prophet's calling be repeated in the scriptures. The following excerpts from the Prophet Joseph Smith's teachings illustrate his understanding of these matters:

The gospel has always been the same; the ordinances to fulfill its requirements, the same, and the officers to officiate, the same; and the signs and fruits resulting from the promises, the same; therefore, as Noah was a preacher of righteousness he must have been baptized and ordained to the priesthood by the laying on of hands, etc. [^20]

He [God] set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever. [^21]

It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. . . . Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles. [^22]

If a person wishes to have a clear perspective of the work of God on the earth, he should understand these concepts taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. This perspective on the nature and the cohesiveness of the Lord's work is no longer found in the biblical record. We should be grateful for latter-day scripture, which puts all the aspects of God's work together for us in a comprehensive package.

Conclusion

What, then, are some of the contributions of latter-day revelation to our understanding of the Old Testament and the ancient patriarchs? Among the contributions mentioned in this chapter are the following concepts:

4.The ancient patriarchs were intelligent; they were effective gospel preachers and record keepers. Moreover, they had a highly literate society with a written and spoken language that exceeds any on earth today, and their records contained information not known among mankind today.

These and other important doctrinal concepts are now known among us through modern revelations that add to and clarify the biblical record.

Notes

From an address given at the eighteenth annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, 28 October 1989.

1 Holy Bible (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1950), dictionary section, p. 56.

2 Harper's Bible Dictionary (New York: Harper and Row, 1961). p. 185.

3 Holy Bible, dictionary section, p. 134.

4 As found in Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p. 481; see also pp. 545-46. Compare George Q. Cannon, in Journal of Discourses 11:336-37; John Taylor, The Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), pp. 69-70.

5 Heber C. Kimball, in Journal of Discourses 10:235.

---
Notas:
[^1] The ancient prophets were real people. Although they lived and died, they are alive in eternity now, many of them having returned to earth as angels to visit the Prophet Joseph Smith.
[^2] All of these ancient prophets had the gospel of Jesus Christ; therefore they had the same priesthood, the same covenants, the same ordinances, the same endowment, and the same celestial marriage that are known among us in the Church today.
[^3] The plan of salvation-the work of God on the earth in every age-has been and is a standardized and unified objective.
[^4] 4 See Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1 (April 1835): 109-12.
[^5] 5 The dating of the translation of this passage is obtained from the original manuscript prepared by the Prophet and his scribes, courtesy of the historian, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, Independence, Missouri.
[^6] 6 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 11.
[^7] 6 Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 3:74.
[^8] 7 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 157-58.
[^9] 8 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 158.
[^10] 9 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 167-68.
[^11] 10 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 169.
[^12] 11 History of the Church 5:247.
[^13] 12 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 158.
[^14] 13 Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, part 2, p. 207, Harold B. Lee Library, Special Collections, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah; also cited in Hyrum Andrus, Joseph Smith, the Man and the Seer (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1960), p. 92.
[^15] 14 John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses 18:326.
[^16] 15 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 170.
[^17] 16 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 157.
[^18] 17 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 322-23.
[^19] 18 History of the Church 2:17.
[^20] 19 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 264.
[^21] 20 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 168.
[^22] 21 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 308.
