Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

4 ALL THINGS BEAR WITNESS OF CHRIST: AN OLD TESTAMENT PERSPECTIVE [^1]

The essential character of scripture is that it bears witness of Jesus Christ. Scripture may deal with history, doctrine, prophecy, administration, government, or other topics; but it is all directed toward the work and ministry of Jesus Christ. The scriptures were written by the prophets, "holy men of God [who] spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Pet. 1:21; see also D&C 68:2-5; 2 Tim. 3:16). These prophets had testimonies of Jesus Christ, for "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Rev. 19:10). Our underlying purpose for studying a book of scripture such as the Old Testament, therefore, is not just to read the book, but to obtain a perspective on those things that God revealed in ancient times about the life and mission of Jesus Christ.

Imperfect Transmission of the Biblical Text

We are slightly handicapped in a study of the Old Testament because the oldest available manuscripts are hundreds of years removed from the originals. What we have are translations of copies of copies of copies. Yet the fundamental problem is not one of translation but of transmission. There are able scholars today who could translate correctly the ancient texts into English or any other language, but they lack an accurate and complete manuscript from which to work.

It is easy to understand that a manuscript at the end of a long line of copies and translations has probably suffered at the hands of scribes; such would be the case even in the hands of the most careful workmen. The problem with the biblical record, however, is more serious. According to modern revelation the text of the Old Testament has suffered also at the hands of copyists and translators who deliberately altered the text with the intent to deceive future readers (1 Ne. 13:23-42; Moses 1:40-41; JST Luke 11:53-55). Planned departures are in a different category than mistakes caused by the frailty of man. When perpetrated willfully, huge errors and omissions can occur in a very short time. Thus our present text of the Bible has suffered from changes of all kinds, both planned and unplanned.

Fortunately, in our biblical studies we have not only the Masoretic or traditional Hebrew text but also the Septuagint, or Greek text, of the third century B.C. and the Dead Sea Scrolls of about the same time. Comparing these helps us to discover and correct some of the unplanned variants. But even more fortunate, we as Latter-day Saints have the Book of Mormon, which contains the text of certain portions of the Old Testament taken from the plates of brass as early as 600 B.C., predating the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Septuagint by more than three hundred years. We have also the book of Abraham from a text written much earlier. In addition we have other latter-day scriptures, such as the Doctrine and Covenants and the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, which are not translations of ancient documents but are revelations from the God of Israel; these scriptures correctly manifest the spirit and content of the Old Testament and also supply many passages and concepts lost from all known texts. Thus, one who believes in latter-day revelation not only has the benefit of all that the world has in the way of multiple Bible manuscripts but also has the reliable documents of latter-day scripture to supplement, interpret, and add to the available sources.

The Old Testament Testifies of Christ

We should not be surprised that there are many things in the Old Testament that speak of or point to Christ. After all, that is the purpose of scripture, and the Old Testament was written by prophets who knew that Jehovah was not only the Creator but also the Redeemer and future Messiah. Jesus said to the learned but unbelieving Pharisees: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me" (John 5:39). On the day of his resurrection, as Jesus walked to Emmaus with the two disciples, he chided them for their failure to understand and "believe all that the prophets have spoken." Then, the scriptural account tells us, "beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." (See Luke 24:25-27.) The soul craves knowledge of the gospel as the body craves food; and after Jesus had left them, the two disciples reflected upon their meeting with the Savior and said, "Did not our heart burn within us . . . while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32.) That evening Jesus appeared to the eleven and said: "These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me." The record goes on to say that "then opened he their understanding that they might understand the scriptures." (Luke 24:44-45.) Paul said that he taught the Corinthians, first of all, the things he had received of first importance, "how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures . . . and that he rose again the third day, according to the scriptures" (1 Cor. 15:3-4).

The scriptures referred to in the passages above are from the Old Testament, and these expressions make it plain that the Old Testament contained numerous passages that referred to Jesus Christ. We will examine some of the passages that Jesus and Paul may have used in their explanations.

Animal Sacrifice

Adam was the first to offer animal sacrifice. It was explained to him that not just any animal would serve; only a firstling could be used. A firstling is the first offspring of its mother, the one "that openeth the matrix" (Ex. 13:12, 15). An angel explained to Adam that animal sacrifice was in similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son, which was necessary because of the fall of Adam (see Moses 5:7-9). Jesus was the firstborn of Mary, and thus a firstling was used anciently as a symbol for Christ.

The Passover lamb was designated as a male of the first year, without spot or blemish, and it had to be slain without breaking any of its bones (see Ex. 12:46; Num. 9:12; John 19:36). All of these provisions pointed toward Jesus; and thus Paul, knowing the meaning of these things, said that "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us" (1 Cor. 5:7), and likewise John the Baptist referred to Jesus as "the Lamb of God" (John 1:29, 36).

Abraham and Isaac

The Lord commanded Abraham to offer his son Isaac, the child of promise, as a sacrifice. This was a heartrending trial for Abraham; yet he was willing and proceeded to make the offering, believing that "God was able to raise him up, even from the dead" (Heb. 11:19). As recorded in Hebrews, Isaac is called Abraham's "only begotten son" (v. 17); thus, Abraham's offering of Isaac as a sacrifice was a figure or a symbol of the great and eternal sacrifice to come. As Jacob the Nephite prophet explained, the figure of Abraham and Isaac was "a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son" (Jacob 4:5).

Melchizedek

We read in modern revelation that Melchizedek was such a great high priest that the priesthood was called after his name to avoid too frequent use of the name of Deity (see D&C 107:1-4). Before that time the priesthood was called "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God" (v. 3), which indicates that the priesthood itself is a type of the Son of God. The faulty text of Heb. 7:3 states that Melchizedek was "without father, without mother," and that he was "made like unto the Son of God." This passage is corrected in the Joseph Smith Translation to read: "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother. . . . And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually."

The name Melchizedek typifies Christ and means "my king is righteous." According to the scriptures Melchizedek was "King of righteousness" and "King of peace" (Heb. 7:2), titles we would ordinarily reserve for Jesus. Yet all those on whom the priesthood is conferred and who honor the priesthood become representatives or types of Christ, "for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren" (Heb. 2:11), and they become joint-heirs with Christ.

David

King David was a symbol for Christ. He united Israel and obtained a promise that the Messiah would come through his lineage. When Christ comes, he will reign as the "second David." [^2]

Old Testament Allusions to Christ

We include here a few of the instances in which the Old Testament alludes to the Messiah.

Gen. 3:15. The Lord said to the serpent (Lucifer): "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed [Christ]; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." The Hebrew word translated "bruise" actually means to "crush," and thus the seed of the woman (Christ) will crush the head of the serpent, and that is a fatal wound. This prophecy of Christ's victory over the devil is also mentioned in a Latter-day Saint hymn: "He seized the keys of death and hell / And bruised the serpent's head." [^3]

Gen. 49:10. "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah . . . until Shiloh come." That this is a prophecy of Christ is shown in the Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 50:24, wherein Shiloh is identified as the Messiah.

Lev. 16:21-22. Part of the revealed ceremony of the law of Moses involved the use of a scapegoat. On the Day of Atonement the high priest laid his hands on the head of a live goat, which then bore the sins of the community and was sent outside of the camp. This clearly points to Christ's taking upon himself the sins of all mankind.

Num. 24:17. Balaam, the non-Israelite prophet from the land of the Euphrates, prophesied of the Messiah, saying, "I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel."

Deut. 18:15, 18-19. To the Israelites Moses prophesied that "the Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken." He declared further that the Lord had told him: "I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them. . . . And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him." Peter identified this prophet as Jesus Christ (Acts 3:22-26), as did the angel Moroni (Joseph Smith-History 1:40).

Psalms. Many are the passages in the psalms that allude to some specific aspect of Jesus' mortal existence. Ps. 22:1 contains the words, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" which Jesus spoke while on the cross (Matt. 27:46). Ps. 22:16 speaks of his pierced hands and feet. Ps. 22:18 says, "They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture," a messianic prophecy whose fulfillment is recorded in Matt. 27:35. A messianic statement can be found in Ps. 34:20 to the effect that not one of his (the Messiah's) bones would be broken, as prophesied in Ex. 12:46 and acknowledged in John 19:36. Ps. 69:21 speaks of one thirsting being given gall and vinegar, which were offered to Jesus on the cross (Matthew 27:34). Ps. 118:22 says that "the stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner," a statement which Jesus identified with himself (Matt. 21:42; see also Jacob 4:15-17).

Ps. 41:9. "Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me." This was cited by the Savior as foreshadowing Judas's betrayal of his Master (John 13:18).

Isaiah. This prophet spoke of the coming Messiah more than any other in our present Old Testament. In both subject matter and expression, little else can equal the transcendent beauty of Isaiah's description of Jesus as the son of a virgin (Isa. 7:14), as the child who would be called the mighty God, the Prince of Peace (Isa. 9:6-7), and as the man of sorrows wounded for our transgressions (Isa. 53:1-12).

Micah 5:2. Micah prophesied of the Messiah by saying: "But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel." This passage is referred to in Matt. 2:6 as a prophecy of the birth of the Messiah.

Zech. 11:13. This passage speaks of thirty pieces of silver, reminding us of Judas's arrangement with the Jewish priests as recorded in Matt. 26:15 and 27:3. Zech. 13:6 tells of Christ's being "wounded in the house of [his] friends," as Jesus certainly was and as he will testify to the Jews on the Mount of Olives at his second coming (D&C 45:51-53).

The Ancient Prophets Knew of Jesus' Future Ministry

Even though four thousand years passed between the fall of Adam and Christ's mortal advent, all of the major aspects of Jesus' ministry were revealed to the prophets during those intervening years. We have already noted many of the prophecies and types found in the King James Version of the Old Testament; many more are found in the Book of Mormon and in the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis.

The prophetic vision of Enoch (about 3000 B.C.), as revealed through Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible (JST, Gen. 7:61-63; Moses 7:54-56), foretold such events as the Savior's being lifted up on the cross, the groaning of the earth, the rocks' being rent, and the Saints' arising from their graves. Enoch also spoke of Jesus' being "lifted up" as a "Lamb . . . slain from the foundation of the world" (JST, Gen. 7:54; Moses 7:47; see also 1 Pet. 1:19).

The Book of Mormon records many of the details of Jesus' mortal ministry, which were known by prophecy hundreds of years before they occurred. For example, the Book of Mormon reports that Neum, an Israelite prophet living before 600 B.C., testified of the crucifixion of Jesus. This book of scripture also tells us that Zenos, another Israelite prophet, testified of Jesus' burial in a sepulcher and also of the three days of darkness that would be a sign of Christ's death to the inhabitants of the isles of the sea. Both of these prophets were of Old Testament time, place, and lineage, but their writings are not in our current Old Testament. Fortunately, they were recorded on the plates of brass, and we are made aware of them through the Book of Mormon. (See 1 Ne. 19:10, 12, 16; Jacob 5; 6:1; Alma 33:3-17; 34:7; Hel. 8:19-20; 15:11; 3 Ne. 10:15-16.)

In several passages the Book of Mormon states that all of the prophets, from the very beginning of the world, knew of Jesus Christ and wrote of his ministry. Following are a few of those Book of Mormon passages:

We knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves . . . but also all the holy prophets which were before us (Jacob 4:4).

They [the scriptures] truly testify of Christ. Behold none of the prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ. (Jacob 7:11 .)

For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah . . . ? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began-have they not spoken more or less concerning these things? (Mosiah 13:33.)

And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things, but also all the holy prophets, from his days even to the days of Abraham. . . .

Yea, and behold I say unto you, that Abraham not only knew of these things, but there were many before the days of Abraham who were called by the order of God; yea, even after the order of his Son; and this that it should be shown unto the people, a great many thousand years before his coming, that even redemption should come unto them. (Hel. 8:16-18.)

In addition, the Book of Mormon prophets knew the exact year in which Jesus would be born (1 Ne. 10:4; 19:8) that his mother would be called Mary and would be a virgin from Nazareth (Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10; 1 Ne. 11:13-21) that Jesus would be baptized (1 Ne. 11:27) that he would teach the people, heal the sick, and cast out devils; that he would experience pain, sorrow, hunger, thirst, and fatigue; and that he would bleed at every pore, die upon the cross, be buried, and rise from the dead after three days (1 Ne. 11:27, 31-33; Mosiah 3:5-10).

Although the Old Testament gives us many prophetic glimpses of the Savior, it does not offer the extensive detail that the Book of Mormon does. Apparently this is the result of two conditions: (1) the Old Testament has suffered at the hands of copyists and editors who have deliberately removed many plain and precious parts; and (2) the ancient Jewish people were not especially receptive to the words of the prophets, and therefore the Lord may not have permitted them to have the word in detail and clarity. Chapter 15 of 3 Nephi provides an example of this second condition in relation to the "other sheep." In this chapter Jesus explains that the Jews in the Old World were not given as much information about the "other sheep" as the Nephites were because the first group did not have sufficient faith. However, we can be sure that on both continents, those called as prophets had great knowledge, in plainness and detail, about Christ's forthcoming ministry-even if they were not permitted to reveal all of it to the people.

All Things Bear Record of Christ

The scriptures say that all things are the "typifying of" Christ (2 Ne. 11:4) that "all things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of [him]" (Moses 6:63). The law of Moses was a type and "shadow of things to come" (see Col. 2:16-17; Mosiah 3:15; 13:31). The ordinances and ceremonies of the tabernacle-and even the tabernacle (or temple) structure itself -were a "shadow of heavenly things," typifying Christ (see Heb. 8:5; 10:1). They were, in the words of the scriptures, "patterns of things in the heavens" (Heb. 9:23).

It should not be thought incredible that the plan of salvation, along with so many details concerning the mortal life of the Messiah, could be revealed to the prophets centuries before Jesus came into mortality. Jesus was chosen in the pre-earth life to atone for the fall of Adam. He is the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world, and the entire plan of salvation was known even in that pre-mortal life. Therefore there is no difficulty in understanding how any or all of this information could be revealed to Adam, or to Enoch, or to Isaiah, or to any other prophet. There is no alternate plan, and there is no other Savior-there never was and never shall be. If Jesus had not accomplished the Atonement, nothing mankind could do, collectively or individually, could make up for the loss. Therefore it is imperative that people in every age of the world know of their Redeemer that they might exercise faith in him unto salvation.

Notes

From The Seventh Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1983), pp. 118-21.

1 See Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), pp. 602-11.

2 "We'll Sing All Hail to Jesus' Name," Hymns, no. 182.

---
Notas:
[^1] The ancient prophets were real people. Although they lived and died, they are alive in eternity now, many of them having returned to earth as angels to visit the Prophet Joseph Smith.
[^2] All of these ancient prophets had the gospel of Jesus Christ; therefore they had the same priesthood, the same covenants, the same ordinances, the same endowment, and the same celestial marriage that are known among us in the Church today.
[^3] The plan of salvation-the work of God on the earth in every age-has been and is a standardized and unified objective.
