Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

5 MOSES: PRINCE OF EGYPT, PROPHET OF GOD [^1]

The prophet Moses is prominent in the literature and belief of millions of people. He is revered by three large segments of the religious world: Judaism, Islam, and Christianity. The New Testament record tells us that at the Jerusalem Conference, James, the brother of the Lord, observed that Moses' writings were "read in the synagogues every sabbath day" (Acts 15:21). In fact, according to Jewish custom, in the synagogue service it was not permissible to read anything from the prophets (such as Isaiah or Jeremiah) or from the writings (such as Psalms or Kings) until after a reading from the law written by Moses.

In the Old Testament Moses is mentioned 657 times; in the New Testament, 65 times; in the Book of Mormon, 26 times; in the Doctrine and Covenants, 21 times; and in the Pearl of Great Price, 29 times. This is a total of 798 times. The Pearl of Great Price contains writings of three of the greatest prophets who ever lived. That Moses is one of them (the other two are, of course, Abraham and Joseph Smith) illustrates how important he is to Latter-day Saints.

Volume ten of the Catholic Encyclopedia offers two large pages in small print on the subject of Moses; and volume nine of the Jewish Encyclopedia devotes fourteen large pages in small print to that ancient prophet.

There are a lot of things about the ancient world in which Moses lived that we do not know. We do not know all we would like to about ancient Egypt; this is especially true of precise dates in that nation's history. And there is much about the culture of the ancient Israelites that we do not know. We do not know the date of the exodus of Israel from Egypt-probably not within a hundred years. Nor do we know the name of the pharaoh who enslaved and oppressed Israel, nor that of the later pharaoh at the time of the Exodus. Furthermore, in all the available records of Egypt no mention is made of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, or Moses. They say nothing about the Israelites' being in Egypt and therefore nothing about their being led out of Egypt by the hand of God through a prophet. Here we have four hundred years of our ancestral history, including mighty works of God such as the ten plagues and the dividing of the Red Sea, and the records of Egypt are as silent about them as the great stone sphinx.

Yet we do know some crucial things concerning this ancient period; and as we learn and use latter-day revelation as our scope, filter, and key, we are able to see the purposes of God as they were unfolded among the ancient Israelites in the land of Egypt under the leadership of Moses.

Birth and Early Life of Moses

In the Bible the first mention of the name Moses occurs in the story of his birth (Ex. 2:10). But in the Bible translation given by revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the patriarch Joseph, in his prophecy, mentions Moses' name at least three hundred years before his birth. Joseph spoke to his brothers about their future condition in Egypt and told them that the house of Israel would come into "bondage" and "affliction," but he had obtained, he said, a promise o f deliverance from the Lord: "The Lord God will raise up . . . unto thee, whom my father Jacob hath named Israel, a prophet; (not the Messiah who is called Shilo;) and this prophet shall deliver my people out of Egypt in the days of thy bondage" (JST, Gen. 50:24). As Joseph continued, he declared the Lord had told him: "A seer will I raise up to deliver my people out of the land of Egypt; and he shall be called Moses. And by this name he shall know that he is of thy house; for he shall be nursed by the king's daughter, and shall be called her son." (JST, Gen. 50:29.) This inspired scriptural account also informs us:

The Lord sware unto Joseph that he would preserve his seed forever saying, I will raise up Moses, and a rod shall be in his hand, and he shall gather together my people, and he shall lead them as a flock, and he shall smite the waters of the Red Sea with his rod.

And he shall have judgment, and shall write the word of the Lord. And he shall not speak many words, for I will write unto him my law by the finger of mine own hand. And I will make a spokesman for him, and his name shall be called Aaron.

And it shall be done unto thee in the last days also, even as I have sworn. Therefore, Joseph said unto his brethren, God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land, unto the land which he sware unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and to Jacob.

And Joseph confirmed many other things unto his brethren, and took an oath of the children of Israel, saying unto them, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

So Joseph died when he was an hundred and ten years old; and they embalmed him, and they put him in a coffin in Egypt; and he was kept from burial by the children of Israel, that he might be carried up and laid in the sepulchre with his father. And thus they remembered the oath which they sware unto him. (JST, Gen. 50:34-38.)

When the proper time came (about three hundred years after Joseph), Moses was born. He was of the tribe of Levi and was a son of Amram and Jochebed. Josephus, the great Jewish historian, points out that Moses was a very special child, the seventh generation from Abraham. [^2] No doubt Josephus mentions this because the ancient Jews considered a person's being the seventh son, or the seventh generation, to be very significant. The numbers three and forty were also important anciently, and the scriptures speak of three forty-year periods in Moses' life: the first he spent in Egypt, the second, in Midian and Sinai, and the third, in leading Israel in the wilderness.

The book of Exodus account of Moses' birth and the first forty years of his life is very brief. It tells us that a pharaoh arose who "knew not Joseph" (Ex. 1:8) and that the children of Israel were enslaved and forced to work at hard labor: "And they [the Egyptians] made their [the Israelites'] lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigor" (Ex. 1:14). They were employed also in the building of two "treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses" (Ex. 1:11).

Because the Israelites were so numerous, the Egyptian king began to fear and gave command that every Israelite boy that was born should be cast into the river, but every daughter should be saved alive (Ex. 1:22).

When Moses was born, his parents kept him three months and then put him in a basket among the reeds along the banks of the river Nile, while Miriam, his older sister, watched nearby. Moses also had a brother, three years older, named Aaron.

The pharaoh's daughter found the baby, had compassion on him, recognized him as a Hebrew child, and took him out of the basket. Miriam, standing by, offered to find a woman who could care for the baby, to which the princess agreed. Miriam ran home and got Moses' mother; thus his mother nursed her own son, with the permission of the royal household, and was even paid wages to do so. (Ex. 2:1-9.)

"And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son" (Ex. 2:10). It is an interesting paradox that the king's own command to destroy the sons of the Israelites led to the bringing up in his own household and court the very man who would take the Israelites away from Egypt.

Moses, a Mighty Man in Egypt

The Old Testament gives us little else about Moses' boyhood or life in Egypt. We learn that when he was forty years old he saw an Egyptian smiting an Israelite and came to the rescue. In the struggle the Egyptian was slain (Ex. 2:11-12). The ancient record also tells us that the next day, Moses saw two Israelites fighting and "said to him that did wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?" (Ex. 2:13.)

At this point in the record we find the only allusion or hint in the Old Testament to Moses' being a great man in the Egyptian government, for the Israelite to whom Moses spoke replied: "Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian?" At least those words imply that Moses was looked upon as a prince and a judge of the Egyptians, and maybe a future pharaoh-an heir to the throne. "Now when Pharaoh heard this thing [the slaying of the Egyptian], he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled . . . and dwelt in the land of Midian." (Ex. 2:14-15.)

Moses stayed in Midian forty years, married the daughter of Jethro, and tended Jethro's flocks in the area we know as the Sinai Peninsula, the approximate area in which he later led the children of Israel for forty more years.

Thus, in that brief account from our current Old Testament, we have but little information about Moses' life during his boyhood and young manhood. We cannot help but wonder if he knew that he was an Israelite, not an Egyptian, and if he did know this, when and how he learned it. We wonder also if, during those first forty years in Egypt, he knew what his mission was and what significance his name had. We do not know how much his mother told him; if he was with her enough years, she probably informed him that he was an Israelite, but we do not know if she knew what his mission was to be. Finally, we cannot help but wonder if it was a difficult thing for Moses to give up the splendor and prestige of the palace to live in the desert with the sheep. But there is absolutely no mention in our present Old Testament of Moses' activity and training as a prince of Egypt. We are left, then, without answers to these questions, unless we turn to other sources.

As the New Testament clearly demonstrates, both Paul and Stephen knew things about Moses beyond what is in our current book of Exodus. They must have had a better Exodus account, had other sources, or had both. Consider this excerpt from Stephen's address to the Sanhedrin, as recorded in the book of Acts:

But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,

Till another king arose, which knew not Joseph.

The same dealt subtilly with our kindred, and evil entreated our fathers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they might not live.

In which time Moses was born, and was exceeding fair, and nourished up in his father's house three months:

And when he was cast out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.

And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds.

And when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel.

And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian:

For he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood not. (Acts 7:17-25, italics added.)

We can see from this passage that Moses did know of his own identity and of his mission, and that he was also learned and active in things Egyptian.

Paul, as recorded in the book of Hebrews, says more about Moses. Note that Moses, according to Paul, made a conscious and deliberate choice to serve the Lord:

By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king's commandment.

By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter;

Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;

Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.

By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. (Heb. 11:23-27, italics added.)

Clearly, Stephen and Paul had more information about Moses than we have in our present Old Testament. From them we learn, among other things, that Moses, years before being called at the burning bush, knew of his own identity and of his mission.

That brings us back to the aforementioned prophecy of Joseph recorded in the Joseph Smith Translation. How did Moses learn who he was and what his mission was? Joseph's prophetic report of the Lord's words has considerable bearing on this point, especially in conjunction with the words of Stephen and Paul: "A seer will I raise up to deliver my people out of the land of Egypt; and he shall be called Moses. And by this name he shall know that he is of thy house; for he shall be nursed by the king's daughter, and shall be called her son." (JST, Gen. 50:29, italics added.)

Since Moses was prince of Egypt and was educated "in all the wisdom of the Egyptians," could it be that perhaps one day in the royal archives he came across the writings of Abraham and of Joseph and there read this prophecy of Joseph? If so, he would have read about the precise circumstances of his being in the Pharaoh's household; he even would have read his own name and also the name of his brother, Aaron. All of this would have been rather impressive to a bright young man.

Josephus reports still other dimensions of Moses' life during those first forty years in Egypt. Of particular interest is the historian's mention of Moses' being a military leader in Egypt. No hint of this is given in any portion of the Bible, but Josephus says that, Ethiopia having conquered much of Egypt all the way down to Memphis, Moses led an Egyptian army against them and freed Egypt from Ethiopian domination. According to Josephus, Moses took his army up the Nile into Nubia and Ethiopia, besieging the Ethiopian city of Saba, and even brought back the Ethiopian king's daughter as his wife. [^3]

The Bible informs us that Moses, while in Midian for forty years, became the son-in-law of Jethro and the keeper of the sheep; but this record is silent about any spiritual activities of Moses during this period. In fact it says only that Jethro was the priest of Midian. However, from modern revelation we learn that it was Jethro (a descendant of Abraham through Abraham's wife Keturah and thus a non-Israelite) who ordained Moses to the Melchizedek Priesthood (D&C 84:6). This was done through a priesthood line outside of Israel. We are accustomed to thinking of ancient priesthood holders such as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Ephraim, and so on, but here we learn that others also had the holy priesthood of God. As the modern missionary effort spreads the gospel wider across the earth, it may be a great plus in the presentation for it to become known that Moses, the great prophet of ancient Israel, obtained the priesthood not through the house of Israel, but through another Semitic lineage.

Egypt's Ancient Religion Contained an Imitation of the Temple Endowment

It appears that the religion of ancient Egypt-at least the religion of the pharaohs, the royal families, the priests, and the nobles of Egypt- contained a form of the temple endowment presumably borrowed from other ancient sources. [^4] Evidence of this endowment and its ceremonies and anticipations can be seen today in the paintings on the walls of Egyptian tombs and the carvings on the walls of Egyptian temples. We cannot say how much of this the common laborer in Egypt knew and how much the Israelites in slavery knew. Most likely they knew little of it. The Israelites lived in the Nile delta in Goshen, which at that time was a center of Egyptian culture with temples and statuary. No doubt the Israelites saw the majesty of the Egyptian buildings and temples, but how much of the Egyptian religion they knew is, of course, another question.

On the other hand, Moses-prince of Egypt, heir to the throne, a man educated in "all the wisdom of the Egyptians" -would have been very familiar with the Egyptian view of the afterlife and with the ceremonies and preparations of the Egyptian religious ritual.

Moses Was Trained in Both Secular and Spiritual Things

We can be certain that Moses received considerable training and experience-in Egypt as a prince (the first forty-year period) and in Midian as son-in-law to Jethro (the second forty-year period)-that would prepare him for the great task of getting more than a million Israelites out of Egypt and leading them as a prophet. During that first forty-year period, no doubt he learned reading, writing, astronomy, architecture, leadership principles, and military strategy; moreover, as suggested earlier, he probably read the records of Abraham and Joseph in the sacred Egyptian archives. During the second period of forty years, he received the Melchizedek Priesthood, heard the counsel of his father-in-law, reared at least two sons, and no doubt had other revelations and spiritual tutoring.

Chapter 1 in the book of Moses shows Moses as a man of profound spiritual depth and intellectual curiosity-someone with a philosophic turn of mind. Clearly he was not an average man; he was one called of God, prepared not only in this life but in the pre-mortal existence. Just as Joseph of Egypt prophesied, Moses was a man mighty in writing and in judgment but not so much in speaking (see JST, Gen. 50:35). Paul and Stephen also spoke of these particular accomplishments of Moses.

Following the description of Moses' life in Midian, the Old Testament relates the episode of the burning bush, during which God called Moses back to Egypt (see Ex. 3). Moses, being out with the sheep, saw that the bush was aflame and that it was not consumed, which attracted his attention. Seeing a piece of sagebrush burn would be nothing new to a shepherd; they cooked their food that way every day. But for a bush to burn and not be consumed-that was something new indeed.

The Exodus account states that God spoke to Moses out of the bush and told him that he must go back to Egypt and deliver the children of Israel by power and by wonders. Moses was naturally reluctant and said: "But, behold, they [the Israelites] will not believe me . . . for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee" (Ex. 4:1). There appear to be at least two reasons for Moses' reluctance. First, forty years earlier Moses had tried to help his countrymen, but they would not receive him. As Stephen said centuries later, "For he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood not" (Acts 7:25). Second, Moses must have been concerned about what Pharaoh's reaction would be. At this time Egypt was mighty and powerful-probably the most powerful nation on the earth, with armies and wealth and influence. Here was Moses with neither army, wealth, nor influence (maybe even without the support of his own people), and he was being asked to take on the whole Egyptian establishment. It is no wonder that Moses said, "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" (Ex. 3:11.)

This is an example of the way the Lord works-not by physical or worldly force but by divine power and miracles. The children of Israel would know that they were delivered out of the land of Egypt not by their own strength but by the power of God. Their faith was to be in God, not in their armaments or their own strength. The principle involved here is expressed in this New Testament scripture: "God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty" (1 Cor. 1:27-29; see also D&C 1:19). We see the principle at work again in the episode of David and Goliath (1 Sam. 17) and in the account of Gideon's victory with his army of three hundred men, a number reduced from a larger one (Judg. 7). The Israelites had to believe that God would deliver them, over and beyond what they could do themselves. They were not to trust in the arm of flesh. This is still the way the Lord works among the children of men today.

As the account in Exodus tells us, ten grievous plagues were brought upon Egypt before Pharaoh was willing to let the Israelites go (Ex. 7-12). The first was the turning of the waters into blood; then followed the plagues of frogs, lice, and flies. Next, sickness came upon the Egyptian cattle and boils upon the people, which were followed by the plagues of hail, locusts, and three days' darkness. The tenth and final plague was the death of the firstborn in the house of any family that did not put the blood of the lamb on the door post (Ex. 12:12-13).

It was a mighty struggle, but Moses eventually got a large population-the record says six hundred thousand men, besides women and children (JST, Ex. 12:37)-out of Egypt and into the wilderness.

Soon they came to the Red Sea, where by command the prophet Moses stretched his hand over the waters and the Lord caused them to be parted; whereupon the Israelites passed through on dry ground. But while the pursuing Egyptians in their six hundred chariots were going through the newly made opening, the way became difficult, and they said, "Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians." And then the waters came in upon the Egyptians, and many of them drowned. (See Ex. 14.)

Spiritual Training of Moses

The biblical record contains little information about any spiritual preparation for Moses between the time of his call at the burning bush and his encounters with Pharaoh. It briefly tells of Moses' leaving Midian, meeting his brother Aaron, and then returning to Egypt. It is at this point that latter-day revelation gives us a huge boost in our understanding of Moses' spiritual preparation in his role as a prophet and a seer.

Before Moses embarked on his mission back to Egypt, the Lord gave him a series of visions to prepare him. We find a record of this in the book of Moses, chapter 1, which record was given by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith as he commenced his Bible translation. It provides us with a perspective on Moses unavailable in any other source, being a revelation containing knowledge entirely lost to all other records. We are fortunate and blessed to have it available to us in the Pearl of Great Price, where it is published as an extract from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. In that revelation we read that Moses was shown the whole earth and all the inhabitants thereon; he talked with God face to face; he beheld the brightness and glory of God and discovered that he could not stand in His presence unless he was transfigured before God (Moses 1:1 -11).

Even for a man who had been a prince of Egypt and a great military leader, one mighty as to the strength of men, the comparison of all these things with the works of God made him feel quite small - "which thing he never had supposed" (Moses 1:10).

Next Satan came to him. Moses could see distinctly the difference between the light of God and the darkness of Satan. The Lord had told Moses that he (Moses) was in the similitude of the Only Begotten, and Moses, taking strength in what the Lord had told him, referred to this several times in his encounter with Satan. When Satan demanded Moses' allegiance, Moses told Satan that he would not worship him, that he had better things to do-he wanted to commune again with the God of glory and of knowledge. (Moses 1:12-23.)

Then the Lord spoke to Moses again and told him that he (Moses) would command the waters, and they would obey him-evidently an allusion to his future experience with the Red Sea (Moses 1:24-26).

The Lord then showed Moses a vision of many lands and many peoples, even all the people of this earth and of many earths. At this point in the record, we are given evidence of the great mind and spiritual capacity of Moses, for he asks the Lord two important and fundamental questions about life. There are many things a person might ask about the earth: How long did it take to create it? How long has it been since the Creation? But Moses asked two even more basic questions: Why, Lord, did you create worlds and people? and, How did you do it? (See Moses 1:30.) The answers to these two questions lead to some of the most fundamental concepts regarding man's existence, and we have the Lord's answers right here in the book of Moses. The Lord's response to the first question reads: "This is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). These are the things that gods do-they create worlds for their children and provide them with the opportunity to become gods themselves. The Lord answered the second question regarding how with the account of the six-day creation process.

All of these great revelatory, spiritual experiences occurred in Moses' life after the burning bush episode and before his parting of the Red Sea (see Moses 1:17, 26). The Bible is entirely silent regarding these important experiences recorded in Moses 1.

Is it not plain to see that God was turning this prince of Egypt, great as that designation was, into a prophet and a seer, a far greater calling? Moses would not have been able to endure the opposition and those forty years in the wilderness if he had not been prepared and mature spiritually. Presumably, somewhere along the line Moses received the endowment. It probably surprised him a little to see the similarity to the imitation Egyptian endowment.

When the Lord wants to change things on the earth, he has a baby born-a baby such as Noah, Enoch, Abraham, Joseph, Moses, Peter, Paul, Joseph Smith, Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson, or the greatest of all, Jesus Christ. As these babies grow to maturity the Lord trains and tutors them, and then commands them and helps them to bring about certain events that often change the destiny of nations. Such was the case with the prophet Moses.

Dramatic Events at Sinai

It was a struggle to get Israel out of Egypt, but it was an even greater struggle to get Egypt out of the Israelites. The geographical change was not as difficult as the cultural and personal changes needed in the people's thinking and habits.

Three months after crossing the Red Sea, the Israelites were camped in the approximate area of Mount Sinai (which is probably the same mountain on which Moses had seen the burning bush), and the Lord gave Moses instructions relative to receiving the Ten Commandments and giving the people the fulness of the gospel.

This has to be one of the most dramatic events in the scriptures and of all time. The people remained at the foot of the mount, a respectable distance back, while Moses ascended the mountain. The Lord then descended, met with Moses, and wrote upon the tablets of stone. The people could hear the loud trumpet, the thunder, and the voice of God; they could see the fire and smoke and feel the quaking of the earth. (See Ex. 19, 20.)

At this time the Lord gave to Moses and the people the Ten Commandments. The record says they actually heard God speak the words (see Deut. 4:10-12). This occurred just three or four months out of Egypt, and so the memory of the great pyramids and of the stone statues of the pharaohs, the Egyptian gods, the falcons, and the crocodiles were fresh on the people's minds. Thus we can see that there was a clear context for the giving of the first two commandments: "Thou shalt have no other Gods before me" (Exodus 20:3); "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image" (Ex. 20:4). Even the altars were to be of unhewn stone (Ex. 20:25; Deut. 27:5).

The Lord Gave the Law of Moses as a Lesser Law

We note also that the people were troubled at the thought of their coming into the presence of God, and they said to Moses, in effect, "You deal with God, we'll deal with you"-"but let not God speak with us, lest we die" (Ex. 20:19).

This last condition is a very telling commentary on the spiritual state of the Israelites. They did not want to come up to the presence of God. This was a symptom of a spiritual malady and deficiency that eventually led them to reject the gospel, and as a consequence the Lord gave them the law of Moses and a lesser priesthood instead of the gospel and the Melchizedek Priesthood. This whole concept has been greatly misunderstood by biblical scholars and even by some of our own Church members, because it is not clear in the Bible. However, it has been made clear in the Joseph Smith Translation and in the Doctrine and Covenants.

When Moses came down from the mount after forty days, he saw that the people had built a golden calf to worship. They said they were not even sure Moses was ever coming down from that awful, smoking mountain. When Moses saw the calf and the revelry, he threw down the tablets of stone and broke them. These contained the Ten Commandments and the fulness of the gospel, including the ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Thereupon the Lord told Moses to make a new set of tablets and come up again to the mount. He did so and received the Ten Commandments again, but in place of the higher law the Lord gave him the law of carnal commandments, which functioned under the Aaronic, not the Melchizedek, Priesthood. One of the major differences in these two laws is that the gospel and the Melchizedek Priesthood will prepare a person to be brought into the presence of God, while the law of Moses and the Aaronic Priesthood, by themselves, will not. Furthermore the Melchizedek Priesthood is connected with the ministry of Jesus Christ and the beholding of the face of God; the Aaronic Priesthood is connected with the ministry of angels. The Joseph Smith Translation makes all the difference in our understanding what happened in the wilderness and what the difference was between the first and second set of tablets. No one can understand these things properly without the help of the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. (See JST, Ex. 34:1-2; JST Deut. 10:1-2; also D&C 84:19-27.)

Because of their lack of desire for righteousness and their cultural attachment to Egypt, the Lord kept the children of Israel in the wilderness forty years, until all who had come out of Egypt at the age of twenty or above had died and a new generation-born in the wilderness and therefore not personally acquainted with Egypt-was growing up. Of that older generation, only Joshua and Caleb were permitted to make the complete trip to the promised land. There is a symbolism attached to the journeyings of the Israelites: They came out of Egypt, were tested in the wilderness, and crossed over Jordan; similarly, in our spiritual journeyings we must come out of Egypt (or the world), endure the wilderness of mortality, and then we can eventually "cross over" into heaven, into the rest of the Lord.

Moses Was Blessed in Not Entering the Promised Land

This leads us to another question concerning the life of Moses: Why was he not permitted to enter the promised land? The scriptures suggest that the reason was the Lord's anger with Moses because the latter took credit for getting water from the rock and didn't follow the Lord's directions properly (Num. 20).

However, I think there is a much better and more fundamental reason. I assume the event at the rock really happened, but that does not really seem to be the reason why Moses did not go into the "good land" (Ex. 3:8). After all, Moses represented the Melchizedek Priesthood and was a man who could stand in the presence of God. I gather from reading D&C 84:20-24 that the Lord was angry not with Moses, but with the children of Israel. They did not deserve Moses any longer, so Moses was translated and taken to heaven. Now, I have been to Israel several times, and it is a remarkable place; but it seems to me that being translated would be even better than entering that ancient promised land. Besides, if the Lord was too angry with Moses to let him go into the promised land, it seems strange that he would yet be pleased enough with him to take him into heaven. Moses was given the greater blessing of being translated, and I suppose that under such circumstances he may have felt properly repaid for missing the Israel trill. Furthermore, we know that Moses needed to be translated so that he, with Elijah, could lay on hands to confer the keys of the priesthood on Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration.

Moses, Israel's Great Prophet

The scripture says of Moses: "And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face" (Deut. 34:10). Moses was preeminent in leadership, prophecy, law giving, and-through several visions-personal acquaintance with God. He was a military man, a pioneer; and he was versed in moral, civil, ceremonial, and religious law. Through him the Lord accomplished one of the greatest migrations in history and established a written code that laid the foundation and pattern of living for many millions of people. He was a prophet, seer, and revelator.

Moses ministered not only to the people of his time, but also to Peter, James, and John in the meridian of time (see Matt. 17) and to Joseph Smith in our day at Kirtland, Ohio (see D&C 110). The Doctrine and Covenants often extols the greatness o f Moses (see D&C 8:10; 28:2; 84:6, 17-25; 103:16; 107:91). Moreover, the scriptures describe the Prophet Joseph Smith as being a man "like unto" Moses, a compliment to both of these great leaders (Moses 1:40-41; D&C 28:2). Likewise, other scriptures speak of Christ's being a prophet like unto Moses (Deuteronomy 18:18-19; Acts 3:22-23; JS-H 1:40). Yet through it all, we find that Moses did not seek his own glory; he was a reluctant leader and was "very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth" (Num. 12:3).

Notes

From an address given as part of a BYU Lecture Series at the time of the Ramses II exhibit, 18 December 1985.

1 See Josephus, The Antiquities of the Jews, trans. William Whiston, II, IX, 6.

2 See Josephus, The Antiquities of the Jews, trans. William Whiston, II, X, 1-2.

3 See Hugh Nibley, The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), pp. Xii-Xiii.

---
Notas:
[^1] Most of the doctrines of the gospel, as set forth in the Book of Mormon, far surpass their comparable recitation in the Bible.
[^2] This Nephite record bears a plainer and purer witness of the divine sonship of Christ and the salvation which comes in and through his holy name than do the Old World scriptures.
[^3] Men can get nearer to the Lord; can have more of the spirit of conversion and conformity in their hearts; can have stronger testimonies: and can gain a better understanding of the doctrines of salvation through the Book of Mormon than they can through the Bible.
[^4] More people will flock to the gospel standard; more souls will be converted; more of scattered Israel will be gathered: and more people will migrate from one place to another because of the Book of Mormon than was or will be the case with the Bible (Ezek. 37:15-28).
