Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

6 WHY THE BOOK OF MORMON IS THE KEYSTONE OF OUR RELIGION [^1]

Most of us are familiar with the Prophet Joseph Smith's statement in which he identified the Book of Mormon as the "keystone of our religion." However, it may be that not all of us have actually read the entire statement, and perhaps some of us do not know to whom the Prophet made it, nor when or where it was recorded, nor why he considered the Book of Mormon to be the keystone.

Joseph Smith gave the "keystone" declaration on Sunday, 28 November 1841, at Nauvoo, Illinois, during a meeting with the Council of the Twelve Apostles. The account we have of it is not a verbatim report made on the spot, but a recollection written by the Prophet himself in his journal after the meeting.

Since the statement was written by Joseph Smith himself in reflection, we can have unshaken confidence that it conveys just what he wanted it to say and accurately reflects his feelings. It reads as follows: "I spent the day in the council with the Twelve Apostles at the house of President Young, conversing with them upon a variety of subjects. Brother Joseph Fielding was present, having been absent four years on a mission to England. I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." [^2]

This is no doubt the shortest and probably the best-known evaluation of the Book of Mormon. If we examine it in its historical context, our understanding and appreciation of this declaration will increase, we will be more able to defend it against critics and nonbelievers, and we will be in a better position to explore the reasons why the Book of Mormon is indeed the "keystone of our religion."

Let us first consider the component parts of the Prophet's statement. He actually said three things about the Book of Mormon: (1) it is the "most correct of any book on earth"; (2) it is the "keystone of our religion"; and (3) "a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book."

"The Most Correct of Any Book on Earth"

The earliest edition of the Book of Mormon came from the press during the week of 18-25 March 1830, in Palmyra, New York. Readers familiar with this edition know that the punctuation is sparse and that paragraphs run to great length. The flow of thought is rather easy, but the sentences are often long and awkward.

The second edition came from the press in 1837 in Kirtland, Ohio. This edition, a revision of the first, contains thousands of punctuation changes as well as hundreds of word changes. Most of the corrections are grammatical and stylistic, although some involve changes in wording designed to clarify meaning. Many of the corrections, but not all, are based on a comparison with the handwritten Oliver Cowdery manuscript that was used as the source for the first printing. As with most first editions, the 1830 edition contained typographical errors that needed correcting, and the 1837 edition incorporates these corrections. The Prophet later used a printed copy of the 1837 edition as a basis for making some additional revisions and technical corrections. This edited copy partially formed the basis for the third edition of October 1840, printed in Cincinnati, Ohio. Thus when the Prophet said in November 1841 that the Book of Mormon was the most correct book on earth, we must keep in mind that he was speaking of the then current third edition. In any case, he no doubt had reference to the contents-the doctrines and teachings-of the Book of Mormon rather than to its grammatical construction, punctuation, and spelling.

Let us be quick to observe that these various editorial changes did not alter the central message of the book in any edition; they were minor, not major, revisions. However, from time to time critics have raised the question of the "perfection" of the Book of Mormon in light of the many editorial touches. In reply, it seems only reasonable that we at least point out that the Prophet was speaking from the context of 1841. The message of the Book of Mormon is the same no matter what edition one uses, but knowing the context of the Prophet's statement tends to blunt what might at first look like a sharp edge of the critics' attack. [^3]

"The Keystone of Our Religion"

We are familiar with the concept of a keystone in a stone arch: without the wedge-shaped center stone the arch would tumble. Everything in the arch depends upon the keystone, and it locks all the other stones together. No doubt the Prophet had this in mind when he used the term keystone, applying it as a symbol for the Book of Mormon's crucial role in the latter days.

Indeed we could truthfully say that the Book of Mormon is at the center of this dispensation. Jesus Christ is the center point of our hope and the foundation of our faith, and the Book of Mormon is a sure witness of his existence, his divinity, his atonement, and his resurrection from the dead. These matters are evident to all who are familiar with the Book of Mormon.

Furthermore, no one can believe the Book of Mormon and disbelieve the Bible or the things the Bible stands for or teaches. If a person really accepts the Book of Mormon, he accepts the ancient as well as the current work of God on the earth-there can be no fragmentation, no partial or divided loyalty. He believes in God, in Christ, in the devil, in faith, in angels, in a judgment, in heaven, in hell, in prophets, in visions, and in miracles, ancient and modern. The Book of Mormon brings all of these things into perspective.

The Prophet Joseph said it this way:

Take away the Book of Mormon and the revelations, and where is our religion? We have none; for without Zion, and a place of deliverance, we must fall; because the time is near when the sun will be darkened, and the moon turn to blood, and the stars fall from heaven, and the earth reel to and fro. Then, if this is the case, and if we are not sanctified and gathered to the places God has appointed, with all our former professions and our great love for the Bible, we must fall; we cannot stand; we cannot be saved; for God will gather out his Saints from the Gentiles, and then comes desolation and destruction, and none can escape except the pure in heart who are gathered. [^4]

"A Man Would Get Nearer to God . . ."

We might ask, What does the Book of Mormon say that is so valuable and that causes it to exceed in greatness any other book, even the Bible? What are its precepts? The Prophet's statement was not a rejection of the Bible. It was, however, an implied comparison with the Bible and an acknowledgment that the Bible has not come to us in its original purity and completeness. Most Bible readers recognize that it mentions many things that were clear to the people of the Bible but are not clear to us. This is not an indictment against the Bible's authors but against its transmitters. If the Bible had been preserved in completeness and had been translated correctly in every instance, it would read in plainness as the Book of Mormon does, and there would then be no confusion or ambiguity about the ordinances of the gospel, or the plan of salvation, or the work of God in any age of the world.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said this about the Bible: "From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of men, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." And at another time he said: "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^5]

From these statements of the Prophet we can ascertain more clearly the meaning of the eighth article of faith, part of which reads, "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly" (A of F 1:8). Here the word translated appears to be used in a broader sense to mean transmitted, which would include not only translation of languages but also copying, editing, deleting from, and adding to documents. The Bible has undergone a much more serious change than merely translation from one language to another.

Let us take a moment to examine a bit of the Bible's textual history, since such an examination can help us better appreciate why "a man would get nearer to God by abiding by [the Book of Mormon's] precepts, than by any other book."

Textual Families and the Bible

One of the most prominent reasons for the variety of Bibles today is that the different versions are not translated from the same collection of manuscripts. No original manuscripts of any part of the Bible are extant. What is available are copies of copies of copies, all of them separated from the originals by centuries. Even when written in the same language, a handwritten copy of anything as extensive as the Bible is going to transmit a number of errors, and the most careful of scribes will make mistakes that will cause his copy to vary from the original. When an error goes undetected, it will be preserved in successive copies with the same care as the sacred text.

As early handwritten copies of the Bible were made from the original manuscripts, each would depart somewhat from the original, and each would depart differently. Second-generation copies may have had some mistakes in common, but in most they would have differed. As third-generation copies were made from these, they would preserve the peculiarities of each second-generation copy and omit other things, until there developed what has come to be known as "manuscript" or "textual families," manuscripts with common traits just as there are family traits in people who are genealogically related. One of the major reasons why various English editions of the Bible today differ from one another is that they represent different textual families. Consequently, learned translators today are capable of rendering into English the thoughts they find on the Greek and Hebrew manuscripts, but they cannot translate what is not written on the document they are translating from. Thus, depending on a person's preference, he chooses the King James Version, or the New English Bible, or the Catholic Douai Version, and so on.

How Variations Occurred in the Bible Manuscripts

Variants occur in many ways. There are planned and unplanned changes. The unplanned are the simplest to deal with, being innocent mistakes of the hand, the eye, the ear, or the mind, and will probably not occur in the same place in each copy. Such changes will be relatively few, generally quite harmless, and easily detected. A comparison with other copies can correct most of these mistakes.

It is the planned changes that are the most damaging. These are made when the copyist or the translator begins to think for himself and deliberately makes his copy differ from the written document. In this manner, substantial changes may occur in a very short time and can result in the addition or the loss of material. Even this kind of change could be corrected if one had the original to refer to for comparison, but if the master copy is unavailable the corrupted texts perpetuate the errors. Thus all subsequent copies made from the altered text will bear the same shortcomings because there is no master copy or archetype with which to correct it.

The Book of Mormon as a Witness for the Bible Text

Apparently the original manuscripts of the Bible disappeared very early. This seems particularly true of the New Testament. Sir Frederic Kenyon, one of the greatest textual scholars of the early twentieth century, commented thus: "The originals of the several books have long ago disappeared. They must have perished in the very infancy of the Church; for no allusion is ever made to them by any Christian writer." [^6] Kenyon's statement is particularly important to us because it means that for centuries there has not been an original Bible manuscript to guide the reader. Even in the early decades of the original Christian church, the original texts seem to have been absent.

In the Book of Mormon we have an account of a vision and guided tour given to Nephi, during which he is accompanied by an angel and shown in advance much about the textual history of the Bible. The angel identifies the book as "a record of the Jews" that "containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets" and the testimony of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb (see 1 Ne. 13:23-24). This is without question the Old and the New Testaments. The angel tells Nephi that the book is similar to the record on the plates of brass, but not as extensive, and that it contains many covenants of the Lord (see 1 Ne. 13:20-23). The angel continues:

When it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record. . . .

Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles. . . .

And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the formation of that great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away. (1 Ne. 13:24-26.)

The angel makes it clear that he is not talking about subtle accidents of hand and eye, resulting in a few misplaced letters or words -the unplanned errors of copyists. He pointedly ascribes these changes to the planned editorial work of designing men: "And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men. Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God." (1 Ne. 13:27-28.)

The angel then declares that the textual corruption of which he spoke would not be a gradual, long-time process taking place over thousands of years, but something that would occur-at least for the New Testament-soon after the time of Jesus and before the distribution of the Bible among the nations of the Gentiles: "And after these plain and precious things were taken away it [the Bible] goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles; and after it goeth forth . . . because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book . . . because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (1 Ne. 13:29).

As we read the words of the angel, we discover that the world never has had a complete Bible, for it was massively-even cataclysmically-corrupted before it was distributed. Of course, in addition to the major willful corruption of the Bible in the early Christian era, the manuscripts have also continued to suffer the gradual and relatively mild changes, due to errors of hand and eye, that the scholars talk about. Thus there have been two processes at work: (1) a major, sudden, and deliberate editorial corruption of the text and (2) a gradual promulgation of variants that has occurred as a natural consequence of copying and translation.

The great scholars, employing the science of textual criticism, seem to be effectively correcting the errors made by the carelessness and weakness of man. As these scholars search the available manuscripts-such as the Vaticanus, Sinaiticus, Alexandrinus, and lesser fragments-the text of the Bible may yet be recovered to the condition it was in after it was cataclysmically corrupted, as described in 1 Nephi. However, the scholars have not been able to recover the critical missing parts mentioned by the angel because the texts they use are "gentile" texts of the fourth century. Hence the main issue with the text of the Bible today is not a matter of language and of words but the lack of an adequate manuscript.

It appears to me, then, that the world has mistakenly identified the text of the second or third generation as being the same as the original. But the angel in 1 Nephi indicated that the world of the Gentiles has never known the complete Bible. Thus the great and highly regarded manuscripts are indeed precious for their antiquity and beauty, but they represent the depleted text, not the original.

The plain and most precious parts of the Bible are to be had not through secular scholars but through faith and testimony, not through an academician but through a prophet, not through the learning of man only but through the revelations of the Holy Spirit.

Therefore, because of the textual history of the Bible, we can confidently say that no one today, scholar or otherwise, really understands the doctrinal nature of the Bible without the help of latter-day revelation such as the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, the Joseph Smith Translation, and the teachings of Joseph Smith. These are indispensable sources, along with the testimony of the Holy Ghost, for one to clearly grasp the doctrinal message of the Holy Bible. It is in that light that we begin to understand why, in 1841, the Prophet Joseph Smith placed such a high value on the clarity of the teachings of the Book of Mormon.

In comparing the Book of Mormon with the Bible, Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated:

I have unbounded appreciation for both the King James Version and the Joseph Smith Translation. I stand in reverential awe as I read and ponder the wondrous words they contain. I do not believe there is a person on earth who has a greater respect for or appreciation of the Holy Bible than I do.

Now, I say all this as a prelude to making these flat and unequivocal declarations:

In other words, what the Bible does well, the Book of Mormon does better.

In the pages that follow, we will recount in detail some of the precepts of the Book of Mormon that make it such an outstanding book of religious knowledge and faith and the very "keystone of our religion."

The Book of Mormon Testifies of Jesus Christ

The Book of Mormon witnesses that the resurrected Jesus personally visited some ancient American people and showed himself to them in his immortal, glorified, celestial condition. He taught them, healed them, fed them, and let them touch his body (see 3 Ne. 11-27). There is no mistaking that the Book of Mormon says that Jesus is a real, living person, the Son of God, and that the biblical record of him is historically true. But it also clearly shows that the Bible is not the complete record of all that Jesus taught or did and that the Old World record does not contain all we need to know about him.

The Book of Mormon gives approximately one hundred different names for Jesus, each describing some phase or characteristic of his ministry (for example, Creator, Redeemer, Mediator, Judge, Shepherd), and this sacred record mentions the Savior at least 3,471 times in the course of the book. By using these many names for the Redeemer, the Book of Mormon gives a broad spectrum to his mission. By way of analogy we observe that there are eighty-eight sounds on a piano keyboard, and through the proper use and combination of these sounds, one can produce great melodious strains. Similarly the message about Jesus Christ given in the Book of Mormon is not monotone, not just a single note; rather, it is a symphony of delightful and essential information that harmoniously testifies of the Savior of the world. The Book of Mormon's role as a witness for Christ is demonstrated in the following chart:

BooksNumber of VersesNumber of References to the Savior 1 Nephi 618150 2 Nephi 779576 Jacob 203151 Enos 2722 Jarom 158 Omni 3020 Words of Mormon 1813 Mosiah 785484 Alma 1975917 Helaman 467225 3 Nephi 785290 4 Nephi 4942 Mormon 227189 Ether 433218 Moroni 163166Total:6,6043,471

The Book of Mormon not only attests to the reality of Jesus but also, more than any other book available to us, explains graphically why Jesus and his atonement are important. It is one thing to know that there is a Savior; it is another to realize why a Savior is so important, what the consequences would have been worldwide if there had been no Savior, and what the consequences will be individually-since there is a Savior-if any of us rejects him.

Since knowledge about Christ is the greatest knowledge mankind can possess, the book that most perfectly defines, supplies, and promotes that knowledge is the greatest of books. Our assertion is that the Book of Mormon gives a clearer exposition of the need for a divine Savior, the reality that Jesus of Nazareth is that Savior, and the process by which every individual man or woman can obtain the blessings of the atonement of Christ in his or her individual life than any other book known to and in circulation among the human family today.

The Book of Mormon teaches man's absolute dependence on the Savior. It leaves no doubt that Jesus Christ, born of Mary, is the one and only Redeemer of mankind, that he always was and always will be the only Savior of the world. We note this statement from Nephi, recorded around 559 B.C.: "Behold I say unto you, that as these things are true, and as the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved" (2 Ne. 25:20). And about 500 years later Helaman testified to his sons: "Remember that there is no other way nor means whereby man can be saved, only through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, who shall come; yea, remember that he cometh to redeem the world" (Hel. 5:9; see also 2 Ne. 31:20-21; Mosiah 3:17; 4:8; 5:8; Alma 38:9).

There is no book as effective as the Book of Mormon to teach plainly and directly the nature of the fall of Adam and the necessity of the atonement of Jesus Christ. It explains how the Atonement works, how a person must go about gaining a remission of sins, and then how he can "retain a remission" of his sins "from day to day" (see Mosiah 4:12, 26). That is the major message of the Book of Mormon. It offers comprehensive statements on the purposes of God in the fall of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ that are not found anywhere in the Bible. (See such major doctrinal chapters as 2 Ne. 2, 9; Mosiah 3; Alma 34, 42.)

In 2 Nephi we read a statement from Jacob which describes in greater clarity than perhaps any other reference what would be the consequence for all mankind if there had been no atonement of Jesus Christ:

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement-save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. (2 1 Ne. 9:6-9, italics added.)

Here we see clearly what would have happened to the spirits and bodies of all mankind if there had been no atonement by the Savior, Do we realize what the consequences would have been? Do we fully appreciate Jesus' sacrifice? All mankind would have become devils, forever miserable, if there had been no atonement by Jesus Christ. If Jesus had not done what he did, nothing we could do would ever make up for the loss!

Thus, if we want to know the story of the Savior's life and death and resurrection, we turn to the four Gospels in the New Testament. If we wish to know why that life is so important, we turn to the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon Testifies that Jesus Is God of the Whole World

The Book of Mormon testifies of the wide scope of the Lord's work among all peoples of the earth. He is the God of the whole world. He was born and grew up among the Jews, but he also went personally to the Nephites and to the lost tribes of Israel. The Savior has been no absentee landlord. He has been working among all peoples at all times -not always to the same extent perhaps, for all are not equally receptive or ready; but he has given them everything that they should have at any given time.

There are several references that deal with this subject. For example, Nephi records the Lord's words as follows: "For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them. . . . For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it." (2 1 Ne. 29:11-12, italics added.)

The title page of the Book of Mormon corroborates the information found in 2 Nephi, stating that "JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations." Such statements give the broadest possible range to the mission of Jesus Christ.

We are familiar with the feelings expressed by Alma: he wished he were an angel so he could preach the gospel to all the world. Then he rescinded that wish because he knew the Lord had other people in the various nations to do the teaching there: "Why should I desire more than to perform the work to which I have been called? . . . For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have." (Alma 29:6, 8.)

The world in general has come to an awareness that there is a record of the Jews -we call it the Bible. As Latter-day Saints we are also aware that there is a record of the Nephites-we call that the Book of Mormon. And the Book of Mormon tells us that there is a record of the ten tribes that will come forth someday. And the Book of Mormon also explains that there are many other records from other nations. (2 Ne. 29:11-13.) So in these days we are just beginning to get acquainted with what will someday be a long list of standard works and books from which we will be able to learn the history of God's dealings with many branches of the human family.

The Book of Mormon Touches on a Wide Range of Religious and Secular Topics

The Book of Mormon, in its terminology and its vocabulary, is plain and simple, with rather elementary use of the language and with words of few syllables. (That is generally true, although some of us probably first learned the word ignominious from the Book of Mormon.) Yet, m spite of its plainness and singleness of purpose, it is not an easy book to read or to master. It is heavy reading, serious and ponderous. No one will be justified in treating it lightly or casually. Elder James E. Faust explained: "The Book of Mormon did not yield its profound message to me as an unearned legacy. I question whether one can acquire an understanding of this great book except through singleness of mind and strong purpose of heart." [^8]

This greatest of all books touches on many topics, but it deals primarily with spiritual things and confirms or verifies religious subjects. For example, the Book of Mormon speaks of angels, spirits, devils, and God, and it testifies most often and most powerfully of Jesus Christ and his mission. It speaks of God's intervention in human life and tells of visions, revelations, voices, healings, miracles, prophets, and prophecy. It plainly points out the exact fulfillment of prophecy and shows how civilization can be lost. It talks of the spirit world, death, hell, paradise, dreams, truth, and falsehood. It tells about seers and revelators, covenants, sacred writings, God's love, heavenly rewards, and divine punishments. It talks about the premortal existence, the purposes of God, the gospel's being preached from the beginning, the shallowness of man's wisdom, the judgments of God, and the purpose of man's existence. It teaches about prayer, repentance, obedience, faith, baptism, the Holy Ghost, man's accountability before God, and the inevitable and eternal judgment to come to each person for his or her deeds, desires, and thoughts. It speaks of sanctification, a change of heart, being born again, salvation, damnation, missionary work, apostasy, welfare work, tithing, capital punishment, secret combinations, priestcraft, pride, war, family, sin, and happiness. It relates important information regarding the law of Moses, the fall of Adam, the second coming of Jesus Christ, and the earth's being cleansed by fire. It talks about Elijah, temples, the scattering of Israel, the gathering of Israel, the New Jerusalem, the old Jerusalem, the ten tribes, Columbus, the American Revolutionary War, and (as we have seen) Bible manuscript history and biblical textual criticism.

In addition to all of these religious topics, the Book of Mormon touches on items such as political governments, legal systems, monetary systems, migration and formation of different groups and cultures, geography, astronomy, record keeping, ship building, shipping, exploration, architecture, horticulture, medicine, and so on.

The Book of Mormon Identifies the Enemies of Christ

In helping us to "get nearer to God," the Book of Mormon not only declares what the doctrine of Christ is but also tells what the doctrine of Christ is not.

In speaking about the Book of Mormon, President Ezra Taft Benson observed:

The Book of Mormon exposes the enemies of Christ. It confounds false doctrines and lays down contention. (See 2 Ne. 3:12.) It fortifies the humble followers of Christ against the evil designs, strategies, and doctrines of the devil in our day. The type of apostates in the Book of Mormon are similar to the type we have today. God, with his infinite foreknowledge, so molded the Book of Mormon that we might see the error and know how to combat false educational, political, religious, and philosophical concepts of our time. . . .

Now, we have not been using the Book of Mormon as we should. Our homes are not as strong unless we are using it to bring our children to Christ. Our families may be corrupted by worldly trends and teachings unless we know how to use the book to expose and combat the falsehoods in socialism, organic evolution, rationalism, humanism, etc. Our missionaries are not as effective unless they are "hissing forth" with it. Social, ethical, cultural, or educational converts will not survive under the heat of the day unless their taproots go down to the fulness of the gospel which the Book of Mormon contains. . . .

Do eternal consequences rest upon our response to this book? Yes, either to our blessing or our condemnation.

Every Latter-day Saint should make the study of this book a lifetime pursuit. Otherwise he is placing his soul in jeopardy and neglecting that which could give spiritual and intellectual unity to his whole life. There is a difference between a convert who is built on the rock of Christ through the Book of Mormon and stays hold of that iron rod, and one who is not. [^9]

Because of the great mission and powerful effect of the Book of Mormon, and its centrality in this dispensation, we begin to see why the Lord is displeased when we do not use it more effectively. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read:

And your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received-

Which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation.

And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all.

And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written-

That they may bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom; otherwise there remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion. (D&C 84:54-58.)

Conclusion

The Book of Mormon, then, is the keystone: it testifies that the biblical record of Jesus is historically true, and it exceeds the present translations of the Bible in plainness about what a person must do to be saved. The Book of Mormon teaches the fulness of the gospel, which means it clearly explains the fundamentals of life. It testifies that there is a God, that mankind is God's offspring, that there is a divine law, that life has a purpose, and that there is a judgment and an endless existence after death. It tells why a Redeemer is needed as a result of the fall of Adam and man's own sins, and it explains that Jesus-being a God-is the only redeemer able to save mankind. It explains what a person must do to gain the maximum benefit of the Redeemer's atonement. Finally, it teaches that every person will die, be raised in a resurrection, and then be judged according to his or her works.

For these reasons and others, the Book of Mormon is of unique and unparalleled importance. Yet with all its greatness, there is still much we do not understand about it, and it demands our further study and research. There are elements of the translation process used in bringing it forth and items of culture, geography, and history in the book itself that we simply do not know. But we do know that it is a true and sacred record, a testament of Jesus Christ. There is a spirit about the Book of Mormon that whispers of its authenticity. No matter how many marvelous, delightful, and delicious things might be found in its pages, if they weren't true, they wouldn't be worth much. But because the Book of Mormon is true, no man or woman can be saved in the celestial kingdom and not be a believer in this scriptural witness for Christ.

Everything about the Book of Mormon-each item individually and all of them collectively-trumpets loudly the assertion that it is the "keystone of our religion."

Notes

From The Ninth Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, The Book of Mormon (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1981), pp. 18-27; The Sixth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1982), pp. 55-58; and The Tenth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1986), pp. 86-90.

1 History of the Church 4:461. The statement can also be found in Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 194f

2 Extensive studies on the editorial changes in various editions of the Book of Mormon can be found in Jeffrey R. Holland, "An Analysis of Selected Changes in Major Editions of the Book of Mormon, 1830-1920" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1966); Stanley R. Larson, "A Study of Some Textual Variations in the Book of Mormon, Comparing the Original and Printer's Manuscripts and the 1830, the 1837, and the 1840 Editions" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1974). See also the author's article, "The New Publications of the Standard Works - 1979, 1981." BYU Studies 22 (Fall 1982): 387-423; Hugh G. Stocks, "The Book of Mormon, 1830-1879, a Publishing History" (Master's thesis, University of California, Los Angeles, 1979).

3 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 71.

4 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 9-10, 327.

5 Frederic Kenyon, Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts (New York: Harper and Row, 1958), p. 155.

6 Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrines of the Restoration: Sermons and Writings of Bruce R. McConkie, ed. and arr. Mark L. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), pp. 267-68.

7 James E. Faust, "The Keystone of Our Religion," Ensign 13 (November 1983): 9.

8 Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon Is the Word of God," Ensign 5 (May 1975): 64-65.

---
Notas:
[^1] Most of the doctrines of the gospel, as set forth in the Book of Mormon, far surpass their comparable recitation in the Bible.
[^2] This Nephite record bears a plainer and purer witness of the divine sonship of Christ and the salvation which comes in and through his holy name than do the Old World scriptures.
[^3] Men can get nearer to the Lord; can have more of the spirit of conversion and conformity in their hearts; can have stronger testimonies: and can gain a better understanding of the doctrines of salvation through the Book of Mormon than they can through the Bible.
[^4] More people will flock to the gospel standard; more souls will be converted; more of scattered Israel will be gathered: and more people will migrate from one place to another because of the Book of Mormon than was or will be the case with the Bible (Ezek. 37:15-28).
[^5] There will be more people saved in the kingdom of God-ten thousand times over-because of the Book of Mormon than there will be because of the Bible. [^7]
[^6] 6 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 11.
[^8] 7 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 157-58.
[^9] 8 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 158.
