Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

PART II The Joseph Smith Translation

7 THE JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION: WHAT, WHY, AND HOW [^1]

In this chapter we will discuss what the Joseph Smith Translation is, why such a translation was needed, how it adds to and clarifies the biblical record, and how it was accomplished. In discussing this last item-how the translation was accomplished-we will consider the kind of attitude about learning that rendered Joseph Smith capable of making the translation, an attitude that I feel each of us should have in order to benefit from the translation.

Each of us has a need to gain spiritual knowledge-the greatest amount possible-and I believe the Joseph Smith Translation can help us in more than one way as we seek this knowledge. That is, we can benefit not only by comparing verses and texts of this translation with those of the King James Bible, but also by listening to the louder message that is transmitted to us by the very fact that there is a Joseph Smith Translation. This translation is an illustration of true spiritual learning, of how the Lord teaches his children. The Lord simply could have handed Joseph Smith a better translation of the Bible, an English translation of the Book of Mormon, and so on; but he didn't. He required the Prophet to struggle and work out all of these things for himself. To be sure, without the Lord's help none of these things could have been done, but let's not overlook the part that Joseph Smith played as a man in the process of the translation. Can any of us gain spiritual growth without a struggle? There seems to be a law in the plan of salvation for mankind that a person must do everything for himself that he can do.

Some Historical Background

In June 1830, the Prophet Joseph Smith, assisted by Oliver Cowdery as his scribe, began what they called a "new translation" of the Bible. Joseph Smith was twenty-four years of age. Oliver was twenty-three. Their formal schooling was meager. They did not have a knowledge of Greek, Hebrew, or Aramaic, and they had no ancient manuscripts. However, they had had some excellent spiritual preparation and experience that qualified them for this kind of work.

After serving a few months as scribe for the new Bible translation, Oliver was called to other responsibilities and was succeeded as scribe by John Whitmer in October and Sidney Rigdon in December. Work on the new translation was pursued vigorously from June 1830 until July 1833, by which time the initial translation of the Old Testament and the New Testament had been accomplished. Thereafter, the Prophet and his scribes-usually Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams-that is, the First Presidency, reviewed and revised the manuscript, preparing it for the press. In the review process additional revelations were received on some points over and beyond what had been done the first time. This is significant, because it illustrates the principle of learning spiritual matters line upon line.

There were at least three major anticipations for publication of Joseph Smith's Bible translation. The first was in Missouri, but the press was destroyed by a mob before the project was even begun. The second attempt was at Kirtland, and the third at Nauvoo. These two latter ventures failed for want of money and time. Publication of the new Bible translation was a significant undertaking that the Prophet was seeking to accomplish in Nauvoo at the time of his death in 1844. (See the detailed discussion in chapter 10 of this book.)

At the death of Joseph Smith the manuscript of his Bible translation became the possession of his widow Emma Smith, and still later it became the property of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Beginning in 1867 that organization published several editions of the Joseph Smith Translation and it currently holds the legal copyright. I have examined the original manuscript carefully, comparing every word with its published counterpart, and I feel that the printed editions by the RLDS church are correct and careful representations of the Prophet's work.

Now, it seems to me that the Church could have had the Joseph Smith Translation in published form as early as the 1830s or 1840s, but apparently the members didn't want it strongly enough to make the necessary sacrifices for its publication. I think they just didn't fully appreciate the value of this work. In our time, I have heard some Church members say, "If the Lord had wanted the Church to have the Inspired Version, he would have seen to it, and would not have let the Prophet die without publishing it." That is not sound reasoning. If that kind of thinking prevailed, we would also have to say that the Lord didn't really want the children of Israel to have the things on the first set of tablets; that he did not want us to have the date of the First Vision or of the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood; that he did not want us to have the 116 manuscript pages of the Book of Mormon translation; that he did not want the Saints to stay in Missouri; that he did not want the New Jerusalem to be built; and so on.

Principally because of the early Saints' neglect, then, we might say that the Church lost the new translation, but now part of it is available to us again in the 1979 LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible; moreover, we have reasonable access to the original manuscript. We seem to have been given a second chance now. Paul Cheesman, a former colleague of mine, said to me one day, "I think the Lord has given us the Joseph Smith Translation to see what we will do with it." I agree with him. I think the Lord has given us the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the priesthood, and everything else on the same basis. Spiritually we can't afford to neglect the Prophet's Bible translation again. Certain principles taught by Jesus, principles we will discuss again later in this chapter, seem to apply here: A candle is not brought forth to be put under a bushel; if we do not continue to receive the light and truth that the Lord offers us, we may lose what we have.

Many things are yet to be done in this dispensation-Zion is to be established, the New Jerusalem is to be built, Israel is to be gathered, and so forth. Many of these things were begun during the early days of the restored Church, but they suffered delays because the people were not ready. Today we seem to be getting ready in the Church for greater strides again. I think it is not by accident that we also now have some official access to the Joseph Smith Translation.

Why a New Translation Was Needed

A new translation of the Bible was needed because information necessary for the establishment and well-being of the restored Church was lacking in all the current translations of the Bible; the new translation was the Lord's way of revealing that information. All other translations of the Bible were insufficient, and no original manuscripts of that sacred record were available from which to make an adequate translation with all the necessary information in it. The basic problem with the Bible is not one of language: nor is it that we lack scholars who are capable of reading an ancient manuscript. The problem is the absence of an adequate manuscript. The knowledge that was needed just wasn't to be found in any known document.

In 1 Ne. 13 and 14 we read that many plain and precious things have been taken out of the Bible by persons who deliberately wished to weaken the message. Thus no amount of scholarship, without either an adequate manuscript or a new revelation, could produce the lost material. The Lord chose to restore the information through Joseph Smith, giving the latter-day prophet revelation upon revelation to bring again many of the things that were taken from the Bible or were lost before it was compiled.

The Prophet's Approach to the New Translation

The translation process was a learning experience for Joseph Smith. He learned new things by reading the Bible and by receiving the inspiration of the Lord in response to his study. It was a process of inquiry. It required effort, prayer, energy, desire, and serious contemplation. Had he not been willing to follow these requirements, he would not have gained the insight or received the revelation, and none of us would have had the benefit of a new translation.

In many places in the Doctrine and Covenants we read the Lord's counsel to ask, seek, and knock. Some of these instances pertain to the Prophet's work on the Bible translation, as the context of the passages makes clear; for example, D&C 42:56 reads: "Thou shalt ask, and my scriptures shall be given as I have appointed." (On the principle of asking, see also D&C 4:7; 6:6; 29:33; 42:61; 132:1.)

One thing is clear: There is no revelation without a student. Unless a person is a seeker, he isn't likely to get a revelation, whether he is the President of the Church or anyone else. When the Lord told us to ask, seek, knock, he was inviting us to get busy and get ready, to compare and to think.

As members of the Church seek to gain more spiritual knowledge, they do not have to settle for the inherent limitations of a Protestant, Catholic, or Jewish translation of the Bible derived from an inadequate manuscript. They have access to the best Bible that is available-the Joseph Smith Translation.

A passage from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Gospel of Mark illustrates the process of spiritual learning we have been discussing. As this passage relates, the disciples asked Jesus concerning the parable of the sower; his answer included the concept that parables hide the truth from the unready, but he also emphasized the idea that knowledge begets more knowledge: "And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed, and not to be set on a candlestick? I say unto you, Nay. . . . Take heed what ye hear; for with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you; and unto you that continue to receive, shall more be given; for he that receiveth, to him shall be given; but he that continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken even that which he hath." (JST, Mark 4:9-11, 18-20, italics added.) The spirit craves knowledge as the body craves food, and he who seeks sincerely to satisfy those spiritual cravings will find a bounteous feast at the Lord's table, all based on that person's willingness to receive.

We need to keep learning in order to maintain a spiritual uplift. What lifted us yesterday may not be sufficient tomorrow to help us retain the same level of spirituality; we will need more knowledge, new insights, new viewpoints, and new learning experiences.

Studying the Joseph Smith Translation

It seems to me that a person can approach his study of the Joseph Smith Translation on at least three different levels. The first and easiest level is to simply find the verses in the Joseph Smith Translation text that differ from those in the King James Version. The second is to discover the doctrinal or informational meaning of those passages. The third level of study is a little more subtle but often extremely informative: it is to note how the change in the text is accomplished-that is, the literary style. When examining a particular change, a person can ask himself the following: (1) Does the change appear as inspired commentary material interjected by Joseph Smith? (2) Is it given as part of the narrative of the biblical author? or (3) Is it given as a direct quotation, the kind for which there would be quotation marks if such were used in the Bible? Sometimes interesting implications arise as we consider not only the text of new material but also the literary form in which the new material appears and-in the case of a direct quotation-the speaker to whom the words are attributed. There is quite a difference, not only in style but also in meaning, between first and third person and between dialogue and simple narrative. Note, for example, that in the King James Version the account of the Creation is given in third person, with Moses telling the story of what the Lord accomplished: "In the beginning God created . . ." and so forth. On the other hand, the Joseph Smith Translation gives the account in first person, with the Lord telling the story himself: "I, God," did so and so. Many such changes occur throughout the Joseph Smith Translation which enhance the record and say something about the restorative nature of what Joseph Smith was doing.

Let us now take a specific look at some of the things the Joseph Smith Translation has to offer us as gospel students.

An Introduction to the Book of Genesis

In the new translation, there is a whole chapter of information prior to the beginning of the book of Genesis. We know it as Moses 1, but it is part of the Joseph Smith Translation. It tells of some visions that were given to Moses previous to his writing Genesis. Hence we might say that just as Genesis serves as an introduction to all that follows in the Bible, these visions recorded in the new translation serve as an introduction to Genesis.

This introductory material is critical to our understanding of Moses' mission and writings, of the biblical record as a whole, and of God's purposes relative to mankind and this earth. Of particular relevance here is the Lord's marvelous statement: "This is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). The Joseph Smith Translation thus provides us with a precious perspective on God's eternal plan. Other scriptures (D&C 88:17-23; 1 Ne. 17:36; Abr. 3:23) round out the concept that the earth is a home for mankind-that it is not only a mortal laboratory and training ground but also an eternal home. And all of this points back to the great introductory chapter in the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis (see the more detailed discussion in chapter 8 of this book).

The Spirit, the Physical, and the Temporal Creations

We find in the Joseph Smith Translation an explanation of the creative process, showing that life as we now know it-mortality -is the culmination of a three-step process (see JST, Gen. 1-5; Moses 2-5). We learn that all things were created first as spirits, and that this was done in heaven. Then all things-men, animals, and plants-were created on earth as physical beings, with tangible bodies, but in a condition in which they were not yet subject to sin or death. As the third step in the process, these physical beings underwent another essential change and became mortal, a change which occurred when Adam and Eve, while in the Garden of Eden, ate of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Adam and Eve were physical in their nature while they were in the garden, but they were not mortal until they partook of the forbidden fruit. This three-step process, outlined so well in the Joseph Smith Translation, is scarcely hinted at in any other version of the Bible.

Origin of Animal Sacrifice

The King James Version tells us that, after Adam and Eve were cast out of the garden, children were born to them and that their sons Cain and Abel offered sacrifices to God. The King James Version informs us what was done, but it does not tell us why. In the Joseph Smith Translation, however, we read that if they had not become mortal, Adam and Eve would not have had children (Moses 5:10-11). Also, the new translation tells us that animal sacrifice was revealed from heaven as a special ordinance-to be performed in a particular manner-as a similitude of the sacrifice of the Son of God (Moses 5:7-8). Hence the King James Version reports that there was sacrifice; the Joseph Smith Translation tells us why.

Further, we learn from the Joseph Smith Translation that, after Adam and Eve were cast out of the Garden of Eden and had become mortal, they were given revelation on how to live in order to receive a redemption from sin and death: they were taught concerning the mission of Jesus Christ. Other Bible versions hardly touch upon these matters. In cases such as this, the Joseph Smith Translation not only tells us why certain things occurred anciently but also serves as our best or our only source for what was done in that early day.

Enoch and Melchizedek

Two of the greatest among the early patriarchs were Enoch and Melchizedek. In our present Bible, Enoch and Melchizedek are almost totally neglected. Little is said about either one. In three minutes you could read all that the King James Version says about both of them.

Enoch and Melchizedek are important figures in Mormonism, and it is through the Joseph Smith Translation that most of what we know about these two patriarchs has been made available to us.

Credentials of the Patriarchs

The Joseph Smith Translation gives us the credentials of the ancient patriarchs; that is, it states that they were called of God, ordained to the priesthood, and engaged in preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. In most cases the King James Version says nothing about such matters. By providing these details, the Joseph Smith Translation gives a continuity and a compactness to the Genesis account of these early patriarchs that is not available in any other Bible version.

The Covenant with Abraham

In the King James Version it is relatively clear that the Lord made a covenant with Abraham, giving him and his posterity certain responsibilities. The Joseph Smith Translation adds a dimension to all of this not found in any other version of the Bible. From the Prophet's translation we learn that a covenant was made with Enoch, which was then passed on to Noah, then to Melchizedek, and then to Abraham. In the case of each of these men, the Joseph Smith Translation mentions that the patriarch received the same covenant that God made with Enoch. (See JST, Gen. 9, 12, 14.) Of course, there were certain ramifications of the covenant that were particular to each man, but the general covenant was the same. Again, this gives a needed continuity to the book of Genesis.

Prominence of Joseph

The King James Version devotes considerable space and gives great prominence to the story of Joseph of Egypt (Gen. 37-50). The Joseph Smith Translation gives even more prominence to the account. Chapters 48 and 50 of Genesis provide particularly significant information about Joseph. Chapter 48 deals with the placement of Joseph's two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, as regular, first-line tribes of Israel. The King James Version briefly mentions this, but the Joseph Smith Translation enlarges upon it, offering a lengthy addition in which Jacob praises Joseph and tells of Joseph's mission as the preserver and protector of the house of Israel. One important feature of Jacob's statement is the allusion to Joseph as a light bringing salvation to the house of Israel, a salvation from sin and spiritual bondage (JST, Gen. 48:11). This seems to point to the latter days, when the gospel is to be carried to the world through Joseph's seed.

The Jewish historian Josephus, in discussing Jacob's death, says that before Jacob died he "enlarged upon the praises of Joseph." [^2] Josephus does little more than mention this: the Joseph Smith Translation, however, actually provides Jacob's words of praise (see JST, Gen. 48:3-11).

Gen. 50 contains an account of the prophecy of Joseph, of which a much more extensive account is found in the Joseph Smith Translation. This is the prophecy that Lehi discusses in 2 Ne. 2, but the Joseph Smith Translation contains even more information concerning the prophecy than the Book of Mormon account.

The Name Jehovah

In Ex. 6:2-3 of the King James Version we read that the Lord revealed himself to Moses by the name of Jehovah, but that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did not know the Lord by that name. This is corrected in the Joseph Smith Translation to convey the truth that not only Moses but also Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob knew the Lord by that name (see JST, Ex. 6:2-3).

"There Shall No Man See Me, and Live"

As recorded in the King James Version of Ex. 33:20, the Lord said to Moses, "Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live." Thereupon the Lord said he would arrange for Moses to hide in the cleft of a rock as He passed by; Moses would be able to see the back parts, but the Lord's face would not be seen. Without further explanation, these scriptures seem to contradict an earlier passage that reads: "The Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend" (Ex. 33:11).

The Joseph Smith Translation confirms that Moses was not privileged to see the face of the Lord, but adds the significant qualifying information that the restriction was temporary and applied only "at this time" (see JST, Ex. 33:20-23).

The Law of Moses

The value of the Joseph Smith Translation can also be seen in the clarifications it makes concerning the law of Moses. Indeed, a person cannot come to a correct understanding of why the law of Moses was given without examining the relevant information in the Joseph Smith Translation. We know from the King James Version that Moses was given a second set of stone tablets after he destroyed the first set, the people having been denied the blessings of the gospel because of their wickedness. But the King James text gives the impression that this second set contained the same information as the first. The Joseph Smith Translation, on the other hand, explains that the information on the second set of tablets differed from that on the first, thus correcting the notion shared by many in the world that the law of Moses was on both sets of tablets. The Joseph Smith Translation informs us that the first contained the higher ordinances of the gospel, which had power to bring men into the presence of God. The second contained the law of Moses, which was a preparatory law that did not include the fulness of spiritual blessings-that blessing of being brought into the presence of God. (See JST, Ex. 34:1-2; JST Deut. 10:2.) However, certain gospel principles were retained on both sets of tablets, and thus one can discern many elements of the gospel in the law of Moses.

The Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants

It is generally necessary to use the Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants together in order to gain a broader understanding of what the Lord has revealed about biblical subjects. Many times in the Joseph Smith Translation the doctrinal information must be gleaned from the narrative into which it is woven. In the Doctrine and Covenants the doctrinal information is usually given in more direct, didactic form. These two sources complement one another, and when used together they greatly increase our understanding of both the Old Testament and the New Testament. (See the discussion in chapter 11 of this book.)

An Enlarged View

As many of the preceding examples illustrate, one of the main contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation is that it provides us with an opportunity to see a bigger picture, to gain a greater perspective. We might be exposed to a thousand religious facts, but only when we have this greater perspective can we really come to a deeper understanding of the gospel. Organization seems to be the important factor: a five-hundred-dollar watch lying in fifty scattered pieces doesn't say much about the time of day; the scattered pieces of a jigsaw puzzle do not present the best possible picture. In the book of 1 Nephi we learn that when designing and mischievous persons took from the Bible many plain and precious things, their motive was to confuse the people and keep them in spiritual darkness (see 1 Ne. 13:27). This they did very effectively by removing certain things so as to destroy the perspective, the purpose, and the continuity of the biblical narrative. They left many of the whats, but removed many of the whys and the hows.

We can't be content with only knowing what when we can also know why and how. Having the Joseph Smith Translation we can read a more complete biblical account and gain an improved perspective. The nature of salvation and the nature of revelation require that we constantly become better informed and more skillful in our gospel teaching. The fact that the Church saw fit to produce the 1979 LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible, with its many excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation, is indicative of the desire to do things better-to teach with precision, to be more accurate, to provide more information, to do a better job.

As members of the Church we are not merely invited to become acquainted with Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible; we are, I feel, expected to do so, if for no other reason (and there are plenty of reasons) than the fact that it exists and is available for study. If any member of the Church does not already have a testimony by the Spirit of the worth of the Joseph Smith Translation, then there is waiting for that member-through committed, prayerful study of the Prophet's translation-one of the most fruitful experiences of his or her life. I can bear testimony of this because I am familiar with the contents of the Joseph Smith Translation. I know a little of its worth. I have tasted of its spirit, and I know it serves as a great aid in teaching the gospel and as a tangible witness for the divine ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith and for the mission of Jesus Christ. The Joseph Smith Translation represents a search for more light and knowledge; it exemplifies how revelation comes and how spiritual knowledge is obtained. It is a monument to the attitude about spiritual learning that characterized the Prophet Joseph Smith and which ought to characterize each of us.

Notes

1 Josephus, The Antiquities of the Jews, trans. William Whiston, II, VIII, 1.

From The Third Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979), pp. 204-12.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

---
Notas:
[^1] How, when, where, why, and by whom was this part of the translation made? The material we know as the book of Moses was revealed as part of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, but it was not at that time called the book of Moses. The original draft of the Old Testament portion of the JST now contained in the book of Moses was made by Joseph Smith and his scribes from June 1830 until February 1831. It is identified as Old Testament #2. (See item 5 below and also note 3 at end of chapter for the identification of Old Testament #1.) The gospel of Jesus Christ, including baptism an d other ordinances, was had from the beginning. The early patriarchs, beginning with Adam, worshipped Jesus and taught his gospel to their children and to the rest of mankind. (See Moses 6:22-23, 48-68.) This fact is almost entirely lacking in all other translations of the Bible available today. History of the Church 1:145.
[^2] By what means did the material get from the original handwritten manuscript into the printed Pearl of Great Price? The original manuscripts make it evident that most of the book of Moses material was revealed in the summer and early fall of 1830, some portions being revealed in November and December 1830 and some in February 1831. Excerpts of this material were published in the Evening and Morning Star from August 1832 to April 1833, and in the Times and Seasons, January 1843. The Holy Ghost was operative among men from the beginning. Some persons have thought that the declaration in the New Testament that the Holy Ghost had not yet come (see John 7:39) means that the Holy Ghost had never been enjoyed by mankind on this earth until the day of Pentecost, as recorded in Acts, chapter 2. However, the book of Moses makes it very clear that the Holy Ghost was operative among people who had the gospel from the very beginning of man on this earth (see Moses 6:52-68; 8:23). What, then, is the meaning of the statement in John 7:39 that the Holy Ghost had not yet come? Simply that the gift of the Holy Ghost had not yet been manifest in the New Testament dispensation. For a detailed description and history of the manuscripts, see Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975). Two LDS researchers and writers deserve special mention for their preliminary, pioneer work relative to the origin of the book of Moses. One of these, James R. Clark, published some interesting and informative information about the early history and printings of the book of Moses in his book, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955). The other, James R. Harris, wrote a master's thesis (Brigham Young University, 1958) on the text of the book of Moses. He correctly postulated the existence of multiple copies of the early manuscripts made at various stages of the translation. Unfortunately neither of these brethren had access to the original manuscripts.
