Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

9 MAJOR DOCTRINAL CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION [^1]

President Brigham Young, speaking of his high regard for the Prophet Joseph Smith, said: "Would he not take the Scriptures and make them so plain and simple that everybody could understand?" [^2] President Young was never too busy to stop whatever he was doing and listen to the Prophet Joseph. He considered the Prophet's words and opinions to be of unequaled worth. Said he on various occasions: "An angel never watched him closer than I did, and that is what has given me the knowledge I have today. I treasure it up, and ask the Father, in the name of Jesus, to help my memory when information is wanted." [^3] In 1868 President Young declared: "I never did let an opportunity pass of getting with the Prophet Joseph and of hearing him speak in public or private, so that I might draw understanding from the fountain from which he spoke." [^4] And in 1877: "From the first time I saw the Prophet Joseph I never lost a word that came from him concerning the kingdom. And this is the key of knowledge that I have today, that I did hearken to the words of Joseph, and treasured them up in my heart, laid them away, asking my Father in the name of his Son Jesus to bring them to my mind when needed I was anxious to learn from Joseph and the spirit of God." [^5]

The reason why President Young was so willing to listen was that he knew Joseph Smith offered something no one else could. As Church members we feel the same way about the Prophet, and we honor his blessed name and memory. We know what Joseph Smith can tell us about the Bible is very significant. Hence it is my conviction that Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible is a unique production, divinely inspired, worthy of study, and of importance to every soul who wants to understand the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Advantages of the Joseph Smith Translation

The reader of the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (JST) will be thrice blessed. First, he will gain an insight into the Prophet's understanding of various scriptures; second, he will learn many things about the gospel not found in other sources; and third, he will obtain a clue as to the content and meaning of the Old and the New Testaments in their original form.

As a person takes in his hands a printed copy of the JST, he has to wonder what it is, how it came to be, and what it has to offer that other Bibles do not have. It has been my experience that while other editions of the Bible contain much of the historical part of the ancient record, they are often fiat or weak on doctrinal matters. My intention in this chapter is to highlight some of the doctrinal contributions of the JST and to demonstrate how this Bible translation not only often adds new historical information and perspectives, but also tells why certain things are so; that is, the JST gives the doctrinal substance or foundation of biblical events and teachings.

History of the Biblical Text

First, let us consider the Book of Mormon explanation about the history of the Bible text:

And I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles that had gone out of captivity were delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations. [These were the early colonists of America.]

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that they did prosper in the land; and I beheld a book, and it was carried forth among them.

And the angel said unto me: Knowest thou the meaning of the book?

And I said unto him: I know not.

And he said: Behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. And I, Nephi, beheld it; and he said unto me: The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; and it also containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets; and it is a record like unto the engravings which are upon the plates of brass, save there are not so many; nevertheless, they contain the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; wherefore, they are of great worth unto the Gentiles.

And the angel of the Lord said unto me: Thou hast beheld that the book proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew; and when it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record; and they bear record according to the truth which is in the Lamb of God.

Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God.

And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the formation of that great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away.

And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men.

Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God.

And after these plain and precious things were taken away it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles; and after it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles, yea, even across the many waters which thou hast seen with the Gentiles which have gone forth out of captivity, thou seest-because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God-because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them. . . .

. . . The Lord God [will not] suffer that the Gentiles shall forever remain in that awful state of blindness, which thou beholdest they are in, because of the plain and most precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that abominable church, whose formation thou hast seen. . . .

And it came to pass that I beheld the remnant of the seed of my brethren, and also the book of the Lamb of God, which had proceeded forth from the mouth of the Jew, that it came forth from the Gentiles unto the remnant of the seed of my brethren.

And after it had come forth unto them I beheld other books, which came forth by the power of the Lamb, from the Gentiles unto them, unto the convincing of the Gentiles and the remnant of the seed of my brethren, and also the Jews who were scattered upon all the face of the earth, that the records of the prophets and of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are true.

And the angel spake unto me, saying: These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved. (1 Ne. 13:19-29, 32, 38-40, italics added.)

To the above we could add the words of the Lord to Moses: "And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak. And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men-among as many as shall believe." (Moses 1:40-41.)

As Latter-day Saints we reverence the Bible. Note that the angel asked Nephi if he knew the meaning of the book. When he said he did not, the angel explained that it was a record of the Jews-the Jewish prophets and the Twelve Apostles (Old and New Testaments) - that it contained the covenants of the Lord to the house of Israel, and that it was of great worth to both Israel and the Gentiles. This Jewish record in its original purity "contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record." Hence we revere the Bible as a sacred record, not only for its history but also for its witness of Jesus Christ; it contains many parts of his gospel and the plan of salvation. But we also recognize, as the angel pointed out to Nephi, that the Bible has not come to us in its original completeness, for some things have been lost from it. We should take special note, however, that the scriptures speak of not only a loss but also a return, a restoration of the lost material so vital to salvation.

The doctrinal contributions of the JST are many, but we will cover only a few basic and representative examples. Our doing so might be compared to our standing on a mountain peak on a clear day-where we can see almost forever-and the grand view before us kindles in us an intense desire to explore not only all of the other peaks but also the valleys. Each of us, with his own scriptures, will have to explore and discover for himself the many great spiritual insights offered in the JST. When we make our own discoveries we are thrilled, our interest grows, and we are fed spiritually.

The Gospel Taught to Adam

We learn from the JST that the gospel, with its ordinances and the holy priesthood, was taught to Adam and was had among all the early patriarchs from Adam to Abraham. This concept is only hinted at in the King James Version and other translations, and not being taught convincingly or forthrightly stated as the crux of the message, it is at best something that an alert student of the Bible might arrive at only circumstantially or by inference. By contrast, in the JST, the central message is that Adam personally asked the Lord why repentance and baptism in water were necessary. The record goes on to show that, subsequently, Adam himself was baptized in water and received the Holy Ghost. This is an unmistakable message, and the JST is more clear upon this subject than anything that can be found in any other source. In the following excerpt from the Prophet's translation, Enoch explains Adam's experience:

But God hath made known unto our fathers, that all men must repent.

And he called upon our father Adam, by his own voice, saying, I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him, If thou wilt, turn unto me and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask it shall be given you.

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said, Why is it that men must repent, and be baptized in water?

And the Lord said unto Adam, Behold, I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad, among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world. . . .

And I have given unto you another law and commandment; wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in no wise inherit the kingdom of God.

For no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name; and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.

Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying, that by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death; and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so become of dust a living soul;

Even so ye must be born again, into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye may be sanctified from all sin; and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come; even immortal glory.

For, by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified; and by the blood ye are sanctified. . . .

And now, behold, I say unto you, This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time. . . .

And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water; and thus he was baptized.

And the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man.

And he heard a voice out of heaven, saying, Thou art baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost; this is the record of the Father and the Son, from henceforth and for ever;

And thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity.

Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons. Amen. (JST, Gen. 6:51-56, 59-63, 65, 67-71, italics added.)

We recognize the above passage as part of the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price (see Moses 6:50-54, 56-60, 62, 64-68). That book, of course, is an extract from Genesis in the JST. The material on Adam found in the book of Moses was revealed to Joseph Smith in 1830 and therefore predates by years the publication called the Pearl of Great Price.

The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants inform us that all the prophets from the beginning knew of Christ (see Jacob 4:4; 7:11; D&C 20:25-28), but the unique contribution of the JST is that it actually presents the details and shows the gospel at work in the Old Testament setting. The passage from JST Genesis quoted above is part of a discourse by Enoch, seven generations after Adam, which shows that this clear exposition of the Fall, the Atonement, the mission of the Savior, and the very gospel of Jesus Christ was had among the early patriarchs not only through word of mouth but also through the written word.

Continuity in the Old Testament

As an extension and corollary to the antiquity of the gospel and its presence from the very beginning of this earth, we learn from the JST that all of the ancient dispensations were connected and associated through the gospel and its covenants; there is continuity and order in the kingdom of God. That the entire plan of salvation was revealed from the very beginning of man on earth is not a difficult concept to accept, because the plan is older than the earth. In fact, the earth was created in accordance with the provisions of the plan of salvation.

If one had only the Bible translations known throughout the world, one would not be aware that the ancient patriarchs had the fulness of the gospel and that there was a continuity in the way the gospel was handed down and communicated from one generation to another. Consider, for example, the concept of gospel covenants. In other Bibles, the first time the word covenant appears is in connection with Noah: "But with thee [Noah] will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee" (Genesis 6: 18). In the King James Version there is no hint of any covenant between God and Adam or any of the patriarchs between Adam and Noah, a space of time covering some fifteen hundred years. And even the covenant that is mentioned in connection with Noah is not spoken of as a gospel or a priesthood covenant. Thus the King James Bible leaves the impression that there was no visible connection between Adam, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, and Abraham.

By contrast, the JST speaks of Adam's having had the priesthood and the gospel, and it shows that these were given also to Enoch, and then to Noah, and then to Melchizedek, and then to Abraham-the same covenant, the same priesthood, the same gospel. Here are a few of the relevant passages from the JST:

And thus the gospel began to be preached from the beginning, being declared by holy angels, sent forth from the presence of God; and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost.

And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam by an holy ordinance; and the gospel preached; and a decree sent forth that it should be in the world until the end thereof; and thus it was. Amen. (JST, Gen. 5:44-45.)

And then began these men to call upon the name of the Lord; and the Lord blessed them; and a book of remembrance was kept in the which was recorded in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God, to write by the Spirit of inspiration;

And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled.

Now this same priesthood which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also.

Now this prophecy Adam spake, as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost. (JST, Gen. 6:5-8.)

Next, in the JST we have the following from Enoch:

And death hath come upon our fathers; nevertheless, we know them, and cannot deny, and even the first of all we know, even Adam; for a book of remembrance we have written among us, according to the pattern given by the finger of God; and it is given in our own language.

And as Enoch spake forth the words of God, the people trembled and could not stand in his presence.

And he said unto them, Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death, and we are made partakers of misery and woe. (JST, Gen. 6:47-49.)

Now note the JST rendering of the previously quoted passage concerning Noah: "But with thee will I establish my covenant, even as I have sworn unto thy father, Enoch, that of thy posterity shall come all nations. And thou shalt come into the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with them." (JST, Gen. 8:23-24.) The King James Version mentions a covenant with Noah, but it does not say what the covenant was. In the JST the statement is clarified to show that it was the same covenant that was given to Enoch, which was the same given to Adam, and so forth. The Lord's further instructions to Noah, as recorded in the JST, shed even more light on this subject:

And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto your father Enoch, concerning your seed after you. . . .

And I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto Enoch, concerning the remnants of your posterity. . . .

And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch; that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch which I have caught up unto myself.

And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy;

And the general assembly of the church of the firstborn shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy father Enoch. (JST, Gen. 9:15, 17, 21-23, italics added.)

The following instruction, as we learn from the JST, was given to Abraham: "And remember the covenant which I make with thee; for it shall be an everlasting covenant; and thou shalt remember the days of Enoch thy father" (JST, Gen. 13:13). Then, regarding Melchizedek, the JST informs us:

Now Melchizedek was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness; and when a child he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire.

And thus, having been approved of God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch,

It being after the order of the Son of God; which order came, not by man, nor the will of man; neither by father nor mother; neither by beginning of days nor end of years; but of God. (JST, Gen. 14:26-28.)

And later in JST Genesis we read:

And it came to pass, that Abram fell on his face, and called upon the name of the Lord.

And God talked with him, saying, My people have gone astray from my precepts, and have not kept mine ordinances, which I gave unto their fathers;

And they have not observed mine anointing, and the burial, or baptism wherewith I commanded them;

But have turned from the commandment, and taken unto themselves the washing of children, and the blood of sprinkling;

And have said that the blood of the righteous Abel was shed for sins; and have not known wherein they are accountable before me.

But as for thee, behold, I will make my covenant with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations. . . .

And I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee, and it shall be my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations; that thou mayest know forever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old.

And thou shalt observe to keep all my covenants wherein I covenanted with thy fathers; and thou shalt keep the commandments which I have given thee with mine own mouth, and I will be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee. (JST, Gen. 17:3-8, 11-12.)

All of the above passages from the JST are available either in the book of Moses or in the footnotes and the appendix of the 1979 LDS edition of the King James Version. As these passages clearly illustrate, there is a continuity in the Genesis account as given in the JST that is not found in any other Bible. The JST gives an account of the early patriarchs in gospel context and setting, a setting which included the fulness of the gospel, the priesthood, faith in Jesus Christ, and the same covenant. These ancient patriarchs knew of each other and had a common bond, a common faith-a oneness that we never would have suspected or known about or understood without the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. This continuity in the Lord's work among the ancients is the same concept taught so clearly in the first and second of the lectures on faith given in the School of the Elders during the Kirtland period, and the JST is no doubt the source for the doctrine in those lectures.

The JST and the Plates of Brass

As shown earlier, 1 Ne. 13 states that many plain and precious things were taken away out of the record of the Jews (the Bible) and that many covenants of the Lord were lost in that process. In the last few passages of the JST quoted above, we see some of what Nephi was referring to, and we can see that the covenant is being restored. The angel told Nephi that the Jewish Bible, before it was altered, was like unto the record on the plates of brass (see 1 Ne. 13:23). We read further in 1 Ne. 13 that the Lord would bring forth "other books" to make known the plain and precious things that were lost from the Bible. Surely the JST is one of those "other books," along with the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. It would follow, therefore, that the JST-restoring, as it does, material lost from the Bible -reads more like the plates of brass than does any other Bible we know about (compare, for example, 2 Nephi 2: 17 with JST, Gen. 3:1-5; 2 Ne. 2:22-25 with JST, Gen. 5:11).

Joseph Smith could not have restored these things without the spirit of revelation. He had that spirit. He held the keys of salvation. Note what the Lord said about the Prophet and his work in an 1830 revelation directed to Sidney Rigdon:

And I have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant Joseph; and in weakness have I blessed him;

And I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming, if he abide in me, and if not, another will I plant in his stead.

Wherefore, watch over him that his faith fail not, and it shall be given by the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, that knoweth all things.

And a commandment I give unto thee [Sidney Rigdon] -that thou shalt write for him [Joseph Smith]; and the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect. (D&C 35:17-20.)

Fundamental Doctrines

There are some very basic doctrines that are prominent in the JST that are not presented so clearly in other Bible translations. In some cases the JST material is completely new, as in the early chapters of Genesis that detail the secret oaths of Cain (see JST, Gen. 5) and the ministry of Enoch (see JST, Gen. 6-7). In most instances, however, the JST consists of enlargement or clarification of existing material, as in the case of the New Testament Epistles or the Sermon on the Mount.

Often there is another type of benefit that comes as a result of the JST enlargements and additions. This arises because of the fact that the more we know, the more we are able to know. Thus, many of the clarifications in the JST are valuable not only in their own right, but also in that they supply key information that enables us to understand and see new significance in other passages not textually changed in the JST. This is the case with John 8:1-11, which speaks of the Pharisees' bringing before the Savior a woman taken in adultery. The JST rendering of this passage contains no clarifications regarding the Pharisees. But substantial clarification in JST Luke 16:13-22 sets a pattern for the hypocritical life of the Pharisees, a pattern that sheds much light on the Savior's statement: "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her" (John 8:7).

The JST has everything any other Bible has; but the JST also supplies additional information about God's nature, man's nature, the origin of Satan, the premortal existence, the Grand Council and the War in Heaven (see JST, Gen. 3:1-5; JST Rev. 12:6-10), and the gospel's having been taught to Adam and the early patriarchs.

Furthermore, in the JST God does not need to repent (compare Gen. 6:6 with JST, Gen. 8:15; Jonah 3:10 with JST, Jonah 3:10), nor does he harden men's hearts (compare Ex. 7:3, 13 with JST, Ex. 7:3, 13; Isa. 63:17 with JST, Isa. 63:17). Little children, we learn in the Prophet's translation, are saved by the atonement of Jesus Christ (JST, Gen. 6:56; JST Matt. 18:10-11; 19:13).

Little information is given in any Bible about the ministry of Enoch, and there is no mention of his people or of a city called Zion; but in the JST eighteen times more column space is given to Enoch and his preaching than is given in the King James Bible, and the JST says much about his city Zion. This marvelous information about Enoch was revealed to Joseph Smith in November and December 1830 and forms an example and pattern for the building of Zion in our dispensation (see JST, Gen. 6-7). In like manner, little is given of Melchizedek in any other Bible; however, much is given of him in the JST (see JST, Gen. 14:16-40; JST Heb. 7:13).

One of the major contributions of the JST is the insight it gives about the personality and ministry of Jesus Christ. In the four Gospels of the JST, Jesus is more animated, more compassionate with sinners, more stern with the perfidious Jewish rulers, and more clearly shown to be the greatest person who has ever lived on earth than he is in any other Bible translation.

On 7 March 1831 the Prophet received a revelation now identified as D&C 45, a major topic of which is the second coming of the Lord. In this divine communication the promise was given that through the Prophet's translation of the New Testament the Lord would yet reveal to the Prophet (and thus to the Church) much more about the Second Coming: "And now, behold, I say unto you, it shall not be given unto you to know any further concerning this chapter, until the New Testament shall be translated, and in it all these things shall be made known; wherefore I give unto you that ye may now translate it, that ye may be prepared for the things to come. For verily I say unto you, that great things await you." (D&C 45:60-62.) Just what "chapter" is meant we do not know, but given the subject matter of D&C 45, this passage clearly indicates that the JST contains considerable information relative to the Lord's second advent.

Another major contribution of the JST is its emphasis on the first principles of the gospel. Many of the clarifications and additions in Gen. 5, 6, and 7 and in the four Gospels emphasize the messiahship of Jesus, faith, repentance, baptism in water, and the need all people have for the influence and power of the Holy Ghost. (See the Genesis passages quoted earlier in this chapter; see also JST, John 1; JST Mark 1:1-6; JST Matt. 3; JST Luke 3.)

A Problem of Transmission

Now, why are these concepts and clarifications not in the Bibles the world uses? Were not the ancient biblical writers, Apostles, and prophets able to express themselves more clearly than the present Bible record shows? If the current Hebrew and Greek manuscripts of the Bible are anywhere near being correctly recorded, then we have to conclude that either those ancient writers did not have a clear knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ or, if they did have such a knowledge, they did not tell it.

I cannot believe that they did not know it, nor can I believe that they did not tell it or write it. What I do believe is that their writings as found in all known ancient manuscripts have been altered and diluted, so that what presently is regarded as their writing no longer contains many of the "most plain and precious parts of the gospel" that it once did (1 Ne. 13:34).

The major problem, it appears, is not one of translation but of transmission. Today there are able scholars who know well the ancient languages and who have the ability to translate clearly what is on the manuscripts. They do a great service in observing many technical points, updating changes in language, and clarifying different words and passages. But that is not the heart of the problem.

The pivot on which the whole subject turns is the absence of an adequate manuscript. There is no way that a translator using existing biblical manuscripts can get out of them the fulness of the gospel, with plain and extensive statements about the nature of God and about man, the devil, premortal existence, the Second Coming, the resurrection, and so forth. There simply is no way that a translator can make the currently available biblical manuscripts read the same way that the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price do concerning these same doctrines.

What is it then? Did the Bible prophets-Moses, Enoch, Abraham, Paul, Matthew, John, and others-not know the gospel as clearly as the Book of Mormon prophets? Or is it that the records of the Bible prophets have not been preserved in complete clarity and accuracy?

If the currently available biblical manuscripts were correct, then, logically we would be forced to conclude that either the ancient biblical writers did not know the gospel in its clarity or, if they knew it, they did not write it. The testimony of the Book of Mormon, however, is that they did write about the gospel, but that much of what they wrote was lost through faulty transmission, both wilful and accidental, and that much of it would be restored in the latter days through the "other books" (the Joseph Smith Translation, the Book of Mormon, and the other revelations).

Frequently people ask me if the corrections made by the JST are supported in the Hebrew and Greek manuscripts. An answer to that seems to be that if the JST offered no more than the available biblical manuscripts do or if it were completely supported by them, there would have been no need for a new Bible translation from the Prophet. Of course it is not always supported by the manuscripts; present Bible manuscripts simply do not have the luxuriant supply of doctrine that the originals had. It is too late for them to do so. The plain and precious things were lost centuries ago.

This situation reminds me of an experience I have every now and again when I go for a haircut. Often preceding me in the barber's chair is some unappreciative young man who has more hair than three men ought to have. Generally some comment is made about my own contrasting lack of hair, and I say to the barber, "Make me look like him." The barber laughs, and the answer is always the same. He looks at me and says, "It is too late for that." Similarly, it is too late for the existing Hebrew and Greek manuscripts: they cannot provide the light and truth that once were there. That is why there had to be a restoration of the biblical text and those doctrines known anciently.

Joseph Smith a Restorer

Since all the other events, revelations, and restorations of this dispensation are true-the First Vision, the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, the temple endowment, and so forth (the whole package of the Restoration)-it is inevitable that the Prophet would also make a divinely inspired correction and supplemental edition of the ancient Bible. For him not to have done so would have been the surprising thing. if Joseph Smith had not corrected and restored the biblical text, his mission would have been left incomplete.

Revelation is progressive, and one revelation builds upon another. For example, as part of his Bible translation the Prophet produced a manuscript correcting certain passages in the book of Revelation. More information about the book of Revelation, given in connection with the Bible translation, can be found in D&C 77, and still more relevant information can be found in D&C 88. This reflects a very real relationship between the JST and the Doctrine and Covenants, for much of the doctrine of this dispensation came to Joseph Smith while he was translating the Bible.

The "Apollos Principle"

The need for using latter-day scriptures, including the JST, when interpreting the Bible is illustrated in what I am pleased to call the "Apollos Principle." Apollos was a bright and capable man from Alexandria. He was a believer and was very gifted in speech. The following is recorded of him in the book of Acts:

And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to Ephesus.

This man was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John.

And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly. . . .

For he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ. (Acts 18:24-26, 28.)

I will paraphrase the passage so as to illustrate the point:

And a certain teacher, named Apollos, born in Salt Lake City [or anywhere], an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to the Church Educational System.

This man was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the King James Version.

And he began to speak boldly in the classrooms and in firesides: whom when his supervisors and teacher trainers had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly, using the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, the JST, and the teachings of Joseph Smith and of the living prophets.

And afterwards he mightily convinced the students, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ.

We see that the Apollos of the book of Acts had many of the valuable tools and skills helpful to be a great teacher. He was fervent, dedicated, eloquent, and had a knowledge of the scriptures. But as long as he was acquainted with only a portion of the scriptures or of the "way of God," he could not employ his great skills to fully benefit the work of the Lord. Similarly, today we need not only eloquence, skill, and dedication; we need the sources, the facts, and the substance of latter-day revelation if we wish to properly teach and interpet the Bible.

As regards the JST, we as members of the Church now have a second chance. The JST was offered in its entirety to the Saints in the early days of the Church. They did not reject it; they just neglected it. Therefore, the Church essentially lost it for about a century. We now have it again in the 1979 LDS edition of the Bible. We should be careful to not neglect and lose it again.

Testimony

The JST is a witness for Jesus Christ. It is a witness for the divine calling of Joseph Smith as a prophet and Apostle of Jesus Christ. Many people seem to go about it backwards. They want to test Joseph Smith by the content of the inadequate manuscripts. Actually the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation is as great as any other dispensation and can stand on its own record. Joseph Smith had an independent revelation of his own. The Book of Mormon and the JST are the proper standards by which to measure the accuracy of the ancient Bible. We are not measuring the prophets but the quality of the ancient record that tells about them. I think we should be more like President Brigham Young and not ignore the Prophet's teachings.

I have a testimony that what has been discussed in this chapter is true. Given all that the JST has to offer, our diligent study of it cannot help but yield great spiritual benefits. Studying the scriptures will not always answer all our personal problems, but it will increase our spirituality, and with that increased spirituality we can then see our way more clearly to gain the inspiration from the Lord for our immediate problems. I am grateful for the opportunity to have all the books-all of the standard works-and a testimony of the Spirit.

Notes

From The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), pp. 271-89.

1 Brigham Young, Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941), p. 459.

2 8 October 1866 sermon, Brigham Young Papers, Church Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

3 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 12:269-70.

4 25 May 1877 discourse, Deseret News, 6 June 1877, p. 274.

---
Notas:
[^1] How, when, where, why, and by whom was this part of the translation made? The material we know as the book of Moses was revealed as part of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, but it was not at that time called the book of Moses. The original draft of the Old Testament portion of the JST now contained in the book of Moses was made by Joseph Smith and his scribes from June 1830 until February 1831. It is identified as Old Testament #2. (See item 5 below and also note 3 at end of chapter for the identification of Old Testament #1.) The gospel of Jesus Christ, including baptism an d other ordinances, was had from the beginning. The early patriarchs, beginning with Adam, worshipped Jesus and taught his gospel to their children and to the rest of mankind. (See Moses 6:22-23, 48-68.) This fact is almost entirely lacking in all other translations of the Bible available today. History of the Church 1:145.
[^2] By what means did the material get from the original handwritten manuscript into the printed Pearl of Great Price? The original manuscripts make it evident that most of the book of Moses material was revealed in the summer and early fall of 1830, some portions being revealed in November and December 1830 and some in February 1831. Excerpts of this material were published in the Evening and Morning Star from August 1832 to April 1833, and in the Times and Seasons, January 1843. The Holy Ghost was operative among men from the beginning. Some persons have thought that the declaration in the New Testament that the Holy Ghost had not yet come (see John 7:39) means that the Holy Ghost had never been enjoyed by mankind on this earth until the day of Pentecost, as recorded in Acts, chapter 2. However, the book of Moses makes it very clear that the Holy Ghost was operative among people who had the gospel from the very beginning of man on this earth (see Moses 6:52-68; 8:23). What, then, is the meaning of the statement in John 7:39 that the Holy Ghost had not yet come? Simply that the gift of the Holy Ghost had not yet been manifest in the New Testament dispensation. For a detailed description and history of the manuscripts, see Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975). Two LDS researchers and writers deserve special mention for their preliminary, pioneer work relative to the origin of the book of Moses. One of these, James R. Clark, published some interesting and informative information about the early history and printings of the book of Moses in his book, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955). The other, James R. Harris, wrote a master's thesis (Brigham Young University, 1958) on the text of the book of Moses. He correctly postulated the existence of multiple copies of the early manuscripts made at various stages of the translation. Unfortunately neither of these brethren had access to the original manuscripts.
[^3] Of what specific historical value to the book of Moses are the original manuscripts of the JST? Much of the material was already recorded before Sidney Rigdon entered the picture. He was neither the genius nor the recorder for the early part of the Bible translation. In 1851 the excerpts of the JST in the Evening and Morning Star and Times and Seasons Were used by Elder Franklin D. Richards in publishing the Moses material in the first edition of the Pearl of Great Price. There was a symbolic purpose to animal sacrifice. The symbolic nature of animal sacrifice is portrayed clearly in the book of Moses, wherein it is specified that the sacrifice had to be a firstling of the flock and that such a sacrifice was a similitude of the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ. All these things were revealed to Adam (see Moses 5:4-9), and he was the first man on this earth to offer animal sacrifice in the manner and for the purpose described above. Although blood sacrifices are repeatedly spoken of in the Old Testament, this record gives no explanation as to their specific purpose; nor is there anything in the Old Testament about Adam's having offered sacrifices. The book of Moses offers great clarity and explanatory information on this important subject. The original Old Testament manuscripts, now in the possession of the RLDS church, were not numbered by the Prophet or his scribes but have been labeled #s 1, 2, and 3 by RLDS scholars. One would naturally expect the earliest draft to be numbered Old Testament #1. However, through a mistake in identity, the earliest manuscript has since been labeled Old Testament #2. Consequently, for purposes of discussion in this chapter, the earliest draft of the Old Testament revision is identified by the label given it by the RLDS historians. The document labeled Old Testament #1 appears to be simply a private copy made by John Whitmer of part of Old Testament #2 and as such is not crucial to our present discussion.
[^4] Of what historical and doctrinal value is the material known as the book of Moses? The movements of the early brethren-such as Oliver Cowdery's call to Ohio and Missouri; John Whitmer's call to Ohio; Sidney Rigdon's entry into the Church and his arrival in Fayette, New York-are all reflected in the changes of handwriting and the dating found on the original manuscripts of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible. This gives a certain historical importance as well as textual confirmation to these original manuscripts, and greatly facilitates our day-to-day reconstruction of those early events in Church history. This is illustrated in the accompanying chart, "Time Sequence of the New Translation." Private copies of parts of the JST were made by early brethren. Elder Franklin D. Richards evidently had a personal manuscript of at least part of the early Genesis materials, which he used to supplement the materials from the Evening, and Morning Star and the Times and Seasons in publishing the Moses material in the 1851 Pearl of Great Price. Even so, the 1851 Pearl of Great Price contained only about three-fourths of the present content of the book of Moses. Moses I has special doctrinal significance, and I will emphasize only a few very significant aspects of it. The events recorded in this chapter were originally experienced by Moses after the time of the burning bush but before he had parted the waters of the Red Sea and before he had written the book of Genesis (Moses 1:17, 25-26, 40-41). For an extensive discussion of the 1866-67 RLDS publication committee and the modifications made in the 1867 edition of the JST, see chapter 7 in Matthews, "A Plainer Translation."
[^5] In early editions of the Pearl of Great Price, the dates given at the beginning of each chapter in the book of Moses were partially incorrect. From 1920 until 1981, Moses 1 was properly dated June 1830; but chapters 2 through 8 of Moses were all dated December 1830. As explained earlier in this chapter, the material comprising Moses 2 through 6 was received actually during June to December 1830; the material in Moses 7, in December 1830; and the information now known as Moses 8, in February 1831. These dates were all corrected in the 1981 edition of the Pearl of Great Price. This may seem a small matter to some, but it is historically interesting and very important for a correct understanding of the content. Access to the original manuscript has given us this information. The manuscript which is here identified as Old Testament #1 is a lateral copy of Old Testament #2. It did not precede #2 but is a side copy consisting of the first seven chapters. It was made by John Whitmer, probably just before his departure from New York to Ohio in late December 1830. It has no direct connection with the book of Moses material. It is included here only to show its origin and existence. Actually it has been mislabeled and should not carry a manuscript number at all, since it is not a true manuscript in the genealogical line. But since it has been labeled Old Testament #1 by the RLDS historians, it is included here for clarity and to show why the earliest manuscript is incorrectly labeled Old Testament #2. (See note 3 at end of chapter.)
