Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

11 THE JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION AND THE REVELATORY PROCESS [^1]

For years I have enjoyed the simple testimony of the gospel unmixed with sophisticated words and multisyllabic explanations. I know in my heart that Jesus Christ is the Savior and the Redeemer of mankind and that Joseph Smith is his prophet. Sometimes I come in contact with intellectual and high-sounding explanations and proposals that do not set right. I can't always detect what it is that is out of order, but a monitor within me says that there is something not right in the particular proposal or program. I have learned to trust my feelings in these matters, for nearly always time has borne my impressions out. My chief sorrow in many of these instances has been that I haven't said anything about my feelings until afterwards, because I thought no one would listen.

I am often made uneasy by the tendency among educators to complexify and sophisticate things so that simple matters become hard to understand. Sometimes we almost become smothered in oratory. Often when I dwell on problems that arise I begin to feel in at ease, and I have a sense of helplessness and discouragement. But then when I go to the scriptures and read them I get new courage, and hope springs up again; I feel edified because I begin to think in terms of fundamentals. When that happens I feel reassured and faith grows and happiness returns. It is as the scriptures tell us: "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God"; and this faith, or hope, "maketh an anchor to the souls of men" (Rom. 10:17; Ether 12:4).

I have also discovered it is impossible to prove by tangible evidence any doctrine as being absolutely true. You can marshal all the scriptures, all the evidences, all the logic and reason-all the ingredients you want; yet ultimately on every spiritual principle, on every doctrine, there is the unavoidable leap of faith. There is always at least a small gap, and a person needs that spark of faith to get across it. I think that is the test of mortality. That may be why the Lord said we must "seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). There is no other way to learn spiritual things.

Because this is true, we need to be very careful about whom and what we choose as our standards. I have come to distrust much of the conjecture and learning of the world and worldly men and women, no matter how wise, intellectual, educated, and well-mannered they appear to be. I trust the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price more than I do the Bible. I trust prophets more than politicians, and prophets more than scholars for basic understanding. Many biblical scholars, for example, have given much valuable information about the Bible and about history and culture, but they generally do not understand the eternal things and the purposes of God upon the earth in the last days. They do not understand doctrine because they do not know that every dispensation has been a gospel dispensation with Melchizedek Priesthood, and they do not accept the Restoration. It seems as though scholars have assembled the most extensive and detailed information sometimes, but prophets have the better perception.

The New Testament Church encountered the learning of the world among the Jews and the Greeks. Paul said, "The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom" (1 Cor. 1:22). The New Testament Church was finally done in by the worldly-wise because it sought to accommodate their learning. As a result there developed a popular and learned philosophy containing the philosophies of men mingled with scriptures.

Revelation Provides Needed Answers

When a prophet comes with a new revelation, all is clear, faith abounds, and the truth is known. As time puts distance between the prophet and later generations, invariably the wise and the learned and the intellectually minded comment upon every phrase and word of the revelation until they read into each point so many variations and meanings that eventually no one reading the commentaries knows for sure what is right. The Jews did this with the great revelation at Mount Sinai. Others have done it with the New Testament. Some writers have tried to do it with the first vision of Joseph Smith and with the Book of Mormon. Jacob warns us about looking beyond the mark and despising words of plainness and seeking for things we cannot understand (Jacob 4:14). I think we have to be careful about getting in a mode in which we are "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Tim. 3:7). The Book of Mormon is especially strong in its opposition to worldly knowledge as a substitute for revelation.

It almost seems that the literary people do not really want answers; they only want information. Answers have become a contradiction of their goal. It is a paradox that the philosopher and the worldly-wise place great emphasis on the proliferation of words and ideas but object to coming to final answers. Knowledge is what they set out to learn, but the more they learn the less willing they are to accept or arrive at answers. I think that may be why many of the learned have not accepted the Restoration more readily: clear, simple answers are repugnant to their network of suppositions; they do not like absolutes. Since possession of the truth makes much of man's philosophy invalid, could it be that philosophy makes absolute truth unwelcome?

We have to be careful as students of the gospel that we do not get so caught up with the pursuit of learning that we find no room for, and become suspect of, direct answers and testimony. We are not going to be able to learn everything; we are not going to be able to prove everything. If we don't have an unshakable testimony and the current guidance of the Spirit in making decisions, we will get so confused and mixed up that we might make serious mistakes in our own lives and cause others to stumble through the influence we have on them. We would do well to stay close to the President of the Church and the Twelve and to the standard works.

It has been my experience that the discovery of facts is only a minor part of learning. The real challenge and accomplishment is not in the discovery but in the interpretation of those facts. This is where inspiration and revelation are so important to us.

The Role of the Joseph Smith Translation in the Restoration

Having said that, I would now like to turn to a discussion of the process of revelation and what the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible can teach us about that process. It has been customary through the years to deal with the Joseph Smith Translation only on a textual basis, comparing some of its passages with the corresponding passages in the King James Version. However, I would like to discuss some other aspects of the Joseph Smith Translation of which I feel we as Latter-day Saints ought to become aware.

The Joseph Smith Translation is not just another Bible. It is inseparably connected with the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price-chronologically, historically, textually, and doctrinally. It is because of these ties and connections between the standard works that we cannot do justice in teaching the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation without an understanding of the history and the doctrinal content of the Joseph Smith Translation. A person gains additional insights into the unfolding of our dispensation when he understands the role of the Joseph Smith Translation. He begins to comprehend how revelation comes, and he also sees a background behind many of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants that he would otherwise miss.

There are several reasons why each of us should have this wider understanding of the role of the Joseph Smith Translation. As we study Church history, for instance, we will come to realize that the Joseph Smith Translation is an important ingredient in the life of Joseph Smith and that it is an impressive and profound work from his hands. In our study of the Bible the Joseph Smith Translation will further our understanding of that ancient record, and we will come to view the Prophet's translation not as an attempt to "Mormonize" the Bible but as one of his major revelatory products. With the Joseph Smith Translation we see the Prophet in his role as a restorer of lost material. Thus we will find that the Joseph Smith Translation was not an experiment by the Prophet; rather, it was a day-by-day unfolding of the ancient gospel by revelation. If Joseph Smith is a true prophet, then his translation of the Bible is a book of true scripture, and a person ignores it at his own peril.

Likewise, a broader understanding of the Joseph Smith Translation will aid us in our study of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and Latter-day Saint theology. We will see that there is a close doctrinal and informational connection between the Joseph Smith Translation and the development of Church doctrine. In numerous instances the Prophet's Bible translation is a forerunner or preliminary revelation to some of the other doctrinal revelations. I would invite you to observe that the Doctrine and Covenants and the Joseph Smith Translation do not just have similar roots entwined with each other, but rather they have the same root-the root of revelation-and there is no difference, in terms of their nature and source, between the revelations in the Joseph Smith Translation and those in the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. Hence we have not really done our homework unless and until we examine the textual and doctrinal relationship of the Joseph Smith Translation, as well as its revelatory and historical association, with all the elements of the latter-day restoration of the gospel.

The Joseph Smith Translation, then, is not an expendable work, nor is it of private interest only. It is as central to the development of the doctrine of this dispensation as any book we have. It is a tangible evidence of the prophetic calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and it is a testament of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is important that we not judge the Joseph Smith Translation merely by textual criticism or by the wisdom of man or of scholars. This work and its history should have a permanent place in the curriculum of every gospel student because of its pivotal position in relation to the doctrinal restoration as a whole.

Original Manuscripts Provide Valuable Historical Framework

One situation that has blurred our vision is that the Joseph Smith Translation is published as one book, the Doctrine and Covenants as another, and the Pearl of Great Price as still another. Having these revelations, most of which were given during the formative years of the Church, printed in separate books obscures the context and thus the historical and doctrinal relationships between these early revelations. The books have become compartmentalized, whereas in reality the revelations in these books were revealed on a day-to-day basis in the same real-life situations.

Every revelation that has been received was given at some specific place and time and in some specific situation. But the past becomes blurred by time and tradition. Time passes, leaders pass on, and new personalities come into prominence. As a consequence, a vacuum of understanding often forms; false concepts gradually develop and incorrect impressions form. To correct this situation we often have to become literary archaeologists and dig down to the original sources so as to view them as they really are. When we do this we will see things we had not noticed before, no matter how many times we have trodden the path.

No matter how well a person knows the surface of the ground, he can never know what lies even just under the surface-what forms of architecture, what relics of art, or what message the past can convey-until he or someone else removes the surface accumulation and examines the facts of an earlier day. It is the same way with books such as the Doctrine and Covenants and the Joseph Smith Translation. If a person reads only the surface of the printed page, he misses the significance of some of the plainest messages of these scriptural works. Sometimes it is only by going to sources earlier than the printed page, to the original or at least prepublication manuscripts, that one can recreate enough historical framework to see the various historical and doctrinal relationships. When we see the development that has taken place, we gain a more accurate perception and appreciation for the printed page. Until we know the background of our latter-day revelations, our understanding is apt to be superficial and fragmented.

In looking at the Joseph Smith Translation and the revelatory process within the context of the Restoration, we need to begin with a few basic dates and concepts. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^2] In like manner, if we could go back in time and talk with the Prophet or walk about and observe conditions generally, we would no doubt learn new things about how and why some revelations were received. But as we cannot go back in time, we are obliged to reconstruct the history as best we can with the facts that are available. This can be pleasantly rewarding because by excavation we can discover things we had not seen before.

A Chronological Approach

When we sort them out chronologically, we will not have difficulty in seeing the connections between the Joseph Smith Translation and the revelations recorded in other latter-day scriptures. We are not accustomed to doing that because we tend to think in terms of books rather than in terms of history. Without an awareness of the context, we sometimes do not see the connections and do not perceive that the gospel was revealed line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little.

Consider what the Church was like in June 1830. What were the offices, the doctrines, and the practices of the Church in that day? It would be easier to describe what was not yet a part of the Church. In June 1830 there were no wards, no stakes, no First Presidency, no Council of the Twelve, no patriarchs, no Seventies, no bishops, no Word of Wisdom, no revelation on the degrees of glory, no tithing, no welfare program, no law of consecration, no priesthood quorums of any kind, no temples, no endowments, no sealings, no marriages for eternity, no real understanding of the New Jerusalem, no baptisms for the dead, no Doctrine and Covenants, no Pearl of Great Price, and no Joseph Smith Translation. How did these things, which today we recognize as vital to our spiritual life and as basic to the Church, come to be? They came when the time was right and in answer to prayer-the result of earnest search. Each of these things was revealed at some particular time and place and in some particular situation; and each became, one by one, part of the doctrine and the structure of the Church. Many of the fundamental doctrines of the gospel which are contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were first made known to the Prophet Joseph Smith as he worked through the pages of the Bible while making his inspired translation.

The Book of Mormon came from the press during the week of 18-25 March 1830. In a few more days, on 6 April, the Church was organized. A few weeks later, in June 1830, came the earliest revelation associated with the Joseph Smith Translation. We are most familiar with it as the book of Moses, chapter 1, in the Pearl of Great Price. We do not know the exact day in June on which the material was written, but it was in Harmony, Pennsylvania, and chronologically would be just before D&C 25.

Fortunately the prepublication manuscripts of the Joseph Smith Translation have been preserved. They are very informative as to the history of the translation because they contain dates showing when certain portions of the Bible translation were in process. These dates, along with the varying styles of known handwriting that reflect the services of different scribes, have enabled us to identify certain relationships with the Doctrine and Covenants that otherwise would have escaped us.

The pages of the manuscript that follow the material that we know as Moses I contain Joseph Smith's translation of Gen. 1-5 (Moses 2-5), which should be placed chronologically in proximity to D&C 29. Since exact dates are not given in the manuscripts of either Gen. 1-5 or D&C 29 , the placing of these dates has to be approximate. The chapters from Genesis were received and recorded sometime between June 1830 and October 1830, and thus very likely were given previous to the reception of the revelation known as D&C 29.

The subjects of these chapters of Genesis translated by the Prophet have to do with the spiritual and temporal creations, agency, the rebellion of Lucifer, the fall of Adam, and the introduction of the gospel to Adam and his posterity. The doctrinal emphasis is clear and prominent in the Joseph Smith Translation but is almost totally lacking in any other Bible.

In the Prophet's translation of Gen. 1-5, principles are woven into a story line relating the events of the Garden of Eden, Satan's rebellion, his temptation of Adam and Eve, their eating the forbidden fruit, and their being ushered out of the garden. In contrast, the material in D&C 29:30-45 is a brief statement of doctrinal principles-without the story-actually a summary of the doctrine found in the longer narrative of Joseph Smith's translation of Gen. 1-5. Thus, for maximum comprehension, the Prophet's translation of Gen. 1-5 (Moses 2-5) should be read just prior to a study of D&C 29, since that appears to be the order in which they were received.

The historical relationship between these two revelations begins a pattern repeated in later revelations, a pattern which shows that many of the concepts contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were first presented to the mind of the Prophet during his translation of the Bible and actually were recorded first in that translation. Later many of these subjects were enlarged upon and appeared as parts of various sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. We will now proceed to examine other examples.

The Joseph Smith Translation and the Concept of Zion

Both the Old Testament and the New Testament tell about Zion and a New Jerusalem to be built in the last days. The Book of Mormon specifies more particularly that this New Jerusalem will be built on the American continent. The Joseph Smith Translation also makes a special contribution to our understanding of Zion and the New Jerusalem.

In December 1830 the translation had reached Genesis, chapter 5, of the King James Version, where the great patriarch Enoch is mentioned. The Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were living in Fayette, New York. The fifth chapter of Genesis in the King James Version contains only a few skinny comments about Enoch, saying that he was the son of Jared and was a good man, and implying that he was translated. But it says nothing about Enoch's having a city or a people, nothing about Enoch's Zion. You can read everything the Bible has to offer about Enoch in less than thirty seconds. While the Prophet Joseph was translating these passages about Enoch in Gen. 5, he received an extensive revelation about Enoch and his ministry; his teachings; his prophetic call; and his city and their laws, happiness, unity, and harmony. He learned that they were of one heart and one mind and that there were no poor among them. The length of the material about Enoch in the Joseph Smith Translation is eighteen times as long as that in any other Bible.

This new information about Enoch and his people includes a statement that Enoch's city will come down from heaven and be joined with the city of New Jerusalem that is to be built on the earth by the Saints in the last days (see JST, Gen. 7:70-72, or Moses 7:62-64). The information about Enoch and his city is one of the most extensive and valuable contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation. Enoch is a big man in Mormonism, but he is almost obliterated from the Bible and nearly forgotten in present-day Judaism, Catholicism, and Protestantism. Almost everything we know about Enoch we learn from the Joseph Smith Translation. The same is true about Melchizedek. He has been nearly lost to the Bible, yet he is large on the horizon of this dispensation. Almost all we know about Melchizedek we learn from the Joseph Smith Translation.

Soon after the revelation about Enoch was received and recorded, the Lord instructed Joseph Smith to cease translating temporarily and to move the headquarters of the Church to Ohio; there they would receive the "law" (see D&C 42) by which they would be governed. Let us look at the sequence: the Enoch material was received in December 1830; the command to cease translating and move, recorded in D&C 37, was also received in December; the promise of the "law," recorded in D&C 38, was received in January 1831; and the reception of the law, recorded in D&C 42, came in February. The revelations recorded in the next twenty sections or so of the Doctrine and Covenants, from 42-64, were all received in the next ten months, and they dealt with the law of consecration, the founding of the New Jerusalem and Zion, and the economic system sometimes called the united order.

The revelation about Enoch given in the Joseph Smith Translation was a pattern or a backdrop which introduced the idea of Enoch's Zion to the young Church. Then the Lord poured forth many specific revelations to the Prophet, showing him how to build a similar society, or Zion, or New Jerusalem, preparatory to the Second Coming and the return of Enoch's city.

It would be helpful to us, when studying the Doctrine and Covenants, if we would read the Enoch material just before reading D&C 37-64. This sequence is chronologically accurate, and following it helps recreate the setting in which the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were received.

The revelation about Enoch was received in December 1830, just before D&C 37 was received. Therefore it is not surprising that Enoch is mentioned again in D&C 38 and 45. The whole concept of a latter-day Zion, of which Enoch's city was the prototype, was the principal topic of divine revelation at that period of time.

The Joseph Smith Translation and the Brass Plates

As we have seen, close connections exist between the Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants. The Book of Mormon is also related to the Prophet's Bible translation in an interesting way: the Nephite scripture serves as evidence that the Joseph Smith Translation is indeed a work of restoration-the revealing anew of plain and precious truths once enjoyed anciently.

By way of illustration, let us consider the second chapter of 2 Nephi, in which Lehi gives a remarkable discourse. He tells how Satan came to be the devil in the premortal world; that Adam and Eve would have had no children and all things would have remained in their original state if there had been no Fall; and that the Messiah was necessary by reason of the Fall. Lehi seems to have learned all this from reading the plates of brass. Absolutely none of these things is contained in the King James Version nor in any other Bible known to the modern world; however, all of these things-Satan's history; Adam's transgression; the fact that man, the animals, and the earth would all have remained in their original state; the fact that there would have been no children without the Fall: and the role of the Messiah-are found in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters of Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis. What is the point? Simply this: it is very clear that the contents of the Joseph Smith Translation, having received the touch of restoration through the hand of the prophet of God, resemble the doctrinal content of the brass plates more fully than do those of any other Bible.

This is demonstrated further in connection with the Book of Mormon's description of the secret combination entered into by Cain (see Hel. 6:22-30; Ether 8:14-19). From the Joseph Smith Translation it seems clear that this was mentioned originally in the Genesis record of Cain as well as on the brass plates, but is not in our current Bible (see JST, Gen. 5:14-16, 35-37, or Moses 5:29-31, 49-51). Moreover, the prophecies of Joseph of Egypt, as recounted in 2 Ne. 3, are also missing from our King James Version but are presented in the Prophet's translation of Gen. 50. Likewise, the emphasis on Melchizedek given in Alma 13 is borne out-not in the same words but in principle-in Joseph Smith's translation of Gen. 14. Thus, in making his Bible translation the Prophet Joseph Smith was instrumental in restoring many concepts with which the ancient Nephites were acquainted through their having the plates of brass.

It seems to me that we have not begun to appreciate the value of the Joseph Smith Translation, nor have we used it as a textual source as we could. We seem to be too timid, perhaps a little too reluctant, maybe even a little embarrassed when we confront the academic world with a Bible based on revelation from God through a prophet and not certified by a manuscript already accepted by the world. It is as though Joseph Smith, in confronting a monolithic, traditional, learned Goliath, were saying, "You have come armed with ancient manuscript and language and tradition, but I come to you in the name of Israel's God and new revelation."

If the Prophet Joseph Smith were a famous athlete, actor, or race car driver, his opinions would be sought regarding all kinds of things not even close to his expertise-what breakfast cereal would he prefer? which shampoo or shaving cream? and which mouth-wash is most effective? When it comes to gospel truth, revelation, and scripture, Joseph Smith is the greatest prophet in twenty centuries or more, yet we seem to ignore his contributions in the subject of his greatest expertise.

Of course I recognize that the Prophet could have gone through the Book of Mormon and gotten his ideas and then simply inserted them in the Bible without the idea of restoration, but why would any of us want to deny him of his calling as a seer? Why should he not restore, by revelation, the ancient text? In a revelation directed to Sidney Rigdon, the Lord emphasized Joseph Smith's role as revealer and restorer:

And I have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant Joseph; and in weakness have I blessed him;

And I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming, if he abide in me, and if not, another will I plant in his stead.

Wherefore, watch over him that his faith fail not, and it shall be given by the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, that knoweth all things.

And a commandment I give unto thee-that thou shalt write for him; and the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect. (D&C 35:17-20.)

And Moses 1:40-41 affirms that Joseph Smith was to actually restore lost information, even lost text: "And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak. And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men-among as many as shall believe."

It Starts with the Joseph Smith Translation

The train of thought we have been pursuing is also demonstrated on other doctrinal topics. Several major doctrines of the Church were revealed during the process of the Bible translation, such as the age of accountability of children, the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, the role of priesthood quorums and councils, the history of Adam, and so on. It is advantageous to study the chronological sequence in which a particular doctrine was revealed, because then the progressive information unfolds naturally, and the doctrine is easier to understand, since that is the way it was revealed in the first place.

Consider, for example, the book of Revelation. We start with the King James Version. Then we compare the corrections, clarifications, and additions given in the Joseph Smith Translation. That helps considerably. Then we read D&C 77, which was revealed in connection with the Joseph Smith Translation. This section carries the doctrinal enlargement even further. Lastly, we read D&C 88, which is a still further extension.

Another example of this type of relationship concerns the degrees of glory. We begin first with the Bible and the Book of Mormon, both of which make it unmistakably clear that all persons will be resurrected with a physical body (see 1 Cor. 15:21-22; Alma 40:21, 23), never to die again. The Prophet was translating John 5:29 when he received the vision of the three degrees of glory, D&C 76. Later he received D&C 88. Each revelation in its sequence is built upon knowledge given earlier; each has given some new and additional concept not contained in the earlier. Can you see? Revelation is received line upon line-here a little and there a little. Looking at the Joseph Smith Translation in its historical context thus gives us a more comprehensive view of the revelatory process involved in the Restoration.

Specific Ties Between the Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants

Since the relationship between the Doctrine and Covenants and the Joseph Smith Translation, as shown throughout this chapter, highlights better than anything else this revelatory process, let us more specifically identify those areas in which these two works of scripture are related. First, the Doctrine and Covenants contains specific instructions regarding the Bible translation. It records divine directions about when to start the translation, the appointment of scribes, encouragement to continue until completion, and several reminders to publish the translation and use it in teaching. Second, the Doctrine and Covenants presents doctrinal material revealed as a direct result of the Bible translation. Third, the Doctrine and Covenants presents doctrinal material which was obtained first through Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible and was then enlarged upon in the Doctrine and Covenants.

At this stage of my study, I feel I can identify at least 26 verses of the Doctrine and Covenants that are directly associated with the Joseph Smith Translation as regulatory instruction. These are as follows: D&C 9:2; 35:20; 37:1; 41:7; 42:56; 43:12; 45:60; 47:1; 73:3; 90:13; 91:1; 93:53; 94:10; 104:58; and 124:89.

In the second category-doctrinal material revealed as a direct result of the Bible translation-I would list at least the following 141 verses: D&C 76:1-119; 77:1; and 86:1-7.

In the third category, that of material originally revealed in the Joseph Smith Translation and enlarged upon when presented in the Doctrine and Covenants (and this is the more difficult to identify, but is without question a legitimate area), I would list at least the following 200 verses: D&C 45:11-12; 49:21; 68:15; 74:1; 84:6; 88:3, 92-116; 93:1; 107:59; 132:1; and probably many more. I cannot take the time at this writing to relate all the details that point to these conclusions, but in making this assertion I assure you that there is reasonable evidence and that it is not reckless speculation.

Because of our increasing awareness of the role of the Joseph Smith Translation in the development of the Doctrine and Covenants, the 1981 edition of the latter has some mention of the former. For example, the Prophet's work with the Bible translation is mentioned in the historical headnotes to D&C 35, 71, 74, 76, 77, 86, and 91. There are seventeen footnote references at the following verses: D&C 9:2; 35:20; 37:1; 41:7; 42:56; 45:12, 60; 49:21; 73:3; 76:17; 84:14, 24; 93:53; 94:10; 104:58; 107:2; and 124:89. In addition to this material in the Doctrine and Covenants, there are, as you know, 411 verses of the Pearl of Great Price that are excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation.

We now see these connections more clearly, thanks to our being able to examine the dams recorded on the original Joseph Smith Translation manuscript and to the discovery by Robert J. Woodford and others that parts of many of the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were written at earlier dates than the final drafts.

Conclusion

The background of the Joseph Smith Translation is discussed in other chapters of this book as well as in other published sources; therefore, for the purposes of this chapter it has not seemed necessary to recount those preliminary historical details. The focus here has been on relationships, applications, causes, and consequences -what all this means to you and me and to our families and our fellow Latter-day Saints. I have tried to show that the translation of the Bible was a major, mainstream activity in the prophetic life of Joseph Smith, and that the Joseph Smith Translation is a major document not only for biblical study but also for the study of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, Church history and doctrine, and the revelatory process inherent in the events of the Restoration.

Notes

From a lecture given to the faculty in Religious Education at Brigham Young University, 20 February 1987.

1 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 324.

---
Notas:
[^1] How, when, where, why, and by whom was this part of the translation made? The material we know as the book of Moses was revealed as part of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, but it was not at that time called the book of Moses. The original draft of the Old Testament portion of the JST now contained in the book of Moses was made by Joseph Smith and his scribes from June 1830 until February 1831. It is identified as Old Testament #2. (See item 5 below and also note 3 at end of chapter for the identification of Old Testament #1.) The gospel of Jesus Christ, including baptism an d other ordinances, was had from the beginning. The early patriarchs, beginning with Adam, worshipped Jesus and taught his gospel to their children and to the rest of mankind. (See Moses 6:22-23, 48-68.) This fact is almost entirely lacking in all other translations of the Bible available today. History of the Church 1:145.
[^2] By what means did the material get from the original handwritten manuscript into the printed Pearl of Great Price? The original manuscripts make it evident that most of the book of Moses material was revealed in the summer and early fall of 1830, some portions being revealed in November and December 1830 and some in February 1831. Excerpts of this material were published in the Evening and Morning Star from August 1832 to April 1833, and in the Times and Seasons, January 1843. The Holy Ghost was operative among men from the beginning. Some persons have thought that the declaration in the New Testament that the Holy Ghost had not yet come (see John 7:39) means that the Holy Ghost had never been enjoyed by mankind on this earth until the day of Pentecost, as recorded in Acts, chapter 2. However, the book of Moses makes it very clear that the Holy Ghost was operative among people who had the gospel from the very beginning of man on this earth (see Moses 6:52-68; 8:23). What, then, is the meaning of the statement in John 7:39 that the Holy Ghost had not yet come? Simply that the gift of the Holy Ghost had not yet been manifest in the New Testament dispensation. For a detailed description and history of the manuscripts, see Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975). Two LDS researchers and writers deserve special mention for their preliminary, pioneer work relative to the origin of the book of Moses. One of these, James R. Clark, published some interesting and informative information about the early history and printings of the book of Moses in his book, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955). The other, James R. Harris, wrote a master's thesis (Brigham Young University, 1958) on the text of the book of Moses. He correctly postulated the existence of multiple copies of the early manuscripts made at various stages of the translation. Unfortunately neither of these brethren had access to the original manuscripts.
