Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

PART III Spiritual Truths

12 THE KNOWLEDGE THAT SAVES [^1]

The scriptures place a high premium on the acquisition of truth, but they also show that certain kinds of learning matter more than other kinds. In one sense all truth is of the same nature, for "truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24). Jacob, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, declared that "the Spirit speaketh truth" and that, therefore, "it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13). However, not all truths are of the same worth. For instance, if a person happens to be standing six inches from a bare wire carrying two hundred thousand volts of electricity, knowing that truth is far more important to that person at that moment than knowing that Australian white rabbits have pink eyes. By extension we can say that truths that cause persons to change their life-styles are more significant to society than truths that are mere facts.

Those truths of greatest worth are the truths that lead to salvation; and in order for them to be efficacious in our lives, we must view them as eternal realities. We accept Adam and Eve, for example, as real persons who lived, transgressed, and brought about their own fall and the consequent fall of all mankind. If we had a complete record we could mark on the calendar the actual time that the Fall occurred. Likewise, if we had an adequate map, and I expect we will someday, we could mark the exact spot where the Fall occurred. The Fall is just that real and absolute: a real man and a real woman did, at a specific time and location, bring about the Fall, which has affected all of mankind.

In like manner, the birth of Jesus Christ, his miracles, the shedding of his blood in Gethsemane, his death on the cross, and his resurrection from the tomb could be, each one, marked on a calendar and also on a map with perfect accuracy if we but had the detailed information. These are historical facts-absolute truths-not simply philosophical, moral, or so-called "religious" truths; and a knowledge of these and other precious truths is essential to salvation.

However, it seems that the worldly wise, with their systems of philosophy and learning, are always clamoring for our attention. Jacob stoutly denounces trusting in the wisdom and the learning of the world, especially if these prevent a person from coming to a knowledge and acceptance of the gospel, or distract those who already have the gospel. A frequent topic in the Book of Mormon is the antagonism between the learning of the world and the things of God (see, for example, 2 Ne. 26-29; Jacob 4:14). Jacob is not shy in perpetuating the distinction between the two. It is not the worldly learning alone that places a barrier between man and his God; it is also man's pride in his learning-his trusting "in the arm of flesh"-that leaves him ignorant of spiritual things. A specific contribution of the Book of Mormon is that it explains not only what the gospel of Christ is but also what it is not. Hence the Book of Mormon draws a wide distinction between the secular and the spiritual, and it exposes the false concepts so prevalent in the world in the forms of secularism, humanism, materialism, organic evolution, and the like.

Obtaining Truth

But an even more pronounced and significant difference exists between various types or levels of truth than simply their relative importance: Different truths are comprehended by the mind of man in different ways. We perceive most truths that we deal with in mortality through our natural senses, but certain truths necessary to the redemption of our souls we perceive only by revelation through the Holy Ghost. We comprehend these truths not by intellectual activity alone but through spiritual discernment. Such truths are, in the language of the Lord, "great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures" (D&C 89:19). It is as Paul said, "If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost," that is, hidden to those without the Spirit (2 Cor. 4:3).

And again, speaking of spiritual truths, Paul said: "God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. . . . Even so the things of God knoweth no man, except he has the Spirit of God. . . . But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (JST, 1 Cor. 2:10, 11, 14.)

Note that Paul does not say that the natural man simply does not know the things of God; he says the natural man cannot know them. The things of the Spirit are just as real as the things of the earth, but they are in a different sphere, and fallen man's ability to perceive and understand them is so limited that he can comprehend them only by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

This same principle is taught in D&C 76:115-117, wherein is recorded Joseph Smith and Sidney Rig-don's explanation as to why they did not write more about the things they saw in the vision of the three degrees of glory. First, they said, they were forbidden to do so; and second, they explained, "man [is not] capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him; to whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves."

This principle is also illustrated in the Savior's words to Peter. When Jesus asked the Twelve, "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" they replied, "Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets." But when he asked, "Whom say ye that I am?" Peter said, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." Jesus' subsequent response suggests a difference between mortal and divine-secular and spiritual-truth: "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 16:13-17.)

These passages of scripture seem to indicate the existence of a hierarchy of truths and to say that not all truth is available to all persons just for the asking. This stratification of truth may be what the Lord refers to in the following statement: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself" (D&C 93:30). This passage suggests that there are different categories (spheres) of truth and that each is independent of the other. In other words, apparently there are truths common to our mortal, fallen world and other truths peculiar to spiritual things. As we have already seen, there are some areas of truth that the natural man cannot know because he does not have the medium for acquiring them. Spiritual truth is made known only by the Spirit and only to those who believe, repent, and prepare themselves to obtain it.

Gaining the particular knowledge that saves is so important that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (D&C 131:6). Consequently, as the Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge" of these special truths. [^2] The knowledge that a person possesses is fundamental to his thinking and his state of mind. What he doesn't know can't help him. And, contrary to a popular saying, what he doesn't know can hurt him. Even the approach of great danger, if not perceived by an individual, has no effect on the consciousness or emotion of that individual.

Without a knowledge of spiritual things, a person lacks the conviction, the determination, and the direction that this knowledge could give him. We see millions of people in the world today who are unaware and unconcerned about their relationship to God. We read in the third lecture in the Lectures on Faith that without a correct knowledge of God and his attributes, one cannot exercise the degree of faith necessary for life and salvation. [^3] A person cannot have perfect faith in something he knows nothing about. Since this is true, and the scriptures say it is true, all of us are obliged to learn some spiritual truths if we want to be saved in the celestial kingdom. We cannot even have a testimony that Jesus is the Christ except by the revelation of the Holy Ghost. Saving truths are divine, not natural, knowledge.

Since not all truths are of equal value, and since those truths most necessary to salvation are gained only through the Holy Spirit of God, obviously a person stands in jeopardy if he is not gaining those particular truths through that particular Spirit while in this particular life. Job said that the things of God are "past finding out" (Job 9:10), and his "friend" Zophar asked, "Canst thou by searching find out God?" (Job 11:7.) It seems to me the correct answer to Zophar's question is no. The things of God do not yield themselves to searching alone. No one can obtain the things of God except by revelation, and God must reveal himself or remain forever unknown. Jacob wrote: "How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him. . . . And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God." (Jacob 4:8.)

Borrowing the language of Paul from his writings about the different kinds of resurrected bodies and the different degrees of glory (1 Cor. 15:39-44), we could give the following description of the different kinds of truth: All truth is not the same truth, for there is one kind of truth common among men, and another kind that pertains to God. There is also a truth that is gained through the mortal senses, and another that is gained only through the Spirit. There is one kind of truth that comes from God, and another kind that comes from men, for one truth differs from another truth in glory. So also is the truth that is had in the earth. There is a natural truth, and there is a spiritual truth.

But truth of a spiritual nature is different in yet another way. Spiritual truth is not simply bare fact or mere information. The scriptures speak of light and truth as companions. The glory of God, which is his intelligence, is both light and truth, not just truth alone (D&C 93:36). The presence of light in company with knowledge seems to be an essential quality that distinguishes God's truth-the knowledge that saves-from the type of truth that is mere intellectual fact and that even a natural or a wicked man can gain by research and study.

The Miraculous Is Essential to the Gospel

In addition, there has to be a miraculous character to the gospel, or it would be only an earthly philosophy. The ideas, the concepts, the doctrines, the truths thereof must come from a source beyond mortality, or the gospel would be earthbound; it cannot rise above the power and capability of its source. Divine truth comes from the other side of the veil; if this were not so, the gospel could not exceed the knowledge and powers that exist on this side of the veil.

In short, basing our conclusions on the scriptures, we see at least five distinctions between what we call natural, or secular, truth and spiritual truth: (1) spiritual truth is essential for redemption of the soul, but secular truth is only an aid, not a necessity; (2) spiritual truth is perceived only by revelation through the Holy Ghost, Spirit to spirit, whereas natural truth is learned through the five senses; (3) spiritual truth is revealed only to those who seek to obey the commandments of God, whereas secular truth can be gained by anyone, without regard to his or her moral status; (4) spiritual truth does not consist of fact alone but is accompanied by light, whereas secular truth may lack such light; (5) spiritual truth is ultimately more important than any other truth.

Spiritual Learning Should Have Primacy in Mortality

Given the preceding conclusions, we begin to see why it is so important that we stress spiritual learning in our lives. This is not to say that we should oppose secular learning; rather, we should set appropriate priorities. Let us not use up our time on the peripheral concepts; let us focus instead on the unique and basic message of the plan of salvation and the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Those with teaching assignments in the Church have a particular responsibility to ensure that these gospel fundamentals are central to the spiritual learning of those they teach. A statement by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., given on 21 June 1954 at a gathering of seminary and institute faculty, is applicable to all of us at any time:

Only the prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church, the Presiding High Priest, the President of the Church, has the right to receive revelations for the Church or to declare the doctrines of the Church. No other member of the Church has any such right or authority. It is well that we all remember this. It is particularly important that you teachers instructing our youth should keep this constantly in mind. In matters of gospel doctrine there is no such thing as academic freedom in your teaching of youth. You declare the Word of God as written in the scriptures, and as interpreted by his prophet, seer, and revelator. Otherwise there is chaos and apostasy, and we shall follow the route of the primitive, post-Apostolic Church. [^4]

As we consider the high priority that spiritual learning should have in our lives, we would do well to contemplate these words from President Spencer W. Kimball:

The secular knowledge is to be desired; the spiritual knowledge is a necessity. We shall need all of the accumulated secular knowledge in order to create worlds and furnish them, but only through the mysteries of God and these hidden treasures of knowledge may we arrive at the place and condition where we may use that knowledge in creation and exaltation. [^5]

We understand, as few people do, that education is a part of being about our Father's business and that the scriptures contain the master concepts for mankind. [^6]

Peter was said to be ignorant and unlearned, while Nicodemus was, as the Savior said, a master, a trained one, an educated man. And while Nicodemus would in his aging process gradually lose his prestige, his strength, and go to the grave a man of letters without eternal knowledge, Peter would go to his reputed crucifixion the greatest man in all the world, perhaps still lacking considerably in secular knowledge (which he would later acquire), but being preeminent in the greater, more important knowledge of the eternities and God and his creations and their destinies. [^7]

Even in the spirit world after death our spirits can go on learning the more secular things to help us create worlds and become their masters. . . .

Secular knowledge, important as it may be, can never save a soul nor open the celestial kingdom nor create a world nor make a man a god, but it can be most helpful to that man who, placing first things first, has found the way to eternal life and who can now bring into play all knowledge to be his tool and servant. [^8]

Peter and John had little secular learning, being termed ignorant. But Peter and John knew the vital things of life; that God lives and that the crucified, resurrected Lord is the Son of God. They knew the path to eternal life. This they learned in the few decades of their mortal life. This exaltation meant Godhood for them and creation of worlds with eternal increase for which they would probably need, eventually, a total knowledge of the sciences. But this fact escapes many: Peter and John had only decades to learn and do the spiritual but have had already about nineteen centuries in which to learn the secular or the geology of the earth, the zoology and physiology and psychology of the creatures of the earth. But mortality is the time to learn of God and the gospel first and to perform the ordinances, then to learn what can be secured of the secular things. Here are the so-called ignorant Peter and John heirs to exaltation. Accordingly the ignorance the Lord speaks of when he says "One cannot be saved in ignorance" is the lack of knowledge of the really first things-the kingdom of God and his righteousness. [^9]

Thus, the words of the scriptures and of our latter-day prophets indicate that the knowledge of greatest worth to us, and that which we should most earnestly seek to obtain and apply, is the knowledge that saves. The great importance of gaining this knowledge is affirmed in another statement from President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in which he emphasizes that, although all knowledge is useful, highest priority should be given to learning spiritual truths while in mortality: "There is spiritual learning just as there is material learning, and the one without the other is not complete; yet, speaking for myself, if I could have only one sort of learning, that which I would take would be the learning of the spirit, because in the hereafter I shall have opportunity in the eternities which are to come to get the other, and without spiritual learning here my handicaps in the hereafter would be all but overwhelming." [^10]

Since, from an eternal perspective, we have such little time here in mortality, let us heed the counsel of Presidents Clark and Kimball and focus our time and attention on those matters of primary and sacred importance.

Notes

From a manuscript dated 20 June 1988.

6 Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 389.

7 Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 390-91.

8 Spencer W. Kimball, "Beloved Youth, Study and Learn," in Life's Directions (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1962), pp. 179-80.

9 J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in Conference Report, April 1934, p. 94.

---
Notas:
[^1] Spirit Creation Temporal-physical death.
[^2] Physical-Spiritual Creation Spiritual-separation or alienation from things of God.
[^3] The Mortal, Temporal, Fallen World
[^4] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 280, italics in original.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 387.
[^6] The great doctrinal contributions of the book of Moses concerning Adam, Cain, Satan, Enoch, and Noah are of inestimable value to Church members. This material, especially that pertaining to Enoch, constitutes some of the most significant evidence of Joseph Smith's divine calling as a prophet and seer, and should be recognized for what it is-a part of his translation of the Bible. I emphasize the significance of the Enoch material because today apocryphal and archaeological evidences tend to corroborate what Joseph Smith gave us about Enoch. These evidences were not available in Joseph Smith's day. The final draft of the JST of the Old Testament is currently numbered Old Testament #3 and contains many revisions over the earlier Old Testament #2. This manuscript represents Joseph Smith's lattermost revisions of Genesis. The Prophet continued to labor with this manuscript of the translation until his death in 1844.
[^7] The Bernhisel manuscript does not represent the same text as the 1851 Pearl of Great Price because the former has the later revisions of Old Testament #3. Neither was the Bernhisel manuscript the source for the Moses material in any later edition of the Pearl of Great Price, for it does not have the Enoch material of Moses 7, nor the material of Matt. 24, and it contains only excerpts from the original JST manuscript.
[^8] The printed JST of 1867 published by the RLDS church represents the lattermost revisions by Joseph Smith and a few interesting modifications by the RLDS publishing committee. These modifications also appear in the 1878 LDS edition of the Pearl of Great Price, as prepared by Elder Orson Pratt.
[^9] In 1878 Elder Orson Pratt revised the Pearl of Great Price in Salt Lake City. He used the 1867 RLDS printed JST as the source for an updating and enlargement of the Moses material. This edition of the Pearl of Great Price became a standard work in 1880.
[^10] In 1902 another revised edition of the Pearl of Great Price was published in Salt Lake City. It was the work of Elder James E. Talmage, who was under the direction of the First Presidency. Although some parts of the Pearl of Great Price were greatly altered from earlier editions, it retained practically the same text of Moses as the 1878 edition. Chapters, verses, and cross-references were supplied. A later 1921 edition contained a change in format but not in text.
