Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

14 THE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION [^1]

The doctrine of the resurrection from the dead-the doctrine that these very bodies in which we now reside will die and then be renewed to everlasting life-is a fundamental part of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I believe it is important and necessary to our faith that we understand what the scriptures say about it. And since one of the purposes of latter-day scripture is to clarify and bear witness to the central doctrines of the gospel, we shouldn't be surprised to find that the doctrine of the resurrection is clearly, repeatedly, and accurately taught in the first book of latter-day scripture published in this dispensation, namely, the Book of Mormon.

Anyone who has ever stood at the casket of a departed loved one, or who has visited the cemetery where a parent, child, husband, wife, or close friend is buried, has felt the heavy hand of death that is laid on all mankind because of the fall of Adam. Those who have had such experiences and who are also believers in the gospel of Jesus Christ undoubtedly have sensed the importance of the doctrine that every person, with no exceptions, who dies will rise from the dead with the same body and will continue with that body forever, never to die, grow old, or suffer physical pain again.

The Resurrection Taught in the Old Testament

The idea of a resurrection from the dead, that a dead body can be revived and restored to active, vibrant, healthy, and complete wholeness, is taught in all of the standard works. It is not as prominent in the Old Testament today as it once was, but we may rest assured that the ancient prophets of the Old Testament knew the doctrine and taught it plainly -it has simply been lost in the transmission from ancient times to our day. Apparently, most of the plainness about the resurrection has been deliberately taken out of the Old Testament.

In the King James Version of the Bible we read Job's testimony: "I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." Job then prophesies of his own resurrection as follows: "And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me." (Job 19:25-27.) Some modern translations render Job's words thus: "Without my flesh shall I see God," or, in other words, "I do not need this body." This is not the same testimony of the resurrection found in the King James Bible. The modern versions change Job's testimony of the resurrection to a denial of it.

In Isa. 26:19 we find a clear prophetic declaration concerning the resurrection: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead."

In the book of Ezekiel we read of that prophet's vision of the valley of dry bones. He saw that "the bones came together, bone to his bone," along with the sinews, flesh, skin, and breath, so that these persons lived again and stood upon their feet. The Lord then directed Ezekiel to say to the house of Israel: "Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves. . . . and shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live." (Ezek. 37:1-14.)

To those of us who already believe and have a testimony that there will be a resurrection of the physical bodies of all mankind, these Old Testament scriptures seem clear enough. But that is because we have been tutored and taught by the clarity of latter-day revelation and by the Holy Ghost. Therefore, when we read these Old Testament scriptures we understand their doctrinal meaning. But many of our Christian and Jewish friends, who do not have the benefit of latter-day revelation and who do not enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost, interpret these Old Testament verses differently. They see them as figurative, or allegorical, expressions or as some-thing-anything-other than literal, plain-spoken declarations about a physical resurrection of the corporeal bodies of mankind. Many present-day Christians are not even sure that Jesus himself was resurrected with his physical body, and most of those who may believe Jesus had a physical resurrected body do not believe he still has that body today.

As Latter-day Saints we are a highly favored people in that we have not only all that the Bible has to say about the resurrection but also the additional, more detailed, and more specific testimonies from the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, the Joseph Smith Translation, and the teachings of the latter-day prophets, particularly those of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The Resurrection Taught in the New Testament

It is hard for the worldly-minded and those untutored in the things of the Spirit to believe that dead persons will be revived and come back to life. They think such a thing is "unreasonable" and fantastical. When Paul spoke to the philosophers on Mars' hill near the city of Athens, he had a very intellectual audience who worshipped "the Unknown God." These people often came together and "spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing" (Acts 17:21). Paul proceeded to preach Jesus and the resurrection and told them:["[God] hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised [Jesus] from the dead. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter." (Acts 17:31-32.)

Several years later during a hearing before King Agrippa and the Roman governor Festus, Paul encountered the same kind of worldly opposition to the resurrection. Paul praised Agrippa because, as Paul stated, "I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently." In the course of his subsequent oration, Paul said to the king: "Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?" (Acts 26:3, 8.)

Paul proceeded to tell of his conversion and of his being visited by Jesus Christ on the road to Damascus (several years after the Crucifixion), and he testified that Jesus was raised from the dead. At this point, as Paul testified of the resurrection, Festus interrupted him and "said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad" (Acts 26:24).

As the above passages illustrate, the doctrine of the resurrection, concerning which the prophets have taught and testified, is simply not congruent with the learning and the philosophies of the world. The resurrection is something to which the world cannot relate empirically; it has to be understood by faith and by the Holy Ghost. Consequently it is not readily accepted or believed in the world. Paul's magnificent statement about the resurrection recorded in 1 Cor. 15 apparently was written to convince the intellectuals of his day, those who trusted in reason, that the resurrection was logical, scriptural, and necessary. He said that his knowledge of the resurrection came by revelation but that the doctrine was reasonable even so. The testimony of the scriptures and of the Holy Spirit is that the resurrection of Jesus, and eventually of all mankind, is literal, historical, and factual truth. It really did happen to Jesus, it has already happened to many, and it will yet happen to many more. Everyone who has lived upon this earth is destined to come forth in the resurrection.

As we read the New Testament Gospels, we find that even the Apostles had difficulty at first believing in the resurrection of Jesus. He had told them it would occur three days (or upon the third day) after his death, but they were so close to the scene that it hardly seemed real to them. Believing things at a distance seems easier than believing those that are close at hand. Luke's account tells us that when the women found the stone rolled away from the tomb and the body of Jesus gone, "they were much perplexed." At that point they were told by two angels that Jesus had risen from the dead. Then (and not till then) did they remember that Jesus had told them that he would rise from the dead on the third day. The women hurried off and told these things to the eleven Apostles and others, but "their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not." (Luke 24:1-11.)

Later that same day, Jesus personally appeared to the Apostles, and they thought he was a spirit. So he said to them: "Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his feet." (Luke 24:38-40.)

There can be no doubt that at this point the Apostles could perceive that Jesus had been resurrected with a body of flesh and bones. They saw him; they touched him. Yet the next verse states: "And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?" They then watched him eat food. (Luke 24:41-43.) It was hard for them to realize just what the reality was. They wanted to believe it, but it was difficult to do so.

Resurrection from the dead is miraculous; it seems unnatural in our mortal world. But it is a basic and fundamental doctrine of the gospel. It is one of the first principles of the gospel. Teaching the doctrine of the resurrection is as important as teaching faith, repentance, or baptism. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "The Doctrines of the Resurrection of the Dead and the Eternal Judgment are necessary to preach among the first principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ." [^2] It is easy to see why this doctrine should be taught: The knowledge of a personal resurrection and of a personal judgment make faith, repentance, baptism, and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost very important in our preparing for those great and inevitable events.

The Prophet Joseph stated that the resurrection of Jesus Christ is the center point of our hope for future happiness and that Jesus, having been resurrected himself, has the power to bring all people out of their graves to stand before him in judgment. [^3]

With What Body Are the Dead Raised?

As mentioned earlier, 1 Cor. 15 contains Paul's remarkable exposition on the resurrection, and much could be said concerning his great statement. However, for the moment I would like to focus on a particular verse from that chapter: "But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come?" (v. 35.) During the remainder of the chapter Paul answers these two questions, launching into a discussion of the degrees of glory and referring to the resurrected body as a "spiritual body" (1 Cor. 15:44). The word spiritual is used here to describe a condition. A resurrected body is a physical body in a spiritual conditions, as contrasted to a mortal body which is also physical but is not in a spiritual condition: mortal bodies are subject to death and con-rain blood, but resurrected bodies will never die again and are, as President Joseph Fielding Smith explained, "quickened by the spirit and not the blood. [^4]

The word spiritual is used in this same sense in a modern revelation that speaks of' the physical resurrection: For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body. They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened." (DSC 88:27-28; see also Alma 11:45,

With what body are the dead raised, then? They are raised with spiritual bodies, each person receiving in the resurrection "the same body which was a natural body."

These concepts were topics of discussion among the early Brethren in Nauvoo, particularly the question as to whether a person received his same bodily elements in the resurrection. Elder Orson Pratt observed that a man's body is constantly changing, losing old cells and producing new ones, and in the course of seven years a complete change takes place. This would seem to complicate the idea of a literal resurrection in which a person would receive his own bodily elements.

In a conference session on 7 April 1843. the Prophet responded to these observations. Tile report of the conference reads as follows:

To a remark of Elder Orson Pratt's, that a man's body changes every seven years, President Joseph Smith replied: There is no fundamental principle belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in Ibis world or in the world to come; I care not what the theories of men are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up. and he has the power to do it. If any, one supposes that any part of our bodies, that is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is mistaken. [^5]

We have only scant background on the situation that prompted the Prophet's public statement on the mailer. However, thirty-one years later Elder Pratt gave a lecture in Ogden, Utah, in which he discoursed at length on matters pertaining to the resurrection, including the theory that a man's body changes every seven years, and it is clear that Elder Pratt's conclusions at this lime were in harmony with the Prophet Joseph's statement. [^6]

In discussing the Prophet Joseph's statement about the "fundamental parts," Elder Harold B. Lee cited the following explanation from a physician named Joseph S. Amussen:

We have bottles that are composed of bone, muscle, fat, blood, lymph, nerves and tissues. In all these tissues there is a building up and breaking down of complex chemical compounds. These substances are made into tissues, They give form and beauty to the body, and also supply energy. They are derived from the elements in food, drink and air.

These are not the fundamental parts of file body, however, for they are used and then discarded, and new substances come to take their place. This is not true of the fundamental parts. They never change. A person may fast for a certain period of time, and become very emaciated, "lose flesh" we say. People may live on their own tissues until they become almost "skin and bone," yet they live and can, when fed again, regain their former form and weight. During the fast, the fundamental parts of the body are not lost, but only the tissues that are taken into the body temporarily. [^7]

It would be helpful if we had a more extensive explanation from the Prophet Joseph on what he meant by "fundamental parts." I have interpreted this to mean that there is something in each cell of a person's body that is uniquely the property of the owner of the body; hence, no matter what I eat, nothing else's fundamental parts ever become my fundamental parts, and no matter what becomes of my body, my fundamental parts never become the fundamental parts of any other living organism.

Consider this "fundamental parts" concept and how it may relate to things such as baby teeth, fingernails, toenails, whiskers, hair, or anything else we may lose or cut off throughout a lifetime. Obviously we don't want all those pieces of our bodies back; we don't want to end up with four-foot fingernails and so on. But whatever it is in the last joint of my fingers and toes that can produce a nail, I want back; and whatever it was on the top of my head that can produce hair, I want that fundamental part back, in good working order.

Each person obtains his own body in his mother's womb, and that body is precisely and exclusively his: there is something about that body that is his sole ownership not only now but also through all eternity. To be denied a body-as is the case with Lucifer-is everlasting damnation; or, in other words, if there were no resurrection, our fate would be everlasting damnation. In terms of eternity, we have barely begun to appreciate our mothers and what birth into mortality means to us.

President Brigham Young also spoke of these matters, and his remarks are in complete agreement with the teachings of the Prophet Joseph:

The question may be asked, do not the particles that compose man's body, when returned to mother earth, go to make or compose other bodies? No, they do not. . . . Neither can the particles which have comprised the body of man become parts of the bodies of other men, or of beasts, fowls, fish, insect, or vegetables. They are governed by divine law and though they may pass from the knowledge of the scientific world, that divine law still holds, governs and controlls them. Man's body may be buried in the ocean, it may be eaten by wild beasts, or it may be burned to ashes, they may be scattered to the four winds, yet the particles of which it is composed will not be incorporated into any form of vegetable or animal life, to become a component part of their structure. . . . at the sound of the trumpet of God every particle of our physical structures necessary to make our tabernacles perfect will be assembled, to be rejoined with the spirit, every man in his order. Not one particle will be lost. [^8]

On an earlier occasion, President Young similarly testified. "The very particles that compose our bodies will be brought forth in the morning of the resurrection." [^9] And, in an 1876 funeral sermon, Elder John Taylor stated: "All must come forth from the grave, some time or other, in the self-same tabernacles that they possessed while living on the earth." [^10]

By way of a concluding statement on these matters, let us consider these words from President Joseph F. Smith:

What a glorious thought it is . . . that those from whom we have to part here, we will meet again and see as they are. We will meet the same identical being that we associated with here in the flesh-not some other soul, some other being, or the same being in some other form, but the same identity and the same form and likeness, the same person we knew and were associated with in our mortal existence, even to the wounds in the flesh. Not that a person will always be marred by scars, wounds, deformities, defects or infirmities, for these will be removed in their course, in their proper time, according to the merciful providence of God. Deformity will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall attain to the perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God designed in the beginning. [^11]

We note here that President Smith's statement that the body's scars, wounds, and deformities are still present at the moment of resurrection is a strong argument in favor of the concept that the dead are raised with the very same bodies they had in mortality. Such wounds and scars would not be present if resurrected bodies were fashioned from new materials.

The Book of Mormon a Witness for the Resurrection

Let us now turn to the Book of Mormon to see what it says about the important and interesting subject of the resurrection. If we want to read the account of Jesus' death and resurrection, we go to the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. But if we want to know why the death and resurrection of Jesus are so important and how those things apply to you and to me, we go to the Book of Mormon.

We should expect the Book of Mormon to teach much about the resurrection, because the very purpose and mission of the Book of Mormon is to testify of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the everlasting gospel. It could not be a witness for Christ if it did not teach the doctrine of the resurrection.

Five thousand years ago the Lord revealed to the prophet Enoch what the fundamental and basic content of the Book of Mormon would be. He did not mention history, or culture, or geography. He mentioned one thing: The book would testify of Jesus Christ's resurrection and the resurrection of all mankind. Recorded in the book of Moses, this statement about the Book of Mormon is part of the Lord's description of latter-day events preceding the Second Coming: "And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City . . . and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem" (Moses 7:62).

The doctrine of the resurrection is taught by every major prophet in the Book of Mormon. Some form of the word resurrection occurs 83 times in the book, and variations of the phrase "rise from the dead" occur several times also. The word resurrection comes from the root words re and surge. It is a resurgence, and means to get up again, an "uprising." Note the similarity to the word insurrection, which is a political "uprising."

Lehi, Jacob, and Benjamin on the Resurrection

In examining what the Book of Mormon teaches us about the doctrine of the resurrection, we begin with father Lehi's discourse recorded in 2 Ne. 2. This discourse is actually a blessing Lehi gave to his son Jacob. Speaking of the mission and sacrifice of the Messiah, Lehi states: "Wherefore, how great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise" (2 Ne. 2:8).

Note that Lehi says Jesus is the "first that should rise" in the resurrection. There are accounts in the scriptures of persons who were brought back to life before Jesus' resurrection, but these people were restored to mortality only. Elijah healed a boy, as did Elisha, and Jesus raised from the dead at least three people: the son of the widow of Nain, Jairus' twelve-year-old daughter, and Lazarus. But these were not resurrections in the real sense. All of these people certainly died again. Jesus was the first to rise from the dead with an immortal body.

In the Book of Mormon record, father Lehi continues to explain that at the time of creation there was no death and that, had there been no fall, all things that were created would have continued forever and had no end (2 Ne. 2:22). The fall of Adam introduced sin and death. Lehi then declares that the Messiah would come to "redeem the children of men from the fall" (2 Ne. 2:26). Lehi shows the close relationship between the Fall and the Atonement.

Later, as recorded in 2 Ne. 9, Jacob had become a prophet and who was destined to be one of the greatest doctrinal teachers of the Book of Mormon-explains in considerable detail about the need for a resurrection. First, he testifies of the reality of the resurrection: "For I know that ye have searched much, many of you, to know of things to come; wherefore I know that ye know that our flesh must waste away and die; nevertheless, in our bodies we shall see God" (2 Ne. 9:4). Note that the language here is similar to that of Job's testimony. The Book of Mormon thus seems to confirm that the Job passage is accurate as it appears in the King James Version.

Next, Jacob states specifically why there is a need for a power of resurrection:

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement-save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. (2 Ne. 9:6-9.)

The Fall brought upon all mankind not only a physical death but also a spiritual death. This second type of death meant that the spirit was separated from God and could not return to his presence. Thus, without the atonement of Christ, because of the Fall the physical bodies of all people would "rot" and "crumble" to the earth and their spirits would become devils. The atonement of Jesus Christ automatically redeems all people from both of these deaths that came upon them because of Adam, and brings them back into the presence of God for the Judgment (see Hel. 14:15-18; Morm. 9:13).

Continuing, Jacob describes death as an awful monster:

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect.

Wherefore, we shall have a perfect knowledge of all our guilt, and our uncleanness, and our nakedness; and the righteous shall have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment, and their righteousness, being clothed with purity, yea, even with the robe of righteousness.

And it shall come to pass that when all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel; and then cometh the judgment, and then must they be judged according to the holy judgment of God. (2 Ne. 9:10-15.)

These words clearly establish the physical resurrection of all mankind, of everyone who belongs to the family of Adam. The resurrection is as broad as the Fall, "for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22).

Another valuable source of information about the resurrection is Mosiah 3. In this chapter King Benjamin teaches the doctrine he said an angel had taught him. After telling of the divinity of Jesus Christ, the Lord Omnipotent who would "come down from heaven," Benjamin explains that Jesus would suffer and bleed at every pore and that he would be taken by men and be crucified. Benjamin then testifies that Jesus "shall rise the third day from the dead; and behold, he standeth to judge the world." (Mosiah 3:2-10.)

Abinadi on the Resurrection

Later in the Book of Mormon record, Abinadi the prophet testifies of the resurrection of Jesus and of all mankind. He points out that the Messiah who will come to atone for man's sins is none other than God himself-the creator of the world. Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, and Benjamin teach this concept also (see 1 Ne. 19:7-10; 2 Ne. 9:5; Mosiah 3 ), but Abinadi seems to drive it home even more thoroughly.

Abinadi says that the redemption will be made by God himself. He also says that God will bring to pass the resurrection of the dead.

For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began-have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?

Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?

Yea, and have they not said also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that he, himself, should be oppressed and afflicted? (Mosiah 13:33-35.)

These words are reminiscent of those found in the book of Isaiah, quoted earlier in this chapter: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise" (Isa. 26:19).

Further on in the account, Abinadi testifies:

But behold, the bands of death shall be broken, and the Son reigneth, and hath power over the dead; therefore, he bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead.

And there cometh a resurrection, even a first resurrection; yea, even a resurrection of those that have been, and who are, and who shall be, even until the resurrection of Christ-for so shall he be called.

And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God, shall come forth in the first resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection. (Mosiah 15:20-22.)

Then, near the end of his oration, Abinadi explains:

And now if Christ had not come into the world, speaking of things to come as though they had already come, there could have been no redemption.

And if Christ had not risen from the dead, or have broken the bands of death that the grave should have no victory, and that death should have no sting, there could have been no resurrection.

But there is a resurrection, therefore the grave hath no victory, and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ.

He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death.

Even this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruption shall put on incorruption, and shall be brought to stand before the bar of God, to be judged of him according to their works whether they be good or whether they be evil. (Mosiah 16:6-10.)

For this plain talk and for calling the people to repentance, Abinadi was taken and bound by the wicked priests of Noah, who caused this valiant prophet to suffer death by fire.

Amulek on the Resurrection

In the book of Alma we find the prophet Amulek's teachings on the resurrection, some of which are among the clearest Book of Mormon statements on this doctrine. In speaking of the Son of God, Amulek says:

And he shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else.

Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death.

The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil.

Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption. (Alma 11:40-45, italics added.)

Note particularly that Amulek says everyone, with no exceptions, will be resurrected. Then he explains that the resurrection means that the spirit and the body are reunited. He also says that when thus joined, the spirit and the body will never be separated again. Resurrected beings do not die again. They are not reincarnated. The question often arises, Is Jesus the Savior of other worlds? The answer is yes. Did he suffer and die and resurrect on those other worlds? The answer is no. A resurrected being's spirit and body cannot be separated ever again-as the scriptural passage above specifies. Will the sons of perdition be resurrected? Yes. Will they die again? According to this passage of scripture, no.

Aaron on the Resurrection

Later in the book of Alma, Aaron, son of Mosiah, teaches the plan of redemption to the king of the Lamanites, and explains about the fall of Adam, the atonement of Christ, and the resurrection from the dead:

And Aaron did expound unto him the scriptures from the creation of Adam, laying the fall of man before him, and their carnal state and also the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all whosoever would believe on his name.

And since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance, and so forth; and that he breaketh the bands of death, that the grave shall have no victory, and that the sting of death should be swallowed up in the hopes of glory; and Aaron did expound all these things unto the king. (Alma 22:13-14.)

Alma on the Resurrection

Further on in the book of Alma, Alma himself teaches the doctrine of the resurrection to his son Corianton in these words:

Behold, there is a time appointed that all shall come forth from the dead. Now when this time cometh no one knows; but God knoweth the time which is appointed.

Now, whether there shall be one time, or a second time, or a third time, that men shall come forth from the dead, it mattereth not; for God knoweth all these things; and it sufficeth me to know that this is the case-that there is a time appointed that all shall rise from the dead.

Now there must needs be a space betwixt the time of death and the time of the resurrection.

And now I would inquire what becometh of the souls of men from this time of death to the time appointed for the resurrection?

Now whether there is more than one time appointed for men to rise it mattereth not; for all do not die at once, and this mattereth not; all is as one day with God, and time only is measured unto men.

Therefore, there is a time appointed unto men that they shall rise from the dead; and there is a space between the time of death and the resurrection. And now, concerning this space of time, what becometh of the souls of men is the thing which I have inquired diligently of the Lord to know; and this is the thing of which I do know.

And when the time cometh when all shall rise, then shall they know that God knoweth all the times which are appointed unto man. (Alma 40:4-10.)

Alma says he does not know all of the details, but he makes it clear that there will be a resurrection of all mankind sooner or later. He speaks of the resurrection as a kind of restoration: "The soul [spirit] shall be restored to the body, . . . every limb and joint" and every hair. All things shall be "restored to their proper and perfect frame." (Alma 40:23.)

Alma also explains the relationship of the Fall and the Atonement and the resurrection as follows:

And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence.

And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also. . . .

. . . And mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice. (Alma 42:14-15, 23.)

We should note here that, although many scriptures make it clear that the resurrection involves both the body and the spirit, the teachings of Jacob, Amulek, and Alma focus our attention more fully upon the fact that the resurrection is absolutely essential to both the body and the spirit, that neither the body nor the spirit could be saved without the other. These prophets tell us that the resurrection is as much a benefit to the spirit as it is to the body. This fact gives more depth to our understanding of such passages as D&C 45:17 and 138:50, wherein the thought is expressed that after death the spirit looks upon the absence of its body as a type of bondage. Likewise we learn from D&C 93:33-34 that a fulness of joy can be obtained only when the spirit and the body are joined inseparably.

In a related vein, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught:

We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment. He is pleased when he can obtain the tabernacle of man, and when cast out by the Savior he asked to go into the herd of swine, showing that he would prefer a swine's body to having none. [^12]

Perhaps there are principles here that few men have thought of. No person can have this salvation except through a tabernacle.

Now, in this world, mankind are naturally selfish, ambitious and striving to excel one above another; yet some are willing to build up others as well as themselves. So in the other world there are a variety of spirits. Some seek to excel. And this was the case with Lucifer when he fell. He sought for things which were unlawful. Hence he was sent down, and it is said he drew many away with him; and the greatness of his punishment is that he shall not have a tabernacle. This is his punishment. [^13]

We should also note at this point in our discussion that Alma and several Book of Mormon prophets frequently speak of a divine plan, and it is known among them by such names as the plan of salvation, the plan of redemption, the great plan, and the plan of mercy. These prophets see the plan of salvation as a unified and functional whole. To them, the Creation, the Fall, the Atonement, the Resurrection, and the Judgment are each part of the foreordained plan of God rather than isolated, separate, independent, and unrelated occurrences. Hence, the Book of Mormon prophets consider all of these events under such umbrella terms as redemption or salvation. Perhaps that is why Nephi, Lehi, Benjamin, and others do not feel a need to specify certain details, since when they speak of atonement or redemption they mean to convey all that those terms include.

Unmistakable Evidence of Christ's Resurrection

The greatest record establishing that Jesus literally received his body from the grave is found in chapter 11 of 3 Nephi, which recounts how Jesus Christ came to the land Bountiful on the American continent, showed his body to the gathered multitude, and let them feel with their hands that his body was tangible and real. In the early part of this chapter, the record states that the people-hearing a voice from heaven declaring that Jesus was the Father's Beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased-looked up toward the heavens,

and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they thought it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world.

And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come.

And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying:

Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him. (3 Ne. 11:8-17.)

Later during this visit, Jesus announced to the Nephites that he was going also to the lost tribes of Israel to show them his body (3 Ne. 17:4). No doubt an experience similar to that recorded in 3 Nephi, with people touching the wounds in the Savior's body, will be found in the yet-to-be-obtained records of the lost tribes.

Summary and Conclusion

Although all the standard works testify of the reality of the resurrection, nowhere is this doctrine more clearly or more forcefully taught than in the Book of Mormon. What does the Book of Mormon say about the resurrection? At least the following:

his prophecy was recorded at Jesus' special request.

As mentioned earlier, the Lord revealed to Enoch that a basic purpose of the record we call the Book of Mormon would be to testify of the resurrection of Christ and the resurrection of all mankind. Thus, the grand declaration that Jesus Christ is a God, that he has redeemed mankind from the fall of Adam, that he rose from the tomb, and that he brought about a physical resurrection of all mankind is profusely taught in the Book of Mormon. The Doctrine and Covenants and the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith offer further refinements and clarifications about the resurrection, but the Book of Mormon presents the fundamental message of the resurrection so plainly that anyone who wants to know the doctrinal basics of this subject can learn them well from that source.

Notes

From an address presented at a Book of Mormon symposium sponsored by the Division of Continuing Education, Brigham Young University, May 1989, and a lecture given to the faculty in Religious Education at Brigham Young University, 16 February 1990.

1 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 149.

2 See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 62.

3 Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:284.

4 History of the Church 5:339.

5 See Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses 16:353-68. Hereafter cited as JD.

6 As cited in Harold B. Lee, Youth and the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 183; the source for the quote from Joseph S. Amussen is the Improvement Era 30 (June 1927): 703-4.

7 Brigham Young, "The Resurrection," 1875 discourse printed in the Elders' Journal 1 (July 1904): 153.

9 John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses 18:333.

10 Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939), p. 23.

11 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 181.

12 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 297.

---
Notas:
[^1] The resurrection is needed because of the fall of Adam, which brought both temporal and spiritual death. Death is an "awful monster," but the resurrection redeems all people from that monster by bringing all mankind out of the grave and back into the presence of God.
[^2] Without the atonement of Christ there would be no resurrection. Jesus had power over death because he was more than a mortal man. He was a God in his flesh as well as in his spirit.
[^3] Resurrection means the reuniting of the spirit and the physical body on a permanent basis.
[^4] The resurrection pertains to more than the physical body. It involves the redemption of the spirit as well. Without the resurrection no one could return to the presence of God, and all persons would become devils.
[^5] Jesus was the first to rise in the resurrection.
[^6] All mankind will be resurrected.
[^7] Not all will be resurrected at the same time. The righteous come forth before the wicked, and those (of the righteous) who lived before Christ come forth before those (of the righteous) who live after Christ.
[^8] There is a period of waiting between the time of death and the time of resurrection. During this period the spirit is in paradise or in darkness, meaning spirit prison. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 8:28.
[^9] The Creation, the Fall, death, the Atonement, the resurrection, and the Judgment are all necessary and are all part of a divine, merciful, and eternal plan of God. Rather than speaking of these events as independent and unrelated, the Book of Mormon ties all of them together. The resurrection is shown to be a necessary part of the plan of redemption.
[^10] Resurrected bodies are tangible and solid, and can be felt and handled by mortal men.
[^11] After his resurrection Jesus Christ personally appeared to a multitude of about twenty-five hundred people on the American continent and invited them to feel his hands, feet, and side. The people did so and knew for a surety that he was the God of Israel, who had been slain and had risen again.
[^12] After the resurrection of Jesus occurred, in America many deceased Saints rose from their graves and appeared to many. Samuel prophesied concerning these events, and the fulfillment of
[^13] Resurrected beings never die again.
