Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

PART IV The Savior

15 JESUS THE MASTER TEACHER [^1]

There is no doubt that Jesus is the greatest teacher and the greatest example the world has ever known. This is because he is the greatest being that has lived on this earth. He was literally a God living among mortal men. He is the very creator of the planet on which we live, the creator of the stars we see in the heavens. He is the firstborn Son of God in the spirit, the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. He atoned for Adam's fall and for our own sins. He is our only Savior and the final judge of mankind.

An idea put forth by Earl V. Pullias of the University of Southern California has become popular among several modern educators. He said, "One can be no greater as a teacher than he is as a person." [^2] President Harold B. Lee expressed a corollary to this: "You cannot lift another soul until you are standing on higher ground than he is . . . . You cannot light a fire in another soul unless it is burning in your own soul. You teachers, the testimony that you bear, the spirit with which you teach and with which you lead, is one of the most important assets that you can have, as you help to strengthen those who need so much, wherein you have so much to give." [^3] Jesus is the greatest of all teachers because he is the greatest of all persons. He stood on the higher ground and excelled in every way.

Jesus was not simply a dispenser of information. He was an inspirer and mover of men. To the meek, the humble, and the repentant he was always a friend. To the proud and the haughty he was a disturbing influence. In debate he was superb. No one could refute his argument; no one could fail to see the force of his message. There were times when no enemy dared question him any further. He was strong in his assertions and declarations. Had Jesus been a mere "pushover," the Jewish leaders never would have viewed him as a threat to their system. Finally, since they could not silence him, they plotted to remove him from the scene altogether.

Factors Necessary for Great Teaching to Occur

It seems to me that in order for great teaching to occur-teaching that may approach, in some small degree, the caliber of the Savior's-certain things have to take place. I can think of at least five.

First, teachers must have something important to teach. In the case of teachers in the Church, that something is the gospel of Jesus Christ; it is the most important subject matter in the world. Gospel teachers are engaged in the most important work possible, for their teaching could have a more lasting effect, change more people's lives, and do more good in the world than national political conventions or summit conferences.

Second, teachers ought to be excited about what they are teaching. They must understand the importance of and feel a purpose for the instruction. If they don't feel the need for teaching a particular subject, they won't be very enthusiastic and might, by their neglect, give a negative impression about the subject.

Third, teachers must have somebody to whom they can give the message.

Fourth, teachers must have an effective way of communicating. This area includes such things as a teacher's vocabulary, methods, and use of examples, objects, models, and audiovisual aids. It also includes a teacher's ability to recognize the opportune time for teaching and to give the proper level of instruction, all based on the readiness of the learner. The material must be appropriate for the occasion, and it should be conveyed in so plain a manner that no one can misunderstand. Gospel instructors must teach by the Spirit so that they not only inform but also inspire; when they testify of the truth of what they have taught, their words go into the hearts of their listeners and not just the heads.

Fifth, teachers, especially gospel teachers, must have a desire to improve, to grow in knowledge and in skill, so as to become more effective.

Gospel teachers who desire to be most effective in all of the above areas, as well as gospel students who desire to better understand the Master and his message, will find it helpful to consider Jesus' example as the Master Teacher. Using the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John-which are testimonies about Jesus-let us look at some of the events in Jesus' mortal ministry and see what we can learn about him as a teacher. We will supplement the Gospel accounts with latter-day scriptures, which provide a clearer understanding of the Savior and his mission. The Joseph Smith Translation, for instance, makes Jesus a more vivid figure than is the case in other Bible versions.

Jesus' Teaching Was an Organized Plan

Jesus came to earth to accomplish several major tasks (see the accompanying chart). Thus, to Jesus teaching was not an end in itself; it was a way of accomplishing his purposes. Teaching was a means to advance the gospel and to establish the kingdom of God on the earth.

The record of Jesus' ministry shows that he followed an organized plan. During the first year, he taught the multitudes, most of whom had already been introduced to the gospel by John the Baptist. From among the many who followed Him, Jesus chose those whom he would make his leaders. After calling the Twelve and the Seventy, his efforts were directed less toward preaching to the masses and more toward training these new officers. The Sermon on the Mount, for example, was given primarily to the disciples, at a missionary preparation meeting, and not so much as a public discourse. Jesus soon sent the Twelve and the Seventy on missions. This gave them valuable experience at a time when Jesus was still on earth to counsel them. To properly train the teachers was of prime importance in building the kingdom, and Jesus tended to it personally. No doubt the missionary practices of the early Church were patterned after the methods that Jesus taught and demonstrated to his disciples. The Savior spent the last two years of his ministry training those who would be the leaders in the Church. The last week of his mortal life he spent instructing the Twelve and testifying boldly against the dealings of the Jewish religious leaders. His entire ministry was orderly and purposeful, directed toward accomplishing his mission on the earth.

Jesus' Teaching Methods

In making a list of Jesus' teaching methods I came to realize that his methods were adapted to the particular need of the occasion (see section entitled "Jesus' Teaching Methods" in the accompanying chart). [^4] Our basic source for information on how Jesus taught is the text of the four Gospels; and while they are effective testimonies, they are not complete biographies and therefore often lack supporting details. For instance, we all know that without uttering a word a person can communicate much through his facial expression, a raised eyebrow, a wink, a gesture, a movement of the body, and so forth. Generally these types of communication, any of which the Savior might have employed, go unrecorded and therefore unperceived in the sacred record. I recall, however, a passage in the Gospel of Mark that says that Jesus "looked round about on them [the Pharisees] with anger" (Mark 3:5). In the Book of Mormon account of the Savior's visit to the American continent, we read that Jesus "did smile upon" the people (3 Ne. 19:25, 30). In each of these instances, the Lord's countenance conveyed a message in addition to any words spoken.

We cannot avoid wondering how many more times the Savior enhanced a teaching situation with a glance, a step forward, a raised hand, a louder or softer tone of voice, an inflection or emphasis on a word, a rapidly spoken phrase, a long silent pause, a quick retort, and so on. Undoubtedly Jesus' entire personality-all that he was physically, mentally, spiritually, and emotionally-served to convey the particular teaching of the moment. As was the case with Jesus, the live teacher can be the most effective audiovisual aid there is.

Let us now examine in some detail some of the teaching methods used by Jesus, those methods that can be gleaned from the scriptural record.

Simple Declarations, the Use of Miracles, and the Surprise Element

Jesus repeatedly turned ordinary events into teaching experiences. Often, perhaps most often, Jesus said simply and straightforwardly what he meant. The Sermon on the Mount seems to be a good example of that. Some who heard the sermon were "astonished" with the forthrightness of it, for he spoke "as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the scribes" (JST, Matt. 7:36-37). Having studied much, the scribes were learned, and when attempting to teach they could quote a myriad of sources and give a waterfront of opinions, but they had no clear declaration as to what was really right. Jesus didn't teach his disciples in that manner. He gave the answer; he declared the doctrine in simple, direct terms and spoke with the authority of God. The people perceived the difference between him and the scribes and were astonished.

Another teaching technique of the Savior was the performance of miracles. We are impressed with the wide variety of his miracles. He healed people of diseases and also of physical, structural ailments such as a withered hand, blindness, deafness, and the inability to speak. He cast out devils, calmed storms, multiplied food, walked on water, got a coin out of a fish's mouth, cursed a tree, reattached a severed ear, and raised persons from the dead. These acts demonstrated that he had power over diseases, over the unseen world of the spirits, and over the world of nature and physical things, including the weather. They showed that he could overcome the law of gravity and that he could even restore life to dead bodies. He cured broken hearts and healed souls as well as mended physical bodies. The wide scope of these activities surely taught his disciples that "all power" was given him "both in heaven and on earth" (D&C 93:17; Matt. 28:18). Jesus spoke to the elements, and they obeyed.

Jesus the Master Teacher

Major Tasks of Jesus' Ministry

A study of the four Gospels reveals that the Savior used a variety of teaching methods in his ministry, Although he was the Master Teacher, for him teaching was not an end in itself but a means to an end. Everything he did contributed to the purpose of his life on earth. Thus, he used various communicative methods to accomplish the work of his ministry, the major tasks of which were:

Jesus' Teaching Methods

Following is a listing of Jesus' most notable teaching methods. At first glance some of the items may not seem to be teaching methods at all; but a closer look at each real-life event-keeping in mind the precise tasks that constitute the Savior's ministry-readily brings the reader to an awareness that these are teaching situations, and Jesus' responses to the situations constitute his teaching methods. Hence we find that he:

Jesus used the miracle of curing a man of palsy as a teaching device (Mark 2:1-12; Matt. 9:1-8). The man, lying on a bed, was let down through the roof of a house into the midst of a crowd of people. Although it was evident that the man was suffering from a physical ailment and was unable to walk, Jesus' first words to him were, "Son, thy sins be forgiven thee." This greatly agitated the scribes who were sitting there, and they reasoned in their hearts: "Why doth this man [Jesus] thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only?" Jesus then said to them, "Is it not easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, than to say, Arise and walk?" (JST, Matt. 9:5; see also JST, Mark 2:7.) It is as if he had said to them, "You cannot determine through mortal sight whether his sins are forgiven, but you can perceive whether he gets up and walks." Then Jesus made this clarifying statement as to his purpose: "But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house." It is very clear from the way this miracle is reported, particularly in the Joseph Smith Translation, that Jesus used the healing of the man's body, which they who were witnesses could perceive with their eyes, to illustrate His ability to heal a soul, which they could not see. This miracle was a teaching device. It surely worked well, for the people were all amazed and said, "We never saw it on this fashion." I suppose you could say it was a case of moving from the known to the unknown, from the visible to the invisible, from the physical to the spiritual dimension.

Jesus also used gentle subtlety-the surprise element. He said to the woman at Jacob's well, "Go, call thy husband, and come hither." The woman answered, "I have no husband." Jesus said, "Thou hast well said, I have no husband: for thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in that saidst thou truly." The woman said unto him, "Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet." (John 4:16-19.)

Jesus' use of this teaching technique was a part of his delivering the real message of this instructional moment. Sitting at a well where people came to draw water and utilizing this setting to make a comparison between earthly water and the "living water," Jesus taught the woman that he was the Messiah. He said that if someone drank the water drawn from the well, that person would thirst again; but a person who drank the water He had to give would never thirst again. The woman doubted he could provide such water, because he had neither rope nor bucket and the well was deep. She also asked him if he thought he was greater than Jacob himself, who gave them the well. The whole episode compares secular things to spiritual. The woman was engrossed in the worldly things-the flesh, the natural water, the rope, the bucket. She could hardly grasp the idea of the "living water," and even when she began to believe, her response was that she would like some of that special kind of water so that she would never have to come again to the well to draw. She was still thinking in physical terms. It took some time before she could appreciate that the "living water" Jesus could give would be like a flowing well "springing up unto everlasting life." (John 4:6-15.)

Use of Scriptures, Logic, and Irony

Jesus taught from the scriptures. He read from them, quoted them, and explained them to his hearers. Numerous occasions are recorded in which he quoted Isaiah, Moses, or the Psalms, or cited events from the book of Kings. He often reminded his audience of events recorded in the Old Testament, using scriptural accounts of what David, or Moses, or Abraham had done in order to provide an example or establish a precedent. He also used the Old Testament to teach doctrine, the laws governing marriage and divorce, the doctrine of the resurrection, and particularly his own messiahship.

Jesus also used logic or reasoning as a teaching method. The scriptural record shows him using plain "common sense" to arrive at conclusions about proper daily behavior. For example, once Jesus was in the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and a man with a withered hand was present. The Pharisees, anticipating that Jesus would heal the man, questioned the Master: "Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?" As was their custom, they were seeking a chance to accuse and find fault with him. Jesus reasoned with them: "What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out? How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days." Then he healed the withered hand-and he did it right then and there, where everyone could see him do it. (Matt. 12:9-14; see also Luke 6:6-11.) The Pharisees were so frustrated by his power, because it exposed the shallowness of their own reasoning, that they "were filled with madness; and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus" (Luke 6:11).

Later, perhaps the same day, he cast an evil spirit out of a man, and many people observed the change that came over him that was healed. The Pharisees said, "This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of devils." Again Jesus used logic or common sense to help them arrive at a proper understanding, saying: "Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand: and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand? And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out?" (Matt. 12:22-27.)

Jesus sometimes used irony, satire, or adroit sarcasm when dealing with the Pharisees, Sadducees, and scribes. On one occasion he showed no objection when, while he and his disciples were eating, publicans and sinners came and sat down with them. The Pharisees saw a chance to find fault with this, so they asked the disciples, "Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?" Jesus knew their intentions and replied, "They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. . . . I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." (Matt. 9:10-13; Mark 2:15-17; Luke 5:27-32.)

A casual reading may not uncover the force of the Savior's remarks above, but a little meditation on the subject will do so. Who in this world does not need the teachings and saving power of Jesus? Who among all mankind is truly righteous without the gospel of Christ? Can anyone be redeemed without the Redeemer? Is there any other way? Is there any other salvation? When Jesus said he was sent only to the sick, that was true; but who among all mankind is not sick? Were the complaining, self-righteous Pharisees spiritually whole and well? Were not they sinners also? Unquestionably they were sicker and in greater need of Jesus' healing influence than were those "sinners" whom they despised. When Jesus said to the Pharisees, "I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance," he was in fact condemning the Pharisaic brand of self-righteousness which had blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts to the reality of their own sinful condition.

Another instance of Jesus' use of this type of language is found in the context of his giving the parables of the lost sheep, the piece of silver, and the prodigal son (Luke 15:1-32). The setting was as follows: The publicans and the sinners drew near to hear Jesus teach; the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, "This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." Jesus then told the Pharisees and scribes a parable wherein a man, who had one hundred sheep and lost one of them, left the ninety-nine in the wilderness to go find that one lost sheep. Having found him, the man rejoiced mightily over the recovery. Jesus' rebuke of the self-righteous attitude of the Pharisees then came in these words: "I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance."

If we were to take this last statement literally, it would put a premium on sin. The comment about heaven's having more joy over one sinner than over ninety-nine righteous persons is not a simple, straightforward declaration of fact; it is a rebuke of the Pharisees' self-important, self-righteous attitude, because they were certain they needed no repentance for themselves. They were "righteous," all right-self-righteous! Are we really to believe there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents than over ninety-nine truly righteous persons such as Enoch, Abraham, the brother of Jared, Nephi, and Joseph Smith? What tremendous odds-ninety-nine to one! In considering Jesus' statement to the Pharisees, the words of the Old Testament prophet Samuel come to mind: "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice." (1 Sam. 15:22.) What the Savior was really saying to the Pharisees was, in effect, "There is more joy in heaven over one of these despised publicans who honestly repents than there is over ninety-nine self-righteous persons like you, who in your own estimation need no repentance."

Note how the Prophet Joseph Smith interpreted the Savior's words on this occasion:

The hundred sheep represent one hundred Sadducees and Pharisees, as though Jesus had said, "If you Sadducees and Pharisees are in the sheepfold, I have no mission for you; I am sent to look up sheep that are lost; and when I have found them, I will back them up and make joy in heaven." This represents hunting after a few individuals, or one poor publican, which the Pharisees and Sadducees despised.

. . . Like I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety-and-nine just persons that are so righteous; they will be damned anyhow; you cannot save them. [^5]

It may bother some to hear that Jesus would speak this way, because it is at variance with the popular misconception that he was timid and colorless in his personality and spoke only pleasant things. I think the record given in the New Testament is quite clear but has often been misread and misinterpreted. Irony, sarcasm, and satire are literary forms that, when used in a live setting, are usually unmistakable in their meaning. The words say one thing but mean another, and a correct understanding of them is dependent on sound and context. When these words are reduced to writing, however, the background and context are often lost; as a result, the force of the conversation is also lost, and the careless reader may even arrive at just the opposite meaning for a particular passage. Such has been the case many times with these examples we have been discussing.

The four Gospels do not present a single instance in which Jesus was impatient, critical, or unkind with people who were humble, teachable, and willing to change their lives. He mingled with publicans and sinners, and he forgave transgressions on condition of repentance. He cast out devils, healed the lame, raised the dead, fed the hungry, opened the eyes of the blind, gave hearing to the deaf, and restored the sick to health-if they but had the faith that he could do these things. But he was a terror to the workers of iniquity and to the deceptive, the self-righteous, the hypocritical. In dealing with the repentant he was the gentle yet firm Messiah. To the proud, the haughty, and the arrogant, he was absolutely indomitable and irrepressible, and a threat to their craftiness.

Jesus was capable of having tremendous physical and emotional impact on those with whom he met and dealt. When they saw and heard him, many people thought he was one of the Old Testament prophets come to earth again-perhaps Elijah or Jeremiah (Matthew 16:14; Mark 8:27-29; Luke 9:18-19). He was as powerful as the truth that he taught.

Use of Colorful Speech and Object Lessons

Jesus used colorful, attention-getting figures of speech. We find these in his conversations with his disciples, in his teachings to the multitudes, and in his censures of the Jewish rulers. Let us consider some examples. When he called fishermen into his service he said, "I will make you fishers of men" (Matt. 4:19). If a person knowingly gives offense, said Jesus, "it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea" (Matt. 18:6). That is, it would have been better for the man to have died than to have committed the sin. Of Judas, who betrayed him, Jesus said, "It had been good for that man if he had not been born" (Matt. 26:24).

Jesus praised John the Baptist in colorful language, calling him a "burning and a shining light," a man "much more than a prophet" (John 5:35; Luke 7:26). James and John he surnamed the "sons of thunder" (Mark 3:17), while the Jewish rulers he called "hypocrites,"["child[ren] of hell," "blind guides," and described them as being "like unto whited sepulchres, . . . full of dead men's bones," a "generation of vipers" (Matt. 23:13, 15, 16, 27, 33).

To a man who had been cured of a physical ailment, Jesus said, "Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee" (John 5:14), not meaning that every physical ailment is the direct result of sin, but rather that sin leads to a loss of salvation, a loss worse than any physical affliction. Of those Pharisees and scribes who had such great inconsistency in their beliefs, he said that they "strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel" (Matt. 23:24). To his disciples he declared, "If thy hand offend thee, cut it off. . . . If thy foot offend thee, cut it off . . . . And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out." (Mark 9:43-47.) The Joseph Smith Translation makes it clear that these are figurative expressions having reference to friends and associates, it being better to be without present friends and companions if they are the kind who would lead us astray.

In bearing testimony of himself and his messiahship, Jesus employed effective imagery, declaring, "I am the bread of life" (John 6:35). He also said, "I am the door of the sheepfold. All that ever came before me who testified not of me are thieves and robbers." (JST, John 10:7-8.) And further, "Many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them" (Matt. 13:17). "The queen of the south," the Savior testified, "shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and condemn them: for she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here" (Luke 11:31) likewise he declared, the "men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here" (Luke 11:32).

Whether by the means of figurative language or through the use of bold declaration, Jesus repeatedly testified that he was the Messiah. After bearing such a testimony to a gathering of Jews, he said, "If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins" (John 8:23-24). There is no question that the message came through, for the Jews later asked, "Art thou greater than our father Abraham?" Jesus replied, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day, . . . Before Abraham was, I am." The Savior was saying, in effect, "Yes, I am greater than Abraham; I am the Lord." According to the record, the Jews "took . . . up stones to cast at him." (See John 8:53-59.) That they tried to stone him indicates they got the message that Jesus claimed to be the Messiah, the Son of God, the great Jehovah. This is further certified by what some taunters said to him at the cross. They "reviled him, wagging their heads," and said: "If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross." (Matt. 27:39-40.) And the chief priests, scribes, and elders said, "He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God" (Matt. 27:43). There can be no doubt that Jesus was successful in putting his point across to both saint and sinner.

Jesus used objects, models, or visual aids to reinforce his words. When a group of fishermen had fished all night and caught nothing, Jesus then told them to cast their nets in again. When they did so, the nets came up full of fish. All were astonished, and then Jesus, with his object lesson vividly in place, said to Peter, "Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men." (Luke 5:4-10.) The purpose of a model, object, or visual aid is to increase the learner's perception. Jesus did this on occasion with persons who were blind or deaf. Sometimes, if the person was deaf, Jesus put his fingers into the person's ears, and thus the person not only saw Jesus but also felt him (see Mark 7:33). If the person was blind, Jesus might put his hands over the person's eyes or place clay on them. Hence, although the blind person could not see, he could hear Jesus and feel his touch, and this would increase the person's perception. (See Mark 8:22-25; John 9:6.) I don't know all the reasons why Jesus did these things, but it appears that one of his purposes was to increase the perception, attention, and experience of the afflicted person.

On another occasion, when his disciples asked, "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" he set a little child before them and declared that, to become great, a person must become converted and be as humble as a little child. He also warned against offending "one of these little ones which believe in me." The Word which is translated "offend" in the King James Version needs some clarification. To offend does not mean, in this case, simply to displease the child or to make it unhappy, but literally it means to "cause to stumble" or lead away from the gospel. Jesus' statement about offending little children is a warning against false teachings. and it is a warning that teachers must be concerned about the influence they have on students. The gospel teacher who plants doubt in place of faith in the minds of students, who criticizes the Brethren. or who makes light of sacred things and fosters a spirit of cynicism risks the possibility of offending the Lord's "little ones." So exercised was Jesus on this point that he said, as mentioned earlier, "Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck. and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea." (Matthew 18: 1-6.) Such descriptive language tells us that the Lord cannot be pleased by the teacher who is cynical and who, by example, teaches others to be the same. He called the false doctrines of such teachers the "leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees," and warned us to beware of it (Matt. 16:6, 12). He said that a student receiving this kind of faithless doctrine becomes "twofold more the child of hell" than he was before he was taught (JST, Matt. 23:12). It is better that the sheep have no shepherd than that they be in the care of wolves. One of the problems with a cynic is that he feels little if any responsibility for the consequences of what he gives to others. Such a teacher is a wolf in sheep's clothing. The scriptural image of a wolf to describe a false, cynical leader is well chosen, for the word cynic itself comes from a word meaning "doglike," You can visualize this kind of teacher running around with his nose to the ground, sniffing out something to complain about or some cherished belief to discredit.

Asking Questions and Reproving the Wayward

we mentioned earlier that Jesus could turn ordinary events into teaching situations. One way that he did that was by asking questions. In this way he could get people talking and involved. For example, he once asked the Twelve, "What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?" They had been disputing over "who should be the greatest" among them. As soon as he could get them talking or at least thinking about it, then he could teach them. In this instance he taught them that "if any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all." (Mark 9:33-35.) On another occasion he asked the Twelve, "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" (Matthew 16: 13.) In this case Jesus was making a point clear by the means of contrast, as if he had said, "Who do other men say I am, and who do you say I am?" Later, on the day of his resurrection, as he walked along the road to Emmaus with two of his disciples (who didn't recognize him), he asked, "What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?" One of them replied, "Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?" And Jesus asked, "What things?" Then the disciples rehearsed the matter of the crucifixion of Jesus and of the reported resurrection, about which they seemed to have some doubt. Through these questions Jesus set up the structure for a whole afternoon's discussion of the mission of the Messiah, and this gave him the opportunity to teach of his atonement and to show that the scriptures testified of him. The experience caused the disciples' hearts to burn within them. (Luke 24:13-35.)

Sometimes he asked questions in response to those who asked him questions. When "a certain lawyer" asked, "Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" Jesus said unto him, "What is written in the law? how readest thou?" When the man then answered his own question from the scriptures, Jesus said, "Thou hast answered right." (Luke 10:25-28.)

At least one time Jesus bargained with his antagonists by means of questions. The Jewish rulers wanted to know by what authority he acted and taught and who gave him that authority. Just the day before he had driven the money changers out of the temple, so at this point the rulers were very much aware of him and sensitive to his actions. When they inquired regarding his authority he said, "I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things." He then asked them to tell him by what authority John the Baptist did his work-was it of heaven or of men? This type of question forced them into a dilemma. He knew it would. If they admitted John's authority was of God, he would say, "Why did ye not then believe him?" If they said John's authority was of man, the people who received John as a prophet would, they feared, react against them. So they attempted to save face, saying, "We cannot tell." Jesus promptly replied: "Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things." However, he did tell them that John came to them "in the way of righteousness" and that the publicans and harlots, if they believed John, would go into heaven before they (the Jewish rulers) would. (Matt. 21:23-32.)

Many of the examples of the teaching situations Jesus encountered, as recorded in the scriptures, were adversarial in nature, because they arose while Jesus labored with the hard-hearted, cynical, and conniving Jewish rulers. Some might wonder why Jesus engaged in this combative activity with those who were so opposed to him. Why didn't he just ignore them? He didn't because this type of confrontation actually constituted part of his mission. Note this explanation from the Prophet Joseph Smith:

The Melchizedek High Priesthood [is] no other than the Priesthood of the Son of God. . . . It is also the privilege of the Melchizedek Priesthood, to reprove, rebuke, and admonish, as well as to receive revelation. . . .

I frequently rebuke and admonish my brethren, and that because I love them, not because I wish to incur their displeasure, or mar their happiness. Such a course of conduct is not calculated to gain the good will of all, but rather the ill will of many; . . . the higher the authority, the greater the difficulty of the station; but these rebukes and admonitions become necessary, from the perverseness of the brethren, for their temporal as well as spiritual welfare. They actually constitute a part of the duties of my station and calling [^6]

Given these statements from the Prophet, we can conclude that it was necessary that Jesus, as one possessing all the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood, testify against sin and wickedness and rebuke those responsible for that wickedness. Had he failed to do so, the wayward and the wicked would not have been challenged to repent in this life, nor would they be left without excuse in the Day of Judgment. This act of reproving is a prerogative of those holding the keys; the rest of us, therefore, had best not use this method so directly.

For the disciples and the believers Jesus performed acts of kindness; he talked to them about prayer, explained the need they had for the Holy Ghost, and taught them in the synagogues and in the courtyard of the temple. To the woman with an issue of blood, he said, "Be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace" (Luke 8:48). To the woman who bathed his feet with her tears and dried them with her hair, he said, "Thy sins are forgiven. . . . Thy faith hath saved thee." (Luke 7:48-50.)

Teaching by the Spirit and by Example

Jesus taught with the Spirit. When he quoted the law, and the prophets, and the Psalms in all things concerning himself, the people's hearts burned within them (see Luke 24:25-32). It was the Spirit that made this happen. When Peter testified that he knew that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God, Jesus said, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven" (Matt. 16:13-18). Here the phrase "flesh and blood" represents the learning of man through worldly methods, through the mortal senses. Learning from "my Father in heaven" represents learning by the Spirit, by revelation. There is an essential difference between the knowledge of the world and the knowledge of the Spirit: knowledge obtaincd through revelation saves one's soul: worldly knowledge, even if correct cannot cleanse the soul nor qualify one for the celestial kingdom. The Spirit reveals things absolutely essential to One's salvation, things that cannot be learned through the mortal, physical senses. Such things are learned through the Spirit, or they are not learned at all.

The Jewish leaders thought a person had to go to their school in order to learn to preach. This is illustrated by the amazement of the Jewish rulers over Jesus' endless wisdom. He had nnt gone through their training and curriculum, nor had he attended their schools, and yet lie knew so much about the scriptures and about men and things. Once, in what appears to be a mixture of surprise and dismay over Jcsus' success as a teacher, the rulers marvelled and cried out, "How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" In response Jesus said, "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me." (John 7:15-16.) II was not float Jesus had "never learned," but that his learning came from the Father, by revelation, rather than from the schools and philosophies of the worldly wise. The Pharisees and Sadducees may have had facts, but they were without the conviction and witness of the Holy Ghost, and thus they were "ever learning, and never able to COllie to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Tim. 3:7). Without the Spirit they could not understand the things of God, even when they read the scriptures. The record says that the Father gave Jesus the Spirit without measure (John 3:34). The Savior taught by the power of the Holy Spirit; it had been with him all his life, and it gave him divine wisdom, even by the age of twelve years.

Jesus also taught by example. He prepared himself for his ministry and for the work he had to do. He fasted, he prayed, he read the scriptures. and he taught. Those who knew him would have observed the things he did and would have learned from them Even though tic was the Son of God and was divine. he would not have hail the spiritual power he did unless he had been obedient and worked to develop, it. When the disciples could not cast out a certain type of evil spirit. Jesus cast it out and told them why they had been unable to do this: their faith was not strong enough He explained to them that such acts required Prayer and fasting (Matt. 17:14-21.) Does not this episode show us that it was by fasting and prayer that Jesus obtained his power and spiritual Strength?

Use of Parables

No discussion of Jesus as a teacher would be complete without mention of his parables. We have already referred to several of the parables that Jesus directed to the Jewish rulers and we noted that these had an element of censure and condemnation in them. The parables of instruction to the multitudes-such as the parables of the sower, the ten virgins, the talents, and the pearl of great price-contain a little less of this element, but they are, non-the-less, somewhat hidden in their meaning. It is possible that many of the Pharisees and scribes, and also the multitudes, did not at first receive the full impact of the message he spoke to them in parables. Even when he chided them through the stories. Jesus used parables not for the purpose of making the spiritual points crystal clear, but as a device to conceal and shadow the deeper meaning from the proud, the lazy, and the self-righteous. The parable of the sower illustrated this through a description of different kinds of soils. The soils represented the different degrees of spiritual readiness and productivity of the people.

Although many have thought that the parables were intended to make the truths of the kingdom easily available, really the parables were intended to conceal the finer points of doctrine from those who did not value them. When the disciples asked Jesus why he spoke to the multitudes in parables, he replied: "Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. . . . Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand." (Matt. 11:10-13.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "I have a key by which I understand the scriptures. I enquire, what was the question which drew out the answer, or caused Jesus to utter the parable?" [^7] The context shows that the parables were given to the multitudes and to the Jewish rulers, not to the disciples. For example, Jesus introduced the parable of the wicked husbandmen with these words: "And again, hear another parable; for unto you that believe not, I speak in parables; that your unrighteousness may be rewarded unto you" (JST, Matt. 21:34). You may have noticed that, by contrast, there are no parables in 3 Nephi, an account of the Savior's ministry among a righteous people.

I know it is common among teachers in and out of the Church to misuse the parables, and many fail to note what Jesus said about why he used them. But the New Testament is quite clear on this matter. I have noticed that if you already know the doctrine, you can usually find it somewhere in a parable, but it is next to impossible to learn it for the first time from the parable alone as the source. Jesus was selective in what he taught to different groups. He did not give away the mysteries to those who had no interest in them and who would not search for, meditate upon, and live worthy of the higher truths. Jesus' purpose in withholding information can be viewed, on one hand, as merciful, because his doing so prevented the people from receiving information they were unprepared for and upon which they would have been judged later. But, on the other hand, it was also an act of justice. No man is saved in ignorance, especially willful ignorance. The rule is, as the Savior stated, "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened" (Matt. 7:7-8). Jesus did not refuse to teach the unbelieving, the indifferent, and the rebellious who would not seek; rather, he gave them the lesser part because of their lack of readiness. No doubt they would eventually reach a time when they would regret their slothfulness and pride and mourn their lost opportunity-if not in this life, then in the spirit world. We too may experience such regrets if we fail to seek diligently the things of the kingdom. The principle of readiness is basic in the psychology of teaching and is nowhere better illustrated than in Jesus' use of parables.

I have a love for the New Testament, especially as it has been made plainer through latter-day revelation and the teachings of the Brethren. There is a joy in learning about the Savior. My heart and mind have been made glad by the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, his compassion, his courage, his humility, his manliness, and his masterful ability to teach. In the best sense of the word, he is a hero. I have a testimony by the Spirit that he is real. He is the Son of God; yet, I marvel, even in his greatness he has time for smaller things. He knows each of us; he knows our names and our ,joys. weaknesses, and trials. He knows, and he cares. There is so much about him that "I scarce can take it in." [^8] He is our Savior. the great Exemplar, the Master Teacher.

Notes

From a presentation given at the Church Educational System Symposium for Religious Educators, 11 August 1988.

1 Earl V. Pullias, Toward Excellence in College Teaching (Dubuque. Iowa: W. C. Brown Co., 1963), p. 44.

2 Harold B. Lee, "Stand Ye in Holy Places," Ensign 3 (July 1973): 123.

3 The idea for this section of the chart was first suggested to me several years ago by a master's thesis written in 1951 by Glenn L. Pearson, a former Brigham Young University faculty member, entitled "Missionary Methods and Doctrines of the Primitive Church as Determined by a Study of the New Testament." Through the years I have continued to learn about the Savior's teaching methods, and in this chart I have enlarged, adapted, and rearranged the material Brother Pearson presented originally in his thesis.

4 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 277-78.

5 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 111 - 13.

6 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 276-77.

---
Notas:
[^1] The sermon to the Nephites was given to a mixture of people; there was a multitude of believers, and among them were also twelve special disciples who had been called to be the Lord's personal representatives in the Americas. [^3] The Sermon on the Mount recorded in Matthew, on the other hand, was given to a small number of believers, primarily the Twelve Apostles whom Jesus had chosen in the Holy Land.
[^2] The Sermon on the Mount was a missionary-oriented discourse preparatory to Jesus' sending forth the Twelve to preach. The Nephite sermon was directed to the multitude, only portions of it being pointed specifically to the twelve Nephite disciples.
[^3] The Sermon on the Mount was given prior to the Lord's atonement and death, before he had completely fulfilled the law of Moses. The Nephite sermon was delivered after the Atonement-the multitude consisting of those who had been spared in the great destruction that had taken place in the Americas a few weeks earlier at Jesus' death-and thus after the fulfillment of the law of Moses.
[^4] To withstand all temptations and live without sin (Matt. 4:3-11; Heb. 2:4-18; 4:15; Alma 7:10-13; Lectures on Faith5:2) Used gentle subtlety (John 4:15-19).
[^5] To testify against wickedness and false traditions (JST, John 7:24; Mark 7:9-13; 2 Ne. 10:3-5) Quoted from the Old Testament (Matt. 19:3-6; 22:31; John 10:34).
[^6] To make an atonement with his blood and give his life for the world (Luke24:45-58; John 10:15; G&C 38:4; 45:3-5 Appealed to the Old Testament for precedents (Matt. 12:1-8).
[^7] To bring to pass the resurrection of all mankind from the dead (John 5:25-29; 2 Ne. 8; 9:21; Morm. 9:13). Used logic (Matt. 10:10-12: 12:9-14, 22-28; Mark 3:22-26; Luke 6:6-11; 13:14). "How Great Thou Art," Hymns, no. 86.
[^8] Used irony (Matt. 9:10-13; Mark 2:15-17; Luke 5:27-32: John 8:39-44).
