Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

16 SERMON ON THE MOUNT AND IN BOUNTIFUL: COMPARISONS [^1]

The word of the Lord is always precious and will be the most meaningful to us when we understand it in relation to the setting in which it was originally given. President Brigham Young said:

Do you read the Scriptures, my brethren and sisters, as though you . . . . stood in the place of the men who wrote them? If you do not feel thus, it is your privilege to do so, that you may be as familiar with the spirit and meaning of the written word of God as you are with your daily walk and conversation, or as you are with your workmen or with your households.

The people on every hand are inquiring, "What does this scripture mean, and how shall we understand this or that passage?" Now I wish, my brethren and sisters, for us to understand things precisely as they are, and not as the flitting, changing imagination of the human mind may frame them. [^2]

It is in this light and for the purpose spoken of by President Young that I wish to present some parallels between the Savior's sermon in Bountiful to the Nephites, as recorded in 3 Nephi in the Book of Mormon, and a similar sermon, the Sermon on the Mount, recorded in the book of Matthew in the New Testament. Our primary sources for this study are, of course, the Book of Mormon and the New Testament. Fortunately, we have not only the King James Version of the New Testament but also the Joseph Smith Translation, which gives us many additional insights and points of understanding. We will pursue our subject, then, with the assurance that the Joseph Smith Translation gives the best account of the biblical sermon and that the Book of Mormon gives a correct account of the Nephite sermon. With this sure scriptural foundation we can make some useful comparisons and contrasts.

The Settings

There are at least three notable differences between the setting of the Nephite sermon and that of the Sermon on the Mount:

Since one sermon was to the Nephites and the other was primarily to the Jewish Twelve, and since the sermons were given in differing circumstances and for different purposes, both cultural and doctrinal differences are apparent in the content of these two extensive discourses. The best understanding of the Sermon on the Mount is likely to be gained from the Joseph Smith Translation because it not only restores lost doctrinal concepts but also preserves, better than any other version of the Bible, the Jewish background and original setting of the sermon. Likewise, the best understanding of the Nephite sermon can be gained from studying the context in which it appears in the Book of Mormon. Thus there is something to be gained not only in examining the similarities but also in noting the contrasts between the two sermons.

The Beatitudes

The Beatitudes as given in the Nephite sermon consist of at least eleven statements, each containing the word blessed, meaning a condition of happiness or spiritual well-being. The Book of Mormon account of the Beatitudes adds certain spiritual elements not found in the King James Version, such as "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me" and "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (3 1 Ne. 12:3, 6, italics added). Many already know of these significant additions and have benefited from studying them. We should also be aware that the Joseph Smith Translation of Matt. 5 contains the same clarifications, a fact which indicates that Jesus spoke these same things to the Jewish Twelve; but these concepts were lost in the transmission of the biblical text and thus were missing from the King James Version.

This leads to an additional important feature of the Beatitudes that I want to point out: These choice, brief statements are not separate, disjointed platitudes; each has a relationship to the others. Let us look at them from the more complete list given in the Nephite sermon and in the Joseph Smith Translation. The Beatitudes deal first with a person's relationship to God. They speak of such things as faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism, forgiveness of sins, and receiving the Holy Ghost. (These particular features are missing from the King James Version.) The emphasis then shifts to a person's feelings about himself, or those feelings that spring from within. For example: Blessed are the poor in spirit, those who mourn, those who are meek, and those who hunger and thirst after righteousness. Then the emphasis shifts to a person's attitude toward others. For example: Blessed are the peacemakers. And finally a fourth emphasis appears-how a person should handle other people's attitudes toward himself. Thus, blessed are all they who are persecuted for righteousness' sake or who are reviled and persecuted falsely.

This particular sequence of the Beatitudes follows a pattern seen in other scriptures, scriptures which describe one's relationship first to God, then to oneself, and then to one's fellowmen. Note the similar arrangement in the Ten Commandments. The first four commandments deal with man's relationship to God: man is to have no other gods and no graven images; he is not to take the name of God in vain; and he is to honor the Sabbath day. The fifth refers to one's parents, a commandment which is a good transition between the earlier commandments and those that follow. The last five commandments deal with man's relationship to his fel-lowman: man is not to kill, commit adultery, steal, lie, or covet. (See Ex. 20.) This type of organized sequence gives additional meaning to the Beatitudes and to the Ten Commandments that would not be perceivable if each beatitude or each commandment were separate and unrelated to the others. This sequence is also in harmony with Jesus' declaration that the first great commandment is to love God with all one's heart and that the second is to love one's neighbor as oneself (see Matt. 22:34-40).

A similar pattern can be seen in the sequence of the Articles of Faith. These begin with statements about the Godhead and man's relationship to God; then move on to principles regarding personal behavior, such as baptism and ordination; and finally end with declarations on general behavior, such as in article thirteen about virtue, honesty, doing good to all men, and so on. Such unity and harmony in the Lord's teachings enhance their spiritual impact on us; we see a much deeper meaning in the principles than we would if they were presented in an unrelated form.

In the incomplete way that the Beatitudes are listed in the King James Version, the first category-a person's relationship to God-is missing. It was, therefore, quite essential that the Joseph Smith Translation restore two beatitudes about faith, repentance, baptism, and the Holy Ghost. It was equally significant that these were placed at the beginning of the list in their proper doctrinal sequence. (See JST, Matt. 5:3-4.)

Scribes and Pharisees

The Nephite sermon, unlike the Sermon on the Mount, has no mention of scribes or Pharisees. This is to be expected, since the institution of scribes and Pharisees among the Jews began during the Babylonian captivity, several decades after Lehi's colony left Jerusalem. As a consequence, much of the cultural milieu so prominent in Judaism in New Testament times was not found among the Book of Mormon people.

The Law of Moses

In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus tells his disciples that he has not "come to destroy the law, . . . but to fulfil" it. Certain aspects of the law of Moses are then specified. (See Matt. 5:17-47.) In the biblical sermon Jesus states that the law will be fulfilled; in the Book of Mormon sermon the Savior states three times that the law is already fulfilled (see 3 Ne. 12:17-20, 46). The emphasis on the fulfillment of the law of Moses caused such wonderment among the Nephite people that, following the sermon, Jesus gave an extended explanation about the fulfillment of the law (see 3 Ne. 15:2-9).

The biblical sermon contains no such explanation, although the Joseph Smith Translation contains an interesting alteration in Matt. 5:21-22 (modifying Matt. 5:19-20) that indicates the future fulfillment of the law of Moses: "Whosoever shall do and teach these commandments of the law until it be fulfilled, the same shall be called great."

"Be Ye Therefore Perfect"

In Matt. 5:48 Jesus states: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." A stronger statement is found in the Nephite sermon: "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Ne. 12:48, italics added). The change in wording in the Nephite sermon is probably due to the fact that Jesus had been resurrected by that time and thus had become like the Father in every way.

Although the Joseph Smith Translation renders the verse somewhat differently than the King James Version, it does not add the comment about Jesus' own perfection. Surely this reflects the difference between Jesus' mortal state at the time of the biblical sermon and his resurrected, exalted condition at the time of the Nephite discourse.

The Lord's Prayer

In the Nephite sermon, the sample prayer, commonly known as the Lord's Prayer, is given to the multitude. However, in the Sermon on the Mount, the prayer is given primarily to the Twelve. This distinction has a certain bearing upon some notable differences between the two versions of the prayer.

"Thy kingdom come." The biblical account of the prayer includes the phrase "Thy kingdom come" (Matt. 6:10). The Nephite sermon does not contain this phrase (see 3 Ne. 13:9-10), evidently because the kingdom of God had already come to the Nephites. The record itself makes this clear, since it shows that the Nephites had prophets among them who were baptizing, conferring the Holy Ghost, and doing many things that pertain to the kingdom.

"Give us this day our daily bread." This phrase is found in the biblical sermon (Matt. 6:11) but not in the Nephite one. This is apparently due to the difference in the circumstances of the two sermons. The biblical sermon was given primarily to the Twelve, and they were to leave their normal, secular employ and "take . . . no thought" (Matt. 6:34) for food, clothing, and such temporalities -meaning that they were not to labor at occupations as other men did for the necessities of life. Therefore it was particularly appropriate for them to pray for their "daily bread," that is, for the bread of the day. The Nephite sermon does not contain this plea because the prayer was given as an example to the multitude, who were to labor for bread as all members of the Church are obliged to do. They were to earn a temporal living.

This last example serves to emphasize the distinction not only between the two sermons but also between the special calling of the Apostles and the duties of regular members of the Church. Thus it is that we really cannot appreciate fully either sermon until we compare them.

"He Taught Them as One Having Authority"

The King James Version states that at the conclusion of the Sermon on the Mount the people were astonished, for Jesus had taught them "as one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matt. 7:29). The Joseph Smith Translation states that Jesus taught "as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the scribes" (JST, Matt. 7:37, italics added). The Nephite sermon does not have this comment in any form, since there were no such scribes among the Nephites. As to the authority of Jesus, however, the Nephite record continues with several expressions from the Savior stating his authoritative position: "I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end . . . . I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live." (3 Ne. 15:5, 9.)

Conclusion

If a person made only a superficial or casual study of the scriptures, he might suppose that Joseph Smith, in providing a more complete rendering of the Sermon on the Mount for his Bible translation, simply superimposed the sermon from 3 Nephi. But a deeper investigation shows that the Joseph Smith Translation of chapters 5 through 7 of Matthew presents an independent, fresh, and informarive account of its own. The same careful search likewise reveals that the Nephite sermon is a fresh and independent discourse, totally adapted to the particular situation of the Nephite people to whom it was given.

Notes

From The Sixth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1982), pp. 52-54.

1 Brigham Young, Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941), p. 128.

2 Nowhere does the Book of Mormon label the twelve American disciples as Apostles, even though the twelve in Jerusalem were called Apostles. However, in the Wentworth Letter, dated 1 March 1842, Joseph Smith apparently refers to the twelve Nephite disciples as Apostles (see History of the Church 4:538).

---
Notas:
[^1] Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden of Eden because they partook of the forbidden fruit (v. 19). He does not define death, and he does not use the term spiritual death. An infinite atonement is needed to overcome the Fall (v. 7). The Lord God Omnipotent will come to dwell among men in a tabernacle of clay and be the Savior (vv. 5-11). God himself shall make an atonement for mankind (Mosiah 13:28). (Thus Abinadi identifies the Savior as the God who gave Moses the commandments.)
[^2] All mankind were "lost, because of the transgression of their parents" (v. 21). He does not specifically mention physical death as distinct from spiritual death. Without an infinite atonement, there would be no resurrection of the bodies of men (v. 7). The Redeemer will be called Jesus Christ (vv. 8, 12, 18). Without the Atonement, which God himself shall make, man must perish (Mosiah 13:28).
