Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

17 THE DOCTRINE OF THE ATONEMENT [^1]

At one time there was a program on the BYU campus called the "Last Lecture Series." The idea was that if you had one last opportunity to deliver a lecture, what would you choose to say? For years I have mulled that over in my mind and wondered what I would select to talk about in such a setting. Probably I would say something about family and friends and the blessing of working at BYU in the company of good people. However, the subject of the Atonement would also be very high on my priority list of topics to cover in a last lecture. I can't think of any subject that I have tried harder to master and to understand and to develop the ability to explain. To learn the charity, generosity, power to rescue, and the pardoning mercy of God, as set in order by the Atonement, is the greatest of all studies.

Barriers to an Understanding of the Atonement

As I have taught various gospel subjects, I have encountered three main topics concerning which there is much misunderstanding among students-namely, the plates and internal structure of the Book of Mormon, the scattering and gathering of Israel, and the doctrine of the Fall and the Atonement.

As a teacher I have witnessed some of the barriers that prevent students from coming to a proper understanding of the Atonement. One of the difficulties is that most people are neither theologians nor even doctrine-oriented. Many seem to object to linking scriptural passages together to form a concept. They generally want to see it all said in one brief passage of scripture rather than shaped through bringing several passages together and building from point to point.

It seems to be the common mode of mankind not to search for careful, precise, and specific information about doctrinal items. It appears that many are content with only casual, approximate information. Nephi wrote of his feelings about much of mankind: "They will not search knowledge, nor understand great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain as word can be" (2 1 Ne. 32:7).

Although many of the young people now among us are the brightest and the most faithful youth we have ever seen, this same barrier to understanding also hinders many of them, for it is not the common practice of mankind to search doctrine.

The "Very Points" of Doctrine

Let us look at some passages of scripture that I think speak of learning the gospel with precision rather than approximation. All of these scriptures use some form of the phrase "points of doctrine."

Nephi said: "And at that day shall the remnant of our seed . . . come to the knowledge of their Redeemer and the very points of his doctrine, that they may know how to come unto him and be saved" (1 Ne. 15:14, italics added).

Speaking to his son Corianton, Alma said: "And now behold, my son, do not risk one more offense against your God upon those points of doctrine, which ye have hitherto risked to commit sin" (Alma 41:9, italics added).

And in Helena 11:22-23 we read: "They had peace in the seventy and eighth year, save it were a few contentions concerning the points of doctrine which had been laid down by the prophets. And in the seventy and ninth year there began to be much strife. But it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi, and many of their brethren who knew concerning the true points of doctrine, having many revelations daily, therefore they did preach unto the people, inasmuch that they did put an end to their strife in that same year." (Italics added.)

During the Savior's visit to the Nephites he said: "There shall be no disputations among you . . . concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto been" (3 Ne. 11:28, italics added). And later Jesus declared that the gospel would be taught to the Gentiles so that "they may repent and come unto me and be baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Israel" (3 Ne. 21:6, italics added).

The same terminology appears also in the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein the Lord affirms that the Book of Mormon shall bring people to the "true points of my doctrine, yea, and the only doctrine which is in me" (D&C 10:62; see also v. 63).

What is a "point of doctrine"? One dictionary defines a point as a "penetrating detail, a precise concept; a prominent or important item; the 'telling part' of an argument or discussion; the salient feature; the precise thing; the 'turning point.' "Such is the meaning of a point of doctrine as contrasted to a teaching that is vague, undefined, ambiguous, uncertain, fuzzy, foggy, obscure, or unfocused. As I reflect on the scriptural passages above, I hear the Lord saying that he expects us to learn the very points of his doctrine and that the Book of Mormon is the principal means he has provided by which we are to learn them. The Book of Mormon cannot be the "most correct of any book on earth" and be wrong on the most important doctrines of the gospel.

It is my observation that the points of doctrine given to us in the Book of Mormon and other latter-day scripture will answer all the major doctrinal questions that have been raised during, and as the result of, the Apostasy-those questions which have been the focus of the great church councils from the Nicene Council to Vatican II.

Use of the Right Words

If we use the right words it will help us better understand doctrines such as the Atonement. In this way we can avoid ambiguity. President Ezra Taft Benson has spoken on at least two occasions about the importance of using the right words in gospel teaching:

It is important that in our teaching we make use of the language of holy writ. Alma said, "I . . . do command you in the language of him who hath commanded me" (Alma 5:61).

The words and the way they are used in the Book of Mormon by the Lord should become our source of understanding and should be used by us in teaching gospel principles. [^2]

King Benjamin caused that his three sons "should be taught in all the language of his fathers." (Mosiah 1:2.) They needed to understand and use the language of holy writ. If they didn't know the right words, they wouldn't know the plan. [^3]

In a 1940 letter the First Presidency gave directions along this same line to the Church Educational System. This was a sequel to the "Charted Course" statement issued just two years earlier in 1938. Following is an excerpt from that letter of the First Presidency, dated 17 February 1940 and addressed to Franklin L. West, commissioner of Church Education:

Teachers will do well to give up indoctrinating themselves in the sectarianism of the modern "Divinity School Theology." If they do not, they will probably bring themselves to a frame of mind where they will be no longer useful in our system. The most brilliant of them will find enough in the Gospel to tax all their brilliancy, even genius. The heights and depths of the Gospel have yet to be sounded.

The teachers will not teach ethics or philosophy, ancient or modern, pagan or so-called Christian; they will as already stated teach the Gospel and that only, and the Gospel as revealed in these last days.

In their teaching, the teachers will use the verbiage and terminology which have become classic in the Church. They will not use terms and concepts which, though in one sense, are susceptible of being applied to the Church and Church doctrines, yet which, in another sense, are completely misleading. . . .

The Gospel should be spoken of as the Gospel, God's revealed truth. [^4]

In summarizing the above instructions of the First Presidency, Commissioner West wrote to J. Wiley Sessions, chairman of the Division of Religion at Brigham Young University: "In a general way, they said that we should use our own terminology and avoid as far as we can the terminology used by the sectarian churches. It was suggested that the . . . 'Department of Sacred Scripture' might be called the 'Department of Latter-day Scripture'; that the 'Department of Practical Christianity' be called the 'Department of Church Organization and Activities.' " [^5]

The words of President Benson, coupled with the words of an earlier First Presidency, remind us of Paul's instruction to the Corinthians given more than nineteen hundred years ago:

Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. (1 Cor. 2:12-14.)

It is important that we use the language of the scriptures in our gospel teaching. If we will use direct words and the terminology of the scriptures, our teachings will be clear and our meanings unmistakable.

Consider the following example of the use of terminology. I find it is important to make a distinction between the words spirit and spiritual. It is better, for instance, to refer to the organization of our spirit bodies as the spirit creation rather than the spiritual creation. Spirit is a better word in this case because it has a more definite and limited meaning: it can only refer to the creation of spirits. Now, we say that the fall of Adam brought two kinds of death-physical death and spiritual death. The use here of the word spiritual rather than spirit helps us understand that spiritual death is a condition, not the actual death of the spirit being; it is a death as to the things of righteousness, a separation from the presence of God. Furthermore, the word spiritual can refer to many things. For example, we know that the condition of man and animals in the Garden of Eden was physical, tangible, solid, and real, but not mortal; therefore, it is spoken of as a spiritual condition (see D&C 88:26-28 for a similar use of the term spiritual). Hence, if we used the word spiritual to refer to the premortal creation of spirits, we would engender confusion in others' minds if we used it again to refer to conditions in the Garden of Eden. Thus it is necessary for clarity that we make some careful distinctions in our use of words like spirit and spiritual.

Does It Matter?

I think we need to understand the Fall and the Atonement in the way that the scriptures teach them so that we can teach, when required, the proper concepts to others with a clear and certain sound, detect false doctrine and incorrect views when expressed by others, and benefit from the influence such understanding will have on our own perspective and zeal.

Nephi said he had great joy in proving what he knew about Christ:

Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him.

And also my soul delighteth in the covenants of the Lord which he hath made to our fathers; yea, my soul delighteth in his grace, and in his justice, and power, and mercy in the great and eternal plan of deliverance from death.

And my soul delighteth in proving unto my people that save Christ should come all men must perish. (2 Ne. 11:4-6.)

Thus, I think it does matter whether we are clear and precise in our gospel teaching and learning; and I think it is important that we learn well the salient points of the gospel. I, for one, do not want to harbor and accumulate wrong concepts in my own thinking that I will have to unlearn when I enter the spirit world. I want to make those adjustments now, in this life, and learn the "very points of his doctrine" from the scriptures and from the Brethren, and thus gain whatever correct information and viewpoints I can about life here and hereafter.

In dealing with doctrinal topics we can benefit if we examine and compare several reliable sources. The key is to analyze. Frequently there are parts within a single source that are sufficiently ambiguous that they could be interpreted in more than one way. The value of analyzing corroborating witnesses is that often a second or third source sheds enough light on a concept that it will help delimit and define an otherwise ambiguous passage. We use the second or third witnesses, then, to control our interpretation.

In studying gospel doctrines, I have found it helpful to take a particular scriptural passage and isolate every separate thought and idea in that passage. One way of doing this is to number every new element or thought as it occurs in the passage. Then one can compare these concepts with those found in what seems to be a parallel passage. It is startling how quickly this process of analysis can bring to light both the differences and the parallels between the passages.

Various Dimensions of the Atonement

The atonement of Jesus Christ is multidimensional: it involves not only the payment of a debt but also elements of love and of service. A study of the Atonement that omitted any of these dimensions would necessarily be fragmentary; the doctrines of the gospel do not have much meaning in abstract theory standing separate and apart from people. Therefore, as the Atonement shows us, we must have love for one another and teach the importance of service and recognize the condescension of God. If it were not for his love and condescension, Jesus would never have made an atonement. I like this statement from Nephi: "He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him. Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation. . . . For he doeth that which is good among the children of men." (2 Ne. 26:24, 33.)

On the other hand, if we fail to establish the doctrinal foundation, our teaching about the Atonement can degenerate into ethical and philosophical humanism. The divine element is preserved and kept in focus only through setting forth the doctrinal foundation of the great plan of redemption, which existed in the mind of God before the creation of the world and which was carried out through the Creation, the fall of Adam, and the atonement of Jesus Christ. The plan of salvation is not limited to just the first principles and the temple ceremony. The plan of salvation includes and incorporates the whole transaction-including the grand premortal council, the Creation, the Fall, the Atonement, all of the gospel principles and ordinances, the resurrection, the Judgment, exaltation, and so on.

The Inherited Effects of the Fall of Adam

Let's look at some of the precise things that are said about the effect the fall of Adam has had on mankind. It is necessary to have some idea of the Fall in order to appreciate the Atonement. There are several specific places in the scriptures that deal with the fall of Adam (or the fall of man), and these passages are our best sources. Most of them are in the Book of Mormon, but there are some key passages also in the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price.

As I see it, the chief sources for information on the Fall and its relationship to the Atonement are 2 Ne. 2; 2 Ne. 9; Mosiah 3; Mosiah 12-16; Alma 34; Alma 42; Hel. 14; Morm. 9; D&C 29; Moses 5-6; and Rom. 5. There are, of course, many other individual passages in the scriptures that address this topic, but these chapters have impressed me as being the most direct, containing, as they do, the "very points" of the doctrine. The prophets whose teachings are in these chapters are Lehi, Jacob, Benjamin, Abinadi, Amulek, Alma, Samuel the Lamanite, Moroni, Joseph Smith, Enoch, and Paul. They all teach the same basic doctrine (there are no contradictions among them), but they do not all emphasize the same particular things. Analyze their words, isolate and number the individual ideas, and you will find that each prophet clarifies some particular point more distinctly than the others do. In this chapter we will examine a sampling of the teachings of these prophets.

Lehi and Jacob on the Fall and the Atonement

In 2 Ne. 2 we read the teachings of Lehi about the Fall and the Atonement, from which I have isolated the following six items:

Among the things Lehi does not say about the Fall and the Atonement in this chapter of the Book of Mormon are the following:

We cannot suppose Lehi didn't know of these things; we simply have to recognize that he used broad terms and that these unspoken and unexplained details are encompassed in his use of such words as fall, lost, and redemption. Thus, chapter 2 of 2 Nephi constitutes one of the greatest philosophical statements about good, evil, law, agency, happiness, misery, God, man, and the devil ever recorded, and it contains the plainest declaration that Adam and Eve would have had no children without the Fall. But in speaking of those things, Lehi leaves many of the details undefined.

Lehi's son Jacob, however, supplies some very pointed definitions in 2 Ne. 9. He uses specific words like death of the body, resurrection, spirit, hell, grace, paradise, spiritual death, and infinite atonement. Among other things, Jacob specifies the following concerning the Fall and the Atonement:

Jacob may not have known any more about the plan of salvation than Lehi did, but in his recorded sermon Jacob defined some of the points more distinctly. Yet Lehi, as we have his words recorded in 2 Ne. 2, covered some fundamental things that Jacob did not cover in his talk as given in 2 Ne. 9. Thus it is that we need both chapters.

King Benjamin on the Fall and the Atonement

In Mosiah 3, King Benjamin gives a lengthy statement about the Fall and the Atonement, citing words which he said he learned from an angel. Benjamin extensively defines and identifies the Redeemer and his mission as follows:

3.The Redeemer will bleed from every pore (v. 7).

4.He is the Creator (v. 8).

5.His mother will be named Mary (v. 8).

6.He will be crucified (v. 9).

7.He will rise from the dead the third day (v. 10).

8.His blood atones for the fall of Adam (v. 11).

9.Nothing would save man if it were not for the atonement of the Lord's blood (v. 15).

10.His blood redeems little children (v. 16).

11.There is no other way or means of salvation (v. 17).

Three times Benjamin mentions the fallen condition experienced by all persons by reason of their being descendants of Adam: he refers to "those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam" (Mosiah 3:11) speaking of children, he says that "in Adam, or by nature, they fall" (Mosiah 3:16) and he declares that "the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam" (Mosiah 3:19). In his doctrinal exposition, father Lehi implies this kind of inheritance from Adam, but Jacob and Benjamin are the ones who spell it out.

There are three other strong declarations in the Book of Mormon stating that mankind inherits the effects of the fall of Adam. Note the expression of the brother of Jared as he pleaded with the Lord for help: "Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; . . . because of the fall our natures have become evil continually" (Ether 3:2). The second statement comes from Alma, who said: "Now we see that Adam did fall by the partaking of the forbidden fruit, according to the word of God; and thus we see, that by his fall, all mankind became a lost and fallen people" (Alma 12:22). And from Samuel the Lamanite we have the following: "For all mankind, by the fall of Adam . . . . are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual" (Hel. 14:16).

The Atonement and Little Children

The matter of mankind's having inherited the fall of Adam is a fundamental doctrine of the gospel, but to much of traditional Christianity it is a major stumbling block. Since about the fourth century, Catholic doctrine has held that because children inherit the fall from Adam they are thus born in sin. This belief is based primarily on a misinterpretation of two verses from Romans, which read: "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. . . . For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." (Rom. 5:12, 19, italics added.)

These verses were wrongly interpreted by Augustine and others to mean that all mankind sinned in Adam and that, therefore, children are born in original sin. This resulted in the development of the practice of infant baptism, since infants were considered legally to be sinners by inheritance.

Some today, not feeling comfortable with this traditional Christian doctrine of the depravity of children, have rejected the concept of the Fall altogether, and so speak glowingly of the inherent goodness of man. Either extreme position does not accurately represent the teachings of the scriptures, especially the teachings of the Book of Mormon. The restored gospel takes a position between the two extremes, not denying either but showing how the matter is handled by the Atonement.

Regarding this topic the Lord told Mormon: "Little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them" (Moro. 8:8). Note that here the fall of Adam or its influence -the Lord even calls it a "curse"-is not denied, but its damning effect on little children is shown to be blocked by the intercessory power of the Atonement. The curse is real, but the Atonement prevents it from occurring.

This is the same concept taught by King Benjamin, who explains that children, as well as adults, have need of the Atonement because of the fall of Adam: "And even if it were possible that little children could sin they could not be saved; but I say unto you they are blessed; for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins" (Mosiah 3:16). Moreover, we read in modern revelation that "every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God" (D&C 93:38). And a succinct expression of this influence and power of the Atonement is found in the second article of faith: "Men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

These scriptures say that if it were not for the atonement of Christ, all members of the human family, upon coming into this world as infants, would be lost because of the fall of Adam. Hence we can see why the idea that calls for infant baptism is so erroneous: it sets aside the atonement of Christ as though it had no such power to redeem little children.

Since the Bible is not clear on this very important provision of the Atonement, we see the great need that exists for the enlightening teachings of the Book of Mormon. In a world that generally does not understand the work of Jesus Christ, the Nephite scripture is an indispensable tool for making known the "very points" of Christ's doctrine.

The power of the Atonement to redeem little children is also dealt with in Joseph Smith's translation of Matt. 18. The topic under discussion here is who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Jesus tells the Twelve that they must become as little children, he places a child in their midst as an object lesson, and then he declares that his mission is to save mankind. Now, in the King James Version, Matt. 18:11 reads as follows: "For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost." However, the Joseph Smith Translation adds to that a most important teaching:". . . and to call sinners to repentance; but these little ones have no need of repentance, and I will save them." This significant clarification is in harmony with the teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon on the power that the Atonement has to intercede for children as they are affected by the transgression of Adam. Such a doctrine is much needed in those circles where traditional Christian views are still held.

The correct doctrine is that mankind has inherited the effects of the Fall, but not the sin associated with it. There is a great difference between inheriting only the results or effects of the sin and inheriting the sin itself. Since they only inherit its effects, little children have no accountability or responsibility for original sin. Thus, because of the atonement of Christ, babies are born innocent so far as the law of God is concerned, but babies inherit the effects of the Fall inasmuch as they are out of the presence of God and are subject to physical death. All human beings, though innocent at birth, are destined to die; they cannot prevent it. Nor can they reclaim even one soul from death after it has occurred. Little children are not subject to death because of any sin of their own-it is a biological inheritance from Adam.

Even Adam himself was not held responsible for his original transgression in the Garden of Eden; yet the results and effects of that sin passed upon him when he entered mortality to exactly the same extent that they pass upon each of us as an inheritance from Adam. In mortality Adam was in just the same condition as we are. The Atonement automatically covered the transgression which brought the Fall, and Adam was held responsible to repent only for the transgressions he may have committed when in mortality. This is the plain teaching of the prophet Enoch, as recorded in the book of Moses:

And [God] called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world. (Moses 6:51-54.)

Here we note that Adam was told he must repent of and be baptized for all his transgressions committed in mortality, but he was already forgiven of the transgression committed in the Garden of Eden.

The Divinity of Jesus Christ

When the prophet Abinadi comes on the scene in the Book of Mormon (see Mosiah 11-17), he teaches the same doctrine as the earlier prophets but with a little different emphasis and choice of words. His predecessors mention once or twice that the Redeemer is also the Creator, the Lord Omnipotent, but Abinadi hammers at it so emphatically that the reader cannot miss it.

Abinadi cites the Ten Commandments, which he says God gave to Moses on Mount Sinai (Mosiah 12:33-13:24 and then explains the following:

Abinadi was not the first to declare that Christ is God, but he certainly emphasized the fact more often and with more clarity than the others did. This got him into trouble with a corrupt generation of Nephites, as King Limhi explained: "And because he said unto them that Christ was the God, the Father of all things, and said that he should take upon him the image of man, and it should be the image after which man was created in the beginning; or in other words, he said that man was created after the image of God, and that God should come down among the children of men, and take upon him flesh and blood, and go forth upon the face of the earth -and now because he said this, they did put him to death" (Mosiah 7:27-28).

Later in the Book of Mormon record, the prophet Amulek speaks eloquently about the atonement of Jesus Christ. We will isolate only two items here.

First, Amulek says that without an atonement "all mankind must unavoidably perish" (Alma 34:9). He does not define what perish means, but because we have read the words of Jacob in 2 Ne. 9:6-9, we know that in this context perish means that the physical body would decay with never a chance for resurrection and that the spirit of each person would become a devil, forever miserable.

Second, Amulek defines the atonement of Christ in a most remarkable manner: "It is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice" (Alma 34:10). My guess is that most people, on first consideration, would think of Jesus' sacrifice as a human sacrifice, the sacrifice of a man as opposed to one of animals. But Amulek's words hold us to a different explanation: A human sacrifice would not have been adequate, since it would not have been infinite; redemption required the sacrifice of a God.

We have come a long way in the "points of doctrine" since we started with 2 Ne. 2. The writings of the prophets after Lehi and Nephi do not contradict anything written earlier, but they clarify, focus, and control our understanding and interpretation of the earlier teachings.

Thus, in the Book of Mormon, Christ is God. He is not simply a mortal, a great teacher, a friend of mankind. He is God. I have been surprised to find that the Book of Mormon never identifies Jesus as the firstborn spirit, man's Elder Brother. In the Book of Mormon, he isn't so much man's brother as he is man's God.

Jesus the Only Begotten of the Father in the Flesh

Jesus' condition in mortality was unique (see accompanying chart). Being the Son of a mortal mother and of an immortal Father, he inherited the effects of the Fall without being dominated by them as we are. If Jesus had been subject to death as we are, then in dying at age thirty-three he would have been only giving up his time, for eventually he would have died anyway. But the scriptures say he gave his life.

Thus I see it as one of the "very points" of doctrine that we accept Jesus Christ as the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, who would not have had to die physically or spiritually except as he willed to do so as part of the atoning sacrifice (see John 5:26; 10:17; Hel. 5:11). He died a physical death on the cross, and he died a "spiritual death" in the Garden of Gethsemane (as well as on the cross) when he took upon himself the sins of all mankind. Note these words of President Brigham Young:

The Father withdrew His spirit from His Son, at the time he was to be crucified. Jesus had been with his Father, talked with Him, dwelt in His bosom, and knew all about heaven, about making the earth, about the transgression of man, and what would redeem the people, and that he was the character who was to redeem the sons of earth, and the earth itself from all sin that had come upon it. The light, knowledge, power, and glory with which he was clothed were far above, or exceeded that of all others who had been upon the earth after the fall, consequently at the very moment, at the hour when the crisis came for him to offer up his life, the Father withdrew Himself, withdrew His Spirit, and cast a veil over him. This is what made him sweat blood. If he had had the power of God upon him, he would not have sweat blood; but all was withdrawn from him, and a veil was cast over him, and he then plead with the Father not to forsake him. "No," says the Father, "you must have your trials, as well as others." [^6]

Clearly, a great deal rested on Jesus' birth, life, suffering in Gethsemane, death on the cross, and resurrection. Brigham Young said: "Had he [Jesus] refused to obey his Father, he would have become a son of perdition." [^7] Why is this so? Because an eternal law had been broken, creating a debt no mortal could pay. Had Jesus sinned he would have lost his capacity to mend a broken eternal law. He and all mankind would have been left without a remedy.

"Even So in Christ Shall All Be Made Alive"

It seems that many people do not understand the meaning of Paul's words, "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). Most think it only pertains to the death of the body and the resurrection of the body. In truth, Paul's statement covers both physical death and spiritual death. As in Adam all die a physical and a spiritual death, so in Christ shall all be made alive, that is, be redeemed from both the physical death and the spiritual death. The Atonement is as broad in its influence as the Fall.

Because of Christ, all mankind, with no exceptions, will be redeemed from those two deaths. That is, every human being will be resurrected from the dead and every human being will be restored to the presence of God. All that was lost in the Fall will be restored by the Atonement. I have found that many do not understand that. There is a prevailing idea that although the resurrection is free, only those who repent and obey the gospel will ever return to the presence of God. Those who adhere to this idea, however, seem to have missed a very essential point and fundamental concept of the Atonement, and that is that Jesus Christ has redeemed all mankind from all the consequences of the fall of Adam.

The scriptures teach that every person, saint or sinner, will return to the presence of God after the resurrection. It may be only a temporary reunion in his presence, but justice requires that all that was lost in Adam be restored in Jesus Christ. Every person will return to God's presence, behold his face, and be judged for his own works. Then, those who have obeyed the gospel will be able to stay in his presence, while all others will have to be shut out of his presence a second time and will thus die what is called a second spiritual death.

See how clearly this is taught by Samuel the Lamanite:

For behold, he surely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the Lord.

Yea, behold, this death bringeth to pass the resurrection, and redeemeth all mankind from the first death-that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual.

But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord.

Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness. (Hel. 14:15-18, italics added.)

Similarly, Moroni wrote:

Behold, [God] created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man.

And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death.

And then cometh the judgment of the Holy One upon them; and then cometh the time that he that is filthy shall be filthy still; and he that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still. (Morm. 9:12-14, italics added.)

The two passages above also give an insight into Jacob's words: "Wo unto all those who die in their sins; for they shall return to God, and behold his face, and remain in their sins" (2 Nephi 9: 38).

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote on this topic, and in so doing he quoted something Elder Orson Pratt had said on the subject. Hence, the following excerpt from President Smith's writings is a testimony from both of them:

Christ's sacrifice and death did two things for us: it brought unto us unconditional salvation and conditional salvation. Sometimes we refer to these as general salvation and individual salvation. I am going to read what Orson Pratt said in relation to this. It is one of the clearest statements I know about. It is very concise and well thought out. . . .

". . . Universal redemption from the effects of original sin, has nothing to do with redemption from our personal sins; for the original sin of Adam and the personal sins of his children, are two different things. . . .

"The children of Adam had no agency in the transgression of their first parents, and therefore, they are not required to exercise any agency in their redemption from its penalty. They are redeemed from it without faith, repentance, baptism, or any other act, either of the mind or body.

"Conditional redemption is also universal in its nature; it is offered to all but not received by all; it is a universal gift, though not universally accepted; its benefits can be obtained only through faith, repentance, baptism, the laying on of hands, and obedience to all other requirements of the gospel.

"Unconditional redemption is a gift forced upon mankind which they cannot reject, though they were disposed. Not so with conditional redemption; it can be received or rejected according to the will of the creature.

"Redemption from the original sin is without faith or works; redemption from our own sins is given through faith and works. Both are the gifts of free grace; but while one is a gift forced upon us unconditionally, the other is a gift merely offered to us conditionally. The redemption of the one is compulsory; the reception of the other is voluntary. Man cannot, by any possible act, prevent his redemption from the fall; but he can utterly refuse and prevent his redemption from the penalty of his own sins." [^8]

Frequently, when I am teaching a class and we have read and discussed 2 Ne. 2 and 9, I quote for the students Paul's statement, "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive," and then ask them, "What death did Adam bring?" Students seem to have no difficulty in understanding the idea that Adam brought two deaths-the physical, meaning the death of the body, and the spiritual, meaning our separation from the presence of God. Then I ask, "What did the atonement of Jesus Christ bring?" They readily respond that it brought about mankind's resurrection from the grave; but they seem to have difficulty in grasping the idea that Jesus also redeemed all mankind from the spiritual death and that every one of us is going to be in the presence of God again, if only for the Judgment. Although most students can explain that the Atonement makes it possible for us to work out our salvation by faith, repentance, and so forth, they often slide right past this concept that we will be redeemed from all the effects of the Fall, and seem to feel that no one is going to return to God's presence except the righteous. While it is true that not all people will remain permanently in the presence of the Lord, it is equally true that all will return to his presence for judgment; thus, in our discussions I do not think we are justified in leaving out this critical part of the redemption process. This is one of the "very points" of doctrine taught in the Book of Mormon, a point that a person ought to know.

An Alternate Plan?

Was there an acceptable alternate plan, or alternate savior, if Jesus had not fulfilled his mission? This question may seem unimportant or even unnecessary, but it has some strong implications. Judging from the general life-style of mankind, or even of church-kind, many people must feel either that salvation is not worth struggling for or that there is more than one way to gain salvation. The real question is this: Is acceptance of the gospel of Jesus Christ mandatory or is it optional? Will the billions of people who have lived on the earth without a knowledge of Christ have to come to a knowledge of the very points of his doctrine before they can be saved? Is the gospel of Christ the only way or just the best way, the quickest way? We know that the creation of the world and the fall of Adam were parts of the divine plan, but does that mean that there were alternate ways by which man could have become mortal, the system used on this earth simply, being only one of them? Or is the gospel-that process of creation, fall, and atonement that leads to the redemption and exaltation of mankind-the only absolute and workable way?

What would have happened if Jesus had not come? or if he had come to earth but not been obedient to the end and not accomplished the Atonement? Was there then an alternate plan, another savior, a backup man?

Several years ago I discussed this topic with a group of teachers, and I noted that they were strongly of the opinion that if Jesus had failed, there would have been another way to accomplish salvation. They acknowledged that any other way probably would have been harder without Jesus, but, they said, man could have eventually saved himself without Jesus if Jesus had failed. Thus-although I don't think any of us had at that time searched out the logical implications of our thoughts-these teachers were saying, in effect, that Jesus Christ was a convenience but not an ultimate necessity. I countered by quoting Acts 4:12, wherein are recorded the words of Peter: "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." Their retort was that Peter said this after the atonement and resurrection of Christ were accomplished facts, and that therefore there is now no other way; but if Jesus had failed to make the Atonement, they reasoned, there would have to have been and would be an alternate way.

At that time I was not as well acquainted with the Book of Mormon and the book of Moses as I am now, and I had not thought this subject out completely; hence, while I protested their conclusion, I could not in the moment of the encounter think of a scriptural rebuttal. I was certain they were wrong, but I lacked the immediate ammunition to refute them. However, if I had known then what I know now, I would have called these teachers' attention to the scriptural items discussed below.

Looking at things chronologically, we find that Moses 6:52 is the earliest known reference stating that there is no other name other than Jesus Christ by which salvation is obtained. In this passage Enoch recounts a conversation between the Lord and father Adam. The Lord tells Adam that he must "be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, . . . which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men" (italics added).

Next we have 2 Ne. 25:20: "There is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, . . whereby man can be saved" (italics added).

Then 2 Ne. 31:21: "There is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God" (italics added).

But the very clearest expression of this concept is given by King Benjamin, quoting the words of an angel from heaven: "There shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ" (Mosiah 3:17, italics added). Later this same King Benjamin gives some additional particulars: "This is the means whereby salvation cometh. And there is none other salvation save this which hath been spoken of; neither are there any conditions whereby man can be saved except the conditions which I have told you." (Mosiah 4:8, italics added.)

The value of these passages is that they were spoken before the Atonement had taken place. This gives them an additional force and focus that they might not have if they had been spoken afterwards. (See also Mosiah 5:8; Alma 38:9; Hel. 5:9.) In my estimation, these are some of the "very points" of doctrine that are clarified for us in the Book of Mormon and other latter-day scriptures, if we just believe the scriptures mean what they say. All of this is in harmony with and gives substance to Jesus' words to Thomas: "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6; see also 3 Ne. 27:1-8; D&C 18:23; 109:4).

Hymns Reinforce Doctrine of Atonement

Many of our Church hymns reinforce the "very points" of doctrine we have discussed in this chapter. These hymns can enrich and reinforce our understanding of these subjects. Following are some excerpts from the hymnbook that are pertinent to the doctrine of the Atonement:

Behold the great Redeemer die, A broken law to satisfy. [^9]

For us the blood of Christ was shed; For us on Calvary's cross he bled, And thus dispelled the awful gloom, That else were this creation's doom. [^10]

How infinite that wisdom, The plan of holiness, That made salvation perfect And veiled the Lord in flesh, To walk upon his footstool And be like man, almost, In his exalted station, And die, or all was lost. [^11]

He died in holy innocence, A broken law to recompense. . . . This sacrament doth represent His blood and body for me spent. [^12]

He shed a thousand drops for you, A thousand drops of precious blood. [^13]

His precious blood he freely split; His life he freely gave, A sinless sacrifice for guilt, A dying world to save. . . . How great, how glorious, how complete, Redemption's grand design, Where justice, love, and mercy meet In harmony divine! [^14]

I marvel that he would descend from his throne divine To rescue a soul so rebellious and proud as mine. . . . I think of his hands pierced and bleeding to pay the debt! Such mercy, such love, and devotion can I forget? [^15]

I believe in Christ; he ransoms me. From Satan's grasp he sets me free. [^16]

Conclusion

In my opinion, the kind of faith necessary for salvation-the kind of faith spoken of in the Lectures on Faith-cannot be achieved if one views Jesus Christ's atonement, his excruciating pain, his bleeding at every pore, as simply an act of major convenience. As I read the Book of Mormon I perceive the message that the Fall's effects on all of us, coupled with our own sins, are so severe and dominating that, unless we are redeemed by One more powerful than all mankind combined, we will not be redeemed at all. The power of redemption is not in fallen man. I believe that saving faith requires a person to be completely convinced that he is entirely dependent upon Jesus Christ, and him only, for every shred of salvation. Without the Savior all is lost. The slightest reservation about the absolute necessity of Christ's atonement is injurious to one's spiritual health and to one's perfect faith and knowledge. I see no compromise on this point. Our relation to Christ is crucial, not casual. It is a necessity, not an option. May we diligently study and learn the "very points" of doctrine regarding the Atonement that we might develop and maintain that faith in Christ that leads to salvation.

Notes

From a lecture given to the faculty in Religious Education at Brigham Young University, 17 February 1989.

1 Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants," Ensign 17 (May 1987): 84.

2 Ezra Taft Benson, "Worthy Fathers, Worthy Sons," Ensign 15 (November 1985): 36.

3 As cited in Ernest L. Wilkinson, Leonard J. Arrington, and Bruce C. Hafen, Brigham Young University: The First One Hundred Years, 4 vols. (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975-76), 2:381-82, italics in original.

4 As cited in Ernest L. Wilkinson, Leonard J. Arrington, and Bruce C. Hafen, Brigham Young University: The First One Hundred Years, 2:383.

5 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 3:206.

6 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 10:324.

7 Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:9-10, italics in original; the source for the quote from Orson Pratt is the Millennial Star 12 (March 1, 1850): 69.

8 "Behold the Great Redeemer Die," Hymns, no. 191.

9 "While of These Emblems We Partake," Hymns, no. 173.

10 "O God, the Eternal Father," Hymns, no. 175.

11 "God Loved Us, So He Sent His Son," Hymns, no. 187.

12 "He Died! The Great Redeemer Died," Hymns, no. 192.

13 "How Great the Wisdom and the Love," Hymns, no. 195.

14 "I Stand All Amazed," Hymns, no. 193.

15 "I Believe in Christ," Hymns, no. 134.

---
Notas:
[^1] Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden of Eden because they partook of the forbidden fruit (v. 19). He does not define death, and he does not use the term spiritual death. An infinite atonement is needed to overcome the Fall (v. 7). The Lord God Omnipotent will come to dwell among men in a tabernacle of clay and be the Savior (vv. 5-11). God himself shall make an atonement for mankind (Mosiah 13:28). (Thus Abinadi identifies the Savior as the God who gave Moses the commandments.)
[^2] All mankind were "lost, because of the transgression of their parents" (v. 21). He does not specifically mention physical death as distinct from spiritual death. Without an infinite atonement, there would be no resurrection of the bodies of men (v. 7). The Redeemer will be called Jesus Christ (vv. 8, 12, 18). Without the Atonement, which God himself shall make, man must perish (Mosiah 13:28).
[^3] Without the Fall, all things would have remained as they were created (v. 22). He does not define what he means when he speaks of mankind's being "lost." Without an infinite atonement, the spirits of all men would become devils, forever miserable; that is, they would not just be subject to the devil, but they would actually become devils (vv. 8-9). No one can be saved without the redemption of God (Mosiah 13:32).
[^4] Without the Fall, Adam and Eve would have had no children (v. 23). He does not define or explain what would make the Messiah able to redeem mankind, or how the Redeemer would accomplish it. Because of the Atonement, all mankind will be resurrected, meaning that each person's spirit will be restored to its own physical body again (vv. 10-13). Moses prophesied that God would redeem his people (Mosiah 13:33).
[^5] The Messiah would come to redeem mankind from the Fall (v. 26). He does not use words that refer directly to man's spirit. After the resurrection, all mankind will be judged of God (v. 15). All the prophets have spoken more or less about these things; they have said that God himself should come down and take upon him the form of man (Mosiah 13:33-34).
[^6] Because of the atonement of the Messiah mankind is free to act (v. 26). The Redeemer, who will die for mankind, is also the Creator (v. 5). (Jacob mentions this but does not dwell on it at length.) God himself shall come down among men and redeem his people (Mosiah 15: 1).
[^7] All of these things are according to an eternal plan of the great Creator (vv. 6, 13). And thus God will break the bands of death (Mosiah 15:8).
[^8] The Redeemer (whom Abinadi has repeatedly identified as "God himself") shall be called Christ (Mosiah 15:21).
[^9] Used colorful, attention-getting figures of speech (Matt. 18:6; 23:13; Luke 7:24-28; John 5:14; 5:35; 6:35).
[^10] Employed object lessons (Matt. 18:1-6; 22:16; Luke 5:4-10).
[^11] Asked questions (Matt. 16:13-15; 22:35; 24:13-26).
[^12] Asked questions of those who asked him questions (Luke 10:25-28).
[^13] Bargained by means of questions (Matt. 21: 23-27).
[^14] Used invective and censure. Used witty reply and repartee. (Matt. 22:15-46; John 4:16-19; 10:31)
[^15] Candidly corrected those who were in error (Matt. 2:29).
[^16] Used debate and argument, beyond mere discussion (John 7, 8).
