Robert J. Matthews, Bible! a Bible! ( 1990)

18 THE PRICE OF REDEMPTION [^1]

The word redemption means to make a purchase, to be ransomed, to be liberated, to be rescued, to be delivered. In religious terms we speak of redemption as our deliverance from death and from the consequences of our sins. But, as the word redemption implies, such deliverance comes at a price and with an obligation.

And what was that price? we might ask. What made necessary the redemption of mankind from death and sin? Why was Jesus Christ particularly qualified to deliver us, and what did it cost him to become our Redeemer? What will it cost us to be redeemed? What would have been the fate of mankind had there been no Redeemer? The answers to these questions are basic to the gospel, and without some understanding of them we might not realize what the gospel is; conversely, if we come to understand what the price of redemption was, our gratitude for what Jesus has done for us will increase many fold.

To answer the above questions, then, we will consider some relevant passages from the New Testament. However, since our ultimate purpose is to get at the truth and to understand things as they really are, we will feel free to use all of the standard works, not only to confirm what is in the New Testament but also to clarify and supplement it. The Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible are clearer, more detailed, and therefore superior to the King James Version of the New Testament in declaring the doctrinal aspects of the Savior's mission. It is often the case that the New Testament tells what Jesus did, whereas latter-day revelation explains why he did it and gives a more significant purpose to his words and actions.

We should use all the correct information we can find in discussing the mission of Jesus Christ. Thus it is impossible for a person to gain a thorough understanding of the mission of Jesus Christ and his atonement if he does not consult and study latter-day revelation. You cannot get such an understanding from the New Testament alone in any language. Why is this? As has been shown in other chapters in this book, the problem with the Bible is not one of language and translation-it is the absence of an adequate and complete manuscript. Hence we need latter-day revelation to teach us what we need to know.

The Nature of the Four Gospels

Another brief observation concerning the New Testament record is in order here. Our basic sources for the mortal life and ministry of Jesus are the four books commonly known as the Gospels-Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. The present title for each of these reads "The Gospel According to . . ." followed by the name of the particular writer-St. Matthew, St. Mark, and so forth. [^2] Furthermore, it has become customary to think of these books as biographies or life histories of Jesus. They are in a sense biographical, but they are much more than that.

The Joseph Smith Translation emphasizes the doctrinal nature of these books, giving them the titles, "The Testimony of St. Matthew," "The Testimony of St. Mark," and so on. Such titles give these records a different character than if they were mere biographies, because a testimony has more to do with the nature, the purpose, and the significance of the Savior than with the details of his daily life. Notice also that in D&C 88:141 the Lord refers to John's record as a testimony rather than a biography. Of course there are some biographical details in the Gospels, but they are incidental rather than central.

Let me illustrate the nature of the four Gospels in a little different way. Jesus lived on this earth about thirty-three years. The books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John combined deal with only thirty-one days of those thirty-three years. That is, only thirty-one days of his mortal life are specified in the four books taken together. That would be a very meager biography or life history of anyone, let alone anyone as important as the Savior. However, these records do give considerable information as to who Jesus is-including his parentage, why he came to earth, the circumstances of his birth, his baptism, what he said, what he did, his sufferings, his atonement, his death, his burial, his resurrection from the dead, and his ascension into heaven. These are the things essential for a testimony. Other topics such as eating habits, favorite foods, color of hair, clothing, tone of voice, physical build, and the size of the house in which he lived are relatively unimportant when compared to the doctrinal things.

The Story Begins in Premortal Life

In order to comprehend why mankind's redemption was necessary and why Jesus was qualified to bring about that redemption, we must first consider the events of the premortal life. In that life, we understand, the Savior was selected as our Redeemer. We knew him there: hence our first acquaintance with Jesus began many thousands of years before we were ever born into mortality. I think we often miss the real issue of the contention in premor-tality that eventually led to the War in Heaven. We talk about it as though Lucifer were going to force everybody to obey. He said, "I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost" (Moses 4:1 ), and we interpret that as meaning that he was proposing forced obedience.

It seems strange to me that a third of all the spirits that had the potential to be born into this world would have favored a platt based on forced obedience. Most of us do not like to be forced. As I see it, the real issue was not so milch one of force as it was that Lucifer said he would guarantee salvation for his spirit brothers and sisters. He promised salvation without excellence, without effort, without hard work, without individual responsibility. That is the lie he promulgated in the pre-earth councils.

That so-called shortcut to salvation captivated many gullible and lazy spirits. They wanted something for nothing. We have cer-lain aspects of that in our society today: something is offered for nothing (a free lunch, we sometimes call it), and certain kinds of subsidies promise to guarantee the reward without the effort. With his something-for-nothing offer, then, Lucifer led away many spirits.

But individual progress does not come that way. Only by serious and strenuous exertion do we improve in character and in spiritual growth. In our society we still come in contact with many who arc influenced by this erroneous philosophy advocated by the rebellious in the premortal life. They think they can achieve salvation and exaltation without a struggle. We are still fighting the War in Heaven with the same participants and the same issues, but we are fighting it oil new territory.

Having ascertained that the devil's program was based on a false promise of excellence without effort, we can better appreciate the plan of our Father and His Chosen Son-a plan that would require real struggle on our part in order to do our best in this world to overcome our weaknesses and to obtain redemption from the ef-feets of mortality. Such a redemption would be matte possible through the sacrifice and merits Of our Redeemer. Jesus Christ. It is in view of the premortal life and the issues fought in the War in Heaven, then, that everything else in the ministry of Jesus and in the gospel must be understood. If we overlook the premortal life we never get the clear perspective necessary in mortality to under stand the gospel of redemption.

Upon learning in the premortal life about the plan of redemption. no doubt many of us labored as missionaries for the Savior going among the spirits to persuade others to choose the Savior and following him in preparing for earth life. Elder Orson Pratt Pratt discussing the conditions that existed in the premortal world that finally led to the War in Heaven, the appointment of some to special callings, and also the expulsion of many spirits. said:

It is not likely that the final decision of the contending armies took place immediately. Many, no doubt. were unsettled in their views, unstable in their minds. and undecided as to which force to join: there may have been, for aught we know, many deserters from both armies: and there may have been a long period before the division line was so strictly drawn as to become unalterable. Laws, without doubt, were enacted, and penalties affixed, according to the nature of the offences or crimes: those who altogether turned from the Lord, and were determined to maintain the cause of Satan and who proceeded to the utmost extremities of wickedness. placed themselves without the reach of redemption therefore, such were prohibited from entering into a second probationary state, and had no privilege of receiving bodies of flesh and bones. . . .

Among the two-thirds who remained. it is highly probable that there were many who were not valiant in the war, but whose sins were of such a nature that they could be forgiven through faith in the future sufferings of the Only Begotten of the Father. and through their sincere repentance and reformation. We see no impropriety in Jesus offering himself as an acceptable offering and sacrifice before the Father to atone for the sins of His brethren, committed, not only in the second, but also in the first estate. Certain it was, that the work which Jesus was to accomplish, was known in the Grand Council where the rebellion broke out; it was known that man would sin in his second estate: for it was upon the subject of his redemption that the assembly became divided, and which resulted in war. . . .

If all the two-thirds who kept their first estate were equally valiant in the war, and equally faithful, why should some of them be called and chosen in their spiritual state to hold responsible stations and offices in this world, while others were not? If there were none of those spirits who sinned, why were the Apostles, when they existed in their previous state, chosen to be blessed "with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ?" All these passages seem to convey an idea, that there were callings, choosings, ordinances, promises, predestinations, elections, and appointments, made before the world began. [^3]

We now have a veil of forgetfulness drawn over our minds, and we do not remember the details of those premortal events; yet the spiritual capacity that we developed in the pre-earth life has come with us into mortality, and when we hear the gospel preached it strikes a familiar note. We arc learning again principles we once knew; that previously developed spiritual capacity responds to every true doctrine that is taught to us when the doctrine is properly presented. Our main business in ibis world, then, is to continue that spiritual development we started so long ago, and this we will do by faith in that same Jesus whom we knew and loved and obeyed in our pre-mortal lift.

The Need for Mankind's Redemption

With the broader perspective given us by a knowledge of the premortal life, we can see that a wise Heavenly Father has ordained all the necessary steps leading to the redemption and exaltation of his children. Let us now consider the particular earthly events that set in motion this process of redemption. Here we will be answering the question, What made necessary the redemption of mankind from death and sin?

In John 3:16-17 we read: "For God so loved the world, that he gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, bill have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved." The Bible provides us with this great statement about how we, without the Savior, would surely perish. Paul also discusses these things in I Corinthians and in Romans, but not as clearly as we would like. It takes the Book of Mormon. the Doctrine and Covenants. and the Pearl of Great Price to explain more fully why we would have perished. We would have perished because of the fall of Adam; we could not save ourselves from either his fall or our own sins.

There is passage after passage in the Book of Mormon and in other latter-day scriptures indicating that the fall of Attain brought death upon mankind, two kinds of death: the death of the body and the death of the spirit, this second kind of death being a separation from things of righteousness - an alienation from the things of God Because of the Fall, Adam and Eve and all of their posterity suffered both of these deaths. Thus, if there were no act of redemption made

by someone who was not subject to those deaths-or, in other words. if there were no atonement made by Jesus Christ-then mankind would everlastingly remain subject to those two deaths and could not be redeemed. And so it was absolutely critical that the Lord come into the world and work out an atonement

Let's take a look at some of the plain statements in the book of Mormon on Adam's fall and the resulting need for mankind's redemption. In a missionary situation. Alma said:

Now we see that Adam did fall by the partaking of the for bidden fruit. according to the word of God; and thus we see that by his fall, all mankind became a lost and fallen people

And now behold. I say unto you that if it had been possible for Adam to have partaken of the fruit of the tree of life at that time, there would have been no death, and the word would have been void, making God a liar, for he said: If thou eat thou shalt surely die.

And we see that death comes upon mankind. Yea, the death which has been spoken of by Amulek, which is the temporal death; nevertheless there was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection of the dead. (Alma 12:22-24.)

And in Alma 22:13-14 we read of another missionary situation in which these doctrines are clearly stated:

And Aaron did expound unto him [Lamoni's father] the scriptures from the creation of Adam, laying the fall of man before him, and their carnal state and also the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all whosoever would believe on his name.

And since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance, and so forth; and that he breaketh the bands of death, that the grave shall have no victory, and that the sting of death should be swallowed up in the hopes of glory; and Aaron did expound all these things unto the king.

Finally, we note an excerpt from the words of Nephi's younger brother Jacob. Jacob is one of the great doctrinal preachers of the Book of Mormon. He is one of the greatest theologians in all scripture. It would be hard to measure one prophet against another, but some have gifts in one direction and others have gifts in another; and Jacob had a great insight into, as well as a great facility of expression to explain, the Atonement.

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement-save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. (2 Ne. 9:6-7.)

The "first judgment which came upon man" was "thou shalt surely die" (Moses 3:17). It involved both deaths, the death of the body and the death as to things pertaining to righteousness, or the spiritual death.

Jesus saved mankind from these deaths, the consequences of the fall of Adam. We cannot have a proper understanding of the need for a Savior if we do not believe in the fall of Adam. And we should go one step further and accept that the creation of the world was done with the view in mind that there would be a fall and with the provision of a Savior from before the foundation of the world. The fall of Adam was no surprise to heaven. God wanted it done. He provided the Savior before the Fall ever occurred.

Jesus the Designated Redeemer

Having come thus far in our discussion, we are now prepared to consider the reasons why Jesus was qualified to redeem mankind.

Jesus was the divinely appointed Beloved Son of God the Father, and he was born of Mary into mortality. In many ways- in the incidentals such as eating and talking and the wearing of clothes -he was like other men. But in parentage, being sired by the Eternal Father himself, he was vastly different from all others. It was necessary that he be different from others so that he could make a payment for the transgression of Adam and for everyone's personal sins.

Every other person born into the world has been subject to the fall of Adam and therefore subject to death. Only Jesus was able to give his life but remain undominated by death. Thus, when he chose to die, not being subject to death either by Adam's fall or by any sins of his own, he could shed his blood and give his life as an offering for others. He could also rise from the dead with a perfect, glorified physical body. No one else could do that. Here again the Book of Mormon gives the dearest explanations regarding these matters, as evidenced by the following words of Amulek:

And now, behold, I will testify unto you of myself that these things are true. Behold, I say unto you, that I do know that Christ shall come among the children of men, to take upon him the transgressions of his people, and that he shall atone for the sins of the world; for the Lord God hath spoken it.

For it is expedient that an atonement should be made; for according m the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, all are hardened: yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made.

For it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice.

Now there is not any man that can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man murdereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, Nay.

But the law requireth the life of him who hath murdered; therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world. (Alma 34:8-12.)

Thus we see that Jesus was indeed quail fled to be the Redeemer of mankind. But what were the specific costs to the Savior as he fulfilled this redemptive role?

Jesus' Spiritual Preparation

Even though Jesus was the Son of God by divine appointment, he had to keep the commandments and be sinless in order to make an atonement that would benefit others. He had to remain sinless, even as he was tempted and could sense the pull and attraction of sin. Note Paul's words: "For verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham." That means that he did not come into this world with a wall around him that would shield him from pain and sorrow and temptation; rather, he came with the feeling, warmth, concern, and sensitivity common to other human beings. "Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." (Heb. 2:16-18.) Paul also wrote that Jesus "was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4:15-16.)

As recorded in the Book of Mormon, around 124 B.C. King Benjamin stated that an angel had told him the Savior "shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people" (see Mosiah 3:2-7).

Jesus did not attain to the marvelous ability to resist temptation and avoid sin simply by virtue of his being the Son of God. He had to practice the righteous way of life that leads to that strength and character. Such a capacity and status is not achieved instantly. The preparation for Jesus, and for us, began in the premortal existence. Indeed, it was during that earlier time that we, by our faith in Jesus' future atonement and our compliance with the plan of redemption, progressed to the point that we were permitted to be born into this world as little children, innocent before God.

Jesus' Life One of Self-Denial

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that Jesus "descended in suffering below that which man can suffer; or, in other words, suffered greater sufferings, and was exposed to more powerful contradictions than any man can be." [^4] Because Jesus knew more he felt more; he understood more; he suffered more; and he could be tempted more than any other person. It seems that the number and severity of the temptations that one experiences are in proportion to one's knowledge and perception. A person with greater capacity may be called on to endure greater temptations. On the other hand, the joys and the rewards for that same person are also greater.

Jesus was obedient to the Father. He said, "The Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him" (John 8:29). Jesus drew strength from his Father the same way that we can draw strength from Jesus. He used a vivid description when he said that his disciples were to take up the cross and follow him. What does it mean to take up one's cross? We find out from the Joseph Smith Translation: "Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross, and follow me. And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments." (JST, Matt. 16:25-26.)

The above passages of scripture show that Jesus denied himself of things that his mortal nature may have desired and yet were wrong for him; and he became spiritually strong as a result of that denial. The question that each of us has to answer for himself sometime in his lifetime (and the sooner the better) is whether the spirituality that can be gained is worth the required self-denial. The Savior says it is; the scriptures say it is; and I say it is. But apparently most people in the world do not think the sacrifice is worth it, for we observe that human beings in general do not deny themselves of very many things. Apparently many do not feel that a loss of spirituality or a failure to aspire to its higher levels is a tragic thing.

Jesus the Perfect Example of Self-Mastery

Evidences of the achievement of self-mastery in Jesus' life are found throughout the scriptures. For example, after his baptism Jesus went into the wilderness for forty days, during which time he fasted and prayed. The King James Version says that Jesus went into the wilderness "to be tempted of the devil" (Matt. 4:1 ). The Joseph Smith Translation, being more spiritually attuned, gives us a different perspective. It says that Jesus went into the wilderness to fast and "to be with God." It was after he had "communed with God" that Jesus successfully resisted the temptations of the devil. (See JST, Matt. 4:1-2.) The Savior's communion with his Father, made possible by his fasting and prayers, strengthened him spiritually.

Consider another episode in Jesus' life. In Galilee the disciples tried to cast out an evil spirit, and they could not. The Savior, however, was successful in doing so. When the disciples asked Jesus why they had failed, he explained that they didn't have enough faith. He also said that evil spirits of that type "goeth not out but by prayer and fasting." (See Matt. 17:14-21.) Jesus' success in casting out that evil spirit demonstrates that he had the necessary faith developed by prayer and fasting.

Spiritual strength and self-mastery are rooted in personal prayer. The record says that before choosing the Twelve, Jesus prayed all night unto his Father (see Luke 6:12-13). Why would he have done that if it were not necessary for his spiritual well-being? No doubt such prayer would aid him in choosing the Twelve in accordance with his Father's will. At the time of his greatest ordeal in the Garden of Gethsemane, when he bled at every pore and took upon himself the sins of mankind, he prayed. And then, as the scriptural account tells us, "there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him." (See Luke 22:41-43 .) Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested in his writings that Adam might have been that angel; for who else could have more appropriately offered strength to Jesus at this time? [^5] What I want to emphasize here is how the Savior received this spiritual strength: He got it through prayer and fasting. We have every reason to believe that much of Jesus' spiritual power-the power by which he calmed the storm, walked on the water, turned water into wine, healed the sick, raised the dead, fed the five thousand, forgave sins, and so forth-came to him as a result of his triumphant struggles to overcome the drag of mortality. His attainment and development of spiritual power came through his deliberate effort and from his receiving strength from his Father.

Thus, for the Savior the cost of our redemption was his complete obedience and dedication to the Father's will; he did not allow himself any deviation or straying from that path of obedience. In order to be able to save the world, he had to be the One who would be sinless, who would be perfect in his self-denial and his self-mastery. He had to become the person able to save himself as well as others. This Jesus did, as he worked out his own and our salvation, ultimately paying the highest price imaginable-the sacrifice of his own life.

Jesus Suffered and Gave His Life

The price of our redemption was so high that only a God could bring about our deliverance. Jesus Christ, through his voluntary atoning sacrifice, "purchased [us] with his own blood" (Acts 20:28; see also Heb. 9:12). Jesus' saving mission was described by Jacob over five hundred years before the Savior's mortal ministry: "And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam. And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day." (2 Ne. 9:21-22.)

In Luke's account in the New Testament we read of Jesus' going into the Garden of Gethsemane and there working out an atonement for all mankind:

And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives; and his disciples also followed him.

And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation.

And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and kneeled down, and prayed.

Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.

And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

And when he rose from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found them sleeping for sorrow,

And said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. (Luke 22:39-46.)

It was in Gethsemane, on the slopes of the Mount of Olives, that Jesus made his perfect atonement by the shedding of his blood-more so than on the cross. We have a corroboration of that concept in the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein the Lord says:

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit-and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink-

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men.

Wherefore, I command you again to repent, lest I humble you with my almighty power; and that you confess your sins, lest you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit. (D&C 19:16-20.)

I suppose that all of us have at some time or another done something that caused the Spirit to leave us; hence we felt low, we felt down, we felt alone. In each case, our losing the Spirit was the result of something we had done individually, not something someone else had done.

Now, let us consider the case of Jesus, who had the Holy Ghost all the days of his life (and the Holy Ghost is the Comforter). Indeed, the Savior had the help of the Holy Ghost from the time he was born. At every trial and at every endeavor and at every temptation, he had the strength of the Holy Ghost to be with him. But as he went into the Garden of Gethsemane and began to take upon him our sins, the Father withdrew the Spirit from him, and Jesus worked out the Atonement alone. [^6] This withdrawal of the Spirit is the agony described by the Savior in the verses above, an agony which, as he told Martin Harris, "in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit." It appears that the Father withdrew the Spirit from his Son in the Garden of Gethsemane so that Jesus might tread the winepress alone (see D&C 133:50). Jesus alone is our Redeemer and Savior. He committed no sins; nothing he had done caused the Spirit to withdraw from him. It was our sins he carried and for which he suffered.

The Costs of Redemption for Mankind

Now to the question, What will it cost us to be redeemed?

First we should understand that mankind cannot prepare for redemption by acquiring knowledge alone or by just attending to a few rituals. It is true that gaining knowledge and performing ordinances are part of the process, but redemption comes to a person through a change of heart, through being born again and being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Unless a person experiences this change of heart and spiritual rebirth, he is never quite ready for a righteous existence. In fact, he might not even desire such an existence. The Holy Ghost must touch and temper that person's spirit and disposition. Spirit must speak to spirit; that is, the Holy Spirit must act upon a person's spirit to purify his desires and actions.

In a related vein, Paul wrote to the Corinthians: "I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God." (1 Cor. 2:3-5.)

Every person needs experiences with the Spirit of God. Without them there is no genuine testimony, no conversion-only intellectual commitment. It is folly to think that salvation can come by assimilation of knowledge alone, for the natural man has too many insurmountable limitations.

Gaining knowledge is important, but it is different from being sanctified by the Holy Ghost and different from having a change of heart. We need light and truth, not just truth alone. Light is the contribution of the Holy Spirit, and such light is lacking in an intellectual experience alone.

Paul continued his explanation to the Corinthians with these words: "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them [he didn't say "neither does he know them"; he said he can't know them], because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2: 14). Attitudes, convictions, and viewpoints of eternal significance are planted in the soul by the Spirit, not by cold intellectual exercise. Again, gaining knowledge is absolutely essential, but it is not the thing that changes a natural man into a saint; only the Holy Ghost will do that, which is a cleansing as by fire. Thus we see that intellectual exercise is a complement to, but no substitute for, the workings of the Holy Ghost.

The Book of Mormon speaks eloquently of the mighty change of heart that must take place in the soul of a believer (see Alma 5:12-26). When a person has experienced this phenomenon, he or she is a changed person, a new creature because of faith. Such a person has "no more disposition to do evil" and cannot "look upon sin save it [be] with abhorrence" (Mosiah 5:2; Alma 13:12). The luster and the wisdom of the world lose some of their attraction, and the hope of redemption enlivens the soul. Without this change the struggles of mortality can become so great that one grows weary and neglects the work of the Lord. However, a person truly converted or changed will have the proper attitude about spiritual things, even if he lacks the detailed supporting knowledge.

Love the Agent of Conversion

To understand how the change of heart occurs, let us consider the experience of a man who became one of the greatest of the Lord's servants, the Apostle Paul. At first Paul was a stout fighter against the gospel of Jesus because he saw it was a threat to the religion of Judaism. The Lord struck him down by His power, physically blinded him for three days, and then healed him of his blindness. The initial shock was so great that Paul began to fall into line, and he became a willing follower and disciple of Jesus. (See Acts 8-9.) But the good effect of that original blow would not have lasted the rest of Paul's life were it not for the understanding he received and the change of heart he experienced through the operation of the Holy Spirit.

As he learned how the redemption wrought by Jesus Christ operates, Paul became aware that the Lord suffered for mankind because He loved them. Paul could feel that love that Jesus had for him, and thus it was not the fear of the Lord's physical power that made Paul completely devoted and dedicated to the Savior. To Timothy, Paul wrote:

I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry;

Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.

And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.

Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. (1 Tim. 1:12-16.)

To Titus, Paul wrote that Jesus "gave himself for us." I think the emphasis here ought to be on the word himself. Jesus "gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people" (Titus 2:14, italics added). And to the Galatians, Paul wrote: "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me" (Gal. 2:20, italics added).

Paul preached salvation by grace because he learned that Jesus, out of his infinite love for the entire human family, had made it possible for man to conquer the forces that would bring upon him death and unhappiness. In the scriptural sense, what man does is called "works," and what Jesus does for us is called "grace." Thus, Jesus does for us what we could not do for ourselves, and we are able to obtain salvation because of his grace.

What If There Were No Redeemer?

Finally, we turn to the question, What would have been the fate of mankind had there been no Redeemer? I have noticed that quite often when we talk about our Savior we talk principally about the resurrection and its attendant blessings, but we rarely talk about what our circumstances would have been if there had been no atonement by Jesus.

I remember when, during a discussion in a class many years ago when I was a teenager, one of the students asked the teacher what would have become of our spirits if there had been no redemption made by Jesus. The teacher responded: "Well, I do not know what would have happened to our spirits, but I give it as my guess that, if there had been no atonement made by Jesus, we would still go on to whatever degree of glory we had merited. But we would have to go there as spirits without bodies, because Jesus brought to pass the resurrection, and if there were no resurrection we would have no bodies."

None of us in the class knew enough about the gospel to know if that was the right answer. But some time later, while serving a mission, I was reading in the book of 2 Nephi when I realized that if Jacob had been in that earlier class meeting he would have said something like this: "Now, wait a minute. This is what the atonement of Jesus does for us: It not only brings the body forth from the grave but also redeems the spirit from what otherwise would have been an endless, miserable condition with the devil." Or, in other words, if Jesus Christ had not performed the infinite atonement, every man, woman, and child-everybody who belongs to the family of Adam-would have become a son of perdition.

Here is Jacob's explanation as recorded in the Book of Mormon. Speaking of the Atonement, he stated:

It must needs be an infinite atonement-save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more [that is, if there were no resurrection of the body] our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. . . .

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit. (2 Ne. 9:7-10.)

Recall what Jesus said: "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly" (John 10:10). When we understand the alternative-what our fate would have been without the Savior-the preceding words have altogether new and deeper meaning. The more abundant life promised by Jesus refers not only to a resurrected, endless life with a body but also to a better quality of life both now and in the hereafter. It's the joy of a celestial life compared with the misery and disappointment of hell.

Jesus' unique situation, the important fact that he alone is the Savior for all mankind, and the truth that without him all is lost are borne out in several scriptures. For example, Jesus said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6). Peter, testifying of Jesus Christ before a council of Jews, said it this way: "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts 4:12). Peter made this declaration after the atonement and resurrection of Jesus had already been accomplished, but in the Book of Mormon we find the same doctrine spoken many hundred years before Jesus was born (see 2 Ne. 31:21; Mosiah 3:17; 4:8; 5:8). We must realize that there never was any other name, even before Christ's mission in mortality, by which salvation could be obtained. He always has been the only Savior for all of mankind, and he always will be. There are no alternatives, no backup men, no substitute plans.

As we have mentioned previously in this chapter, the consequences of the fall of Adam were both physical and spiritual. Had Jesus not done what he did in his atonement, nothing the rest of us could ever do would make up for the loss. The Savior's words regarding the vine and the branches are appropriate in this context:

I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.

Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.

Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. (John 15:1-5.)

The message of the gospel is that Jesus has broken the bands of death and hell. The resurrection of Jesus Christ is the greatest proclamation of all time, but the Savior's triumph affects more than the life of the physical body. For the faithful there is not only a resurrection of the dead body to everlasting life but also a redemption of the spirit from unhappiness to a state of eternal bliss and a fulness of joy. All of this has been made possible through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, which he shed in Gethsemane, through his death upon the cross, and through his rising from the grave with a perfect resurrected body.

Quite often I find when I talk to students about the Savior, some of them wonder if there was an alternate plan; they seem to be asking, "What if Jesus had failed?" Now, not intending to cast aspersions on these students, I think that that question typifies one of the tools the devil used in the premortal life. I think he not only "guaranteed" salvation without effort for everybody but also probably went around saying something like this: "Now look, if you allow yourselves to be born into this world subject to the fall of Adam, subject to sin and to death, and if Jesus doesn't come through, then you have lost your salvation." That is true; that is what would have been the case. If Jesus had not performed the infinite atonement, we all would have become sons of perdition, and he would have also.

I can almost hear Lucifer in that premortal sphere saying, "Are you going to put all of your faith in Jesus?" And those spirits who were not strong in their faith were thus prompted by the devil to wonder, to doubt, and to think to themselves, "Well, I don't know if I want to trust Jesus or not. What if he fails?" Such a thought is just about like going tracting without purse or scrip but having ten dollars in your shoe just in case. That is not faith. During our pre-mortal life, having faith in Jesus Christ meant that we knew he would not let us down. That is why the gospel is called the "good news." The good news is that there is a redemption for mankind and that Jesus successfully performed the Atonement in order to bring that redemption about.

Conclusion

What was the price of redemption? According to the scriptures the price that Jesus paid was that he gave of himself completely, not even withholding his life; he shed his blood and died on the cross for the sins of the world; he paid for a broken law-a debt we were unable to pay for ourselves. He would not have done this unless he loved us. The costs to us are minor in comparison: we are to love him, believe on his name, repent of our sins, be baptized in water, keep his commandments, and love one another. This doesn't just mean refraining from wrongdoing, but in the larger sense it means deliberately going about doing good and building up the kingdom. No person will do this consistently unless he has the same kind of love in his heart that Jesus had. We need the mighty change of heart that comes from the Holy Ghost.

We cannot fully appreciate the doctrine of redemption if we do not accept and understand the doctrine of the Fall. Moreover, if we take away from the plan of salvation the concept of the pre-earth life, the doctrine of the fall of Adam, and the doctrine of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, then we make of the gospel simply a system of ethics. And that will not do. The gospel is related to ethics, but it is so much more than that. Like Alma, I rejoice in the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. I am so glad he came.

Yea, and the voice of the Lord, by the mouth of angels, doth declare it unto all nations; yea, doth declare it, that they may have glad tidings of great joy; yea, and he doth sound these glad tidings among all his people, yea, even to them that are scattered abroad upon the face of the earth; wherefore they have come unto us.

And [the gospel is] made known unto us in plain terms, that we may understand, that we cannot err; and this because of our being wanderers in a strange land; therefore, we are thus highly favored. (Alma 13:22-23.)

Thus given the price of our redemption, we see that our relationship with the Savior is not casual; it is not optional. It is absolute and critical. Without him there would be no salvation, no redemption, no resurrection, and no happiness. All mankind must take upon themselves his name. Salvation is to triumph over everything that would destroy the happiness and the well-being of man-sin, fear, unhappiness, jealousy, death, and the devil. It is the Lord's purpose to help us achieve this triumph (see Moses 1:39). President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., said:

You know, I believe that the Lord will help us. I believe if we go to him, he will give us wisdom, if we are living righteously. I believe he will answer our prayers. I believe that our Heavenly Father wants to save every one of his children. I do not think he intends to shut any of us off because of some slight transgression, some slight failure to observe some role or regulation. There are the great elementals that we must observe, but he is not going to be captious about the lesser things.

I believe that his juridical concept of his dealings with his children could be expressed in this way: I believe that in his justice and mercy he will give us the maximum reward for our acts, give us all that he can give, and in the reverse, I believe that he will impose upon us the minimum penalty which it is possible for him to impose. [^7]

May we obtain the full benefit of our Savior's love and appreciate what he has done to redeem us. To ignore him is the greatest form of ingratitude. To fail to obey his commandments is the greatest of all mistakes. To follow him and to serve him are the greatest happiness.

Notes

From The Eleventh Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, The New Testament (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1983), pp. 157-68, and Brigham Young University 1984-85 Devotional and Fireside Speeches (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, University Publications, 1985), pp. 42-48.

1 See John E. Steinmueller, A Companion to Scripture Studies. . . 3 vols. (New York: J. F. Wagner, Inc., 1941-43), 3:34-35.

2 Orson Pratt, "The Pre-existence of Man," The Seer 1 (April 1853): 54-56.

3 Lectures on Faith 5:2.

4 See Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81), 4:124-25.

5 See Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 3:205-6.

---
Notas:
[^1] Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden of Eden because they partook of the forbidden fruit (v. 19). He does not define death, and he does not use the term spiritual death. An infinite atonement is needed to overcome the Fall (v. 7). The Lord God Omnipotent will come to dwell among men in a tabernacle of clay and be the Savior (vv. 5-11). God himself shall make an atonement for mankind (Mosiah 13:28). (Thus Abinadi identifies the Savior as the God who gave Moses the commandments.)
[^2] All mankind were "lost, because of the transgression of their parents" (v. 21). He does not specifically mention physical death as distinct from spiritual death. Without an infinite atonement, there would be no resurrection of the bodies of men (v. 7). The Redeemer will be called Jesus Christ (vv. 8, 12, 18). Without the Atonement, which God himself shall make, man must perish (Mosiah 13:28).
[^3] Without the Fall, all things would have remained as they were created (v. 22). He does not define what he means when he speaks of mankind's being "lost." Without an infinite atonement, the spirits of all men would become devils, forever miserable; that is, they would not just be subject to the devil, but they would actually become devils (vv. 8-9). No one can be saved without the redemption of God (Mosiah 13:32).
[^4] Without the Fall, Adam and Eve would have had no children (v. 23). He does not define or explain what would make the Messiah able to redeem mankind, or how the Redeemer would accomplish it. Because of the Atonement, all mankind will be resurrected, meaning that each person's spirit will be restored to its own physical body again (vv. 10-13). Moses prophesied that God would redeem his people (Mosiah 13:33).
[^5] The Messiah would come to redeem mankind from the Fall (v. 26). He does not use words that refer directly to man's spirit. After the resurrection, all mankind will be judged of God (v. 15). All the prophets have spoken more or less about these things; they have said that God himself should come down and take upon him the form of man (Mosiah 13:33-34).
[^6] Because of the atonement of the Messiah mankind is free to act (v. 26). The Redeemer, who will die for mankind, is also the Creator (v. 5). (Jacob mentions this but does not dwell on it at length.) God himself shall come down among men and redeem his people (Mosiah 15: 1).
[^7] All of these things are according to an eternal plan of the great Creator (vv. 6, 13). And thus God will break the bands of death (Mosiah 15:8).
