Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Taming of Thunder

OTTO LEPPERT

When George Washington was eleven years old, his father died quite suddenly and unexpectedly.

Young George had to look after his younger brothers and his sister, Betty. Besides his studies, he spent much of his time on the Mount Vernon plantation hunting, fishing, and taking part in such active sports as swimming, wrestling, and foot and horse racing. His happiest times were when he could take his rifle and his dogs, mount his horse, and go hunting. George seemed to have a special fondness for pets of every description, and a visitor would always find a number of pet animals around the stable.

One day, when George was sixteen, his friend Billy Bustle, who was envious of his skill with horses after George had beaten him in a horse race, dared George to ride a wild stallion owned by Sam Wheeler, a horse dealer in Alexandria.

Billy said, "You think you are so smart that you can master any horse, but I challenge you to ride this unbroken animal. I have heard that he has thrown a dozen riders and now every man fears even to try and mount him."

"I accept your challenge," replied George. "I have confidence that I can tame any horse, no matter how spirited. You and I will ride over to Alexandria this afternoon, and I'll put my skill with horses to the test."

"Good," exclaimed Billy, "but I think you will meet your match this time, if what I have heard about this stallion is true."

Upon arriving at the outskirts of Alexandria, the two boys soon spotted Sam Wheeler's horse ranch. After George told him of his plan to ride the unbroken steed, Sam led the boys to the outer corral. On the way he cautioned George about the horse, saying, "I must remind you that this is a very spirited animal. He has never been ridden, and every man who has attempted to mount him has regretted it. However, he is not a mean horse. He is intelligent and has never kicked or trampled any man who has been thrown. In fact, you can approach him and perhaps even touch him, but as soon as you start to mount, he will rear and buck so violently that you will fly off the saddle. I warn you that you could be injured. Because of his wildness I have vowed to give him to anyone who can successfully ride him."

By this time they had reached the corral, and the horse stood before them. George could see that this was no ordinary animal, but a powerful, blue-blooded steed, more than sixteen hands high, with a glossy, reddish-brown coat, long mane, well-shaped neck, and large breadth of bone. His eyes were large, black, and expressive, and he looked imposing and unconquerable as he switched his tail, stamped his hoofs, and snorted in defiance as the men came near him. In all, he made a majestic-looking figure, with his fine combination of beauty and strength.

George exclaimed, "What a magnificent steed! If you will have your men saddle him, I'll mount and we'll soon see who is master."

Sam had his stablemen lead the horse into a small enclosure where he could not buck or rear. After a struggle they managed to put on a saddle and tighten the saddle girth.

George quickly lowered himself onto the animal's back and firmly grasped the reins. As soon as the enclosure gate was opened, the stallion dashed into the corral, bounding high into the air, crashing down swiftly, bucking wildly, and wheeling around in circles. George felt he would be thrown. He did not think he could continue to hold on at this furious pace. He knew his horsemanship was being tested as the powerful beast tried every way to dislodge him.

Gradually, the swift and violent tempo of the battle diminished as the horse tired. He reared, laid back his ears and showed his teeth, and breathed deeply with inflated nostrils. Then, letting out a scornful neigh, he began to paw the ground, puzzled because he was unable to throw off the rider.

At this point George called for the corral gates to be opened. With a great plunge and a flashing burst of speed, the stallion dashed out into the meadow, galloping swiftly with long, sure strides. George held the reins tightly as the wind whistled past and the landscape rushed by.

The amazed little group watched the horse and rider disappear into the distance while Sam remarked, "I sure hope George can stay in the saddle. He and the stallion make a good pair."

Some time later, when Sam was on the verge of sending some of his men out to look for George, who he feared had been thrown, they glimpsed a horse and rider approaching at a trot. Then George and the stallion came into clear view with the rider in full control.

Sam greeted George enthusiastically. "Congratulations, young man! You are now the owner of a full-blooded stallion."

George replied, "I cannot accept him, because I was dismounted on the way to Mount Vernon. I did manage to hold onto the reins, though, and I believe that he actually allowed me to remount!"

"No matter," said Sam, "you did subdue him, and he is now rightfully yours. How did you manage it?"

"He is a strong animal, with courage, intelligence, and great endurance," replied George. "I had to be firm and convince him that I was his master, and at the same time I had to make him realize that he had nothing to fear from me. I think I'll name him `Thunder' after the booming sound of his hoofs on the road. I can assure you that he will receive good care. I'm sure that Thunder and I will become the best of friends."

The men were astonished to see the great change in the stallion that now stood quietly at George's side as he dismounted, playfully nipping his sleeve as if to say, "That was fun. Let's do it again!"
