Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

A Strange Journey

THELMA J. HARRISON

It was a July night in 1963. Don Marshall, a Brigham Young University student who was touring Europe, sat in his hotel room in Innsbruck, Austria, planning the remainder of his trip. The time had come when he must plan definitely where he was going and when.

As Don planned, he decided his first stop would be Vienna. The second day he would travel into Yugoslavia and stay in Belgrade. The third night he would spend at the "Student House" in Skopje (pronounced Scopia). He planned the rest of his trip in this way.

However, before going to bed, Don knelt in prayer. His summer had been a wonderful one, and though he was traveling alone, he felt the Lord had ever been with him to guide him and make his travels more pleasant and meaningful.

As Don prayed, he told his Heavenly Father that though he had made a schedule of his own, he still wanted to travel under his Heavenly Father's direction and do the things he would have him do.

Early the next morning Don left Innsbruck, but strangely, he did not drive toward Vienna as he had planned. Instead he traveled down the Alps toward Venice, Italy. Why Don drove to Venice he did not know. He had planned to visit Venice three weeks later. The trip was out of his way, taking precious time and costing extra money. Still he did not turn back. Somehow the direction in which he was going seemed right.

Late the night of Don's second day of travel, he arrived in Venice. He stayed only overnight; then he headed straight for Vienna to follow his original schedule. He arrived in Vienna late that night after sixteen hours of driving through rugged mountains. Wearily, he tumbled into bed.

The next morning, refreshed, he sat listening to the radio. In German, a language Don understood, he heard a sad and alarming report. During the night, the city of Skopje had been destroyed by a violent earthquake. Don reached for his schedule. Tears filled his eyes. If it hadn't been for his strange journey to Venice, he would have been staying in Skopje when the earthquake struck.

Three days later Don visited Skopje. He walked through the ruins of what had been the third largest city of Yugoslavia. Where was the "Student House"? Nowhere among the remaining buildings could he find it.

Later, Don met another student traveler. Don inquired, "What happened to the `Student House' in Skopje?"

The traveler replied, "It was completely destroyed."

Children's Friend, July 1962.
