Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Something to Drink

LUCILE C. READING

The boy tossed and turned with fever. His mother, Mrs. Smith, had tried in every way she knew to make him more comfortable, but George Albert hurt all over and was almost too weak to raise his head. He remembered how his mother had told him that once there had been two other children in the family but both of them had died. He wondered if he were going to die too. Somehow he knew that his mother was wondering the very same thing.

There were few doctors at that time in Salt Lake City, where George Albert lived, but his mother was able to get one to come to the house to tell her what was wrong with her boy and how to help him. The doctor said the boy had typhoid fever, which was a hard disease to cure in those days. He said George Albert was very ill and that even after he began to get better, he would have to stay in bed for at least three weeks. The doctor told Mrs. Smith that in the meantime, her son was to have no solid food but that he needed to drink a large quantity of liquids. The doctor suggested that she brew some coffee to give to the sick boy every little while.

George Albert had been taught that in the World of Wisdom given by the Lord to Joseph Smith, all Latter-day Saints were advised not to use coffee. George Albert said he would drink a lot of water instead of coffee and he asked his mother to send for Brother Hawks, a ward teacher who called at their home each month.

Brother Hawks worked at the foundry, but as soon as he could get away he hurried over to the Smith home. Mrs. Smith told him of the doctor's suggestion about coffee. She told him that George Albert said he did not want to drink any coffee, but he knew that if Brother Hawks would give him a blessing, he would get well.

Brother Hawks looked down at the feverish boy who tossed uncomfortably on his bed. Then he placed his hands on the child's head and gave him a blessing, promising him that he would be well again very soon.

Early the next morning George Albert opened his eyes. He stirred in the bed, which felt cool and comfortable to him. He called his mother to tell her he felt fine and to ask if he could get up. A few days later when the doctor called at the Smith home to see his patient, he found him outside playing.

George Albert Smith died on his 81st birthday, April 4, 1951. He was the eighth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He often told the children of the Church the story of his recovery from typhoid fever. And always he added, "I was grateful to the Lord for my recovery. I am sure that he healed me."

Children's Friend, April 1966.
