Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

"I Shall Give Her a New Name"

BERNADINE BEATIE

I'd feel safer about leaving if Beth were older, and much safer if she were a boy!" Father's chair made a small scraping noise as he pushed back from the supper table.

Beth understood. A rancher needed a son, especially in this wild frontier country of 1873. A boy going on fourteen could do almost as many things as a man.

"We'll be all right, Father." Mother rose and started clearing the table.

"Beth killed that old rattlesnake quicker 'n lightning!" Jim Bob piped up in his high six-year-old voice. "She's most as brave as you, Papa."

"She is that!" Mother smiled reassuringly at Beth. "I wouldn't trade her for any boy her age in the whole world."

Father caught at Beth's hair, hanging down her back in two fat reddish braids, and gave one braid a playful tug. "She'll do, I reckon, at least until Jim Bob grows up."

Tomorrow, Father was leaving to join the cattle drive headed for Abilene. Three years of drought had stripped their land of its rich prairie grasses, and day after day Beth had worried with her father, watching the thin, starved cattle pick listlessly at scrubby brush. Finally her father and the neighboring ranchers had decided to keep only foundation herds and drive the rest of their cattle to the Kansas railhead for shipment to eastern markets.

"The Indians have been peaceful enough, but I still hate to leave you three alone," Father said. "If there's any sign of trouble, you must ride to the Davis ranch."

"We will. Now you must quit worrying about us!" Mother smiled brightly.

The next morning, Beth stood at the gate with Mother and Jim Bob, watching Father and one of the Davis boys skillfully head the cattle toward Roundrock, where they were to join the drive.

"Ai-ai!" Father's voice rose above the bellowing of the hungry cattle. The swirling dust almost hid his figure, but Beth saw him raise his arm in farewell and heard his words, "Take care of your mother, Beth, and of Jim Bob!"

"I will! I will, Father!" Beth cried. A great happiness spread through her heart. Father's last words had been for her. He was depending on her to take care of Jim Bob and her mother!

Father had said he would be back at the end of three months, and the long, hot summer days passed slowly. There was not enough breeze to turn the windmill, so each day Beth and Jim Bob pumped water for the cattle when they straggled in from their hungry search for food.

One morning, after Father had been gone for almost two months, one of the Davis boys rode over. Several Indians had been sighted, he said, but he didn't think it was a war party. Still, he cautioned Beth and Jim Bob to lock up the cattle each night and to be on the lookout.

Beth awakened at dawn the next morning. She jumped up hardly believing her ears, for the sound of blessed, life-giving rain drummed on the roof.

Beth ran to her mother's room. Mother was tossing restlessly. "Mother," Beth whispered. She placed a hand on her mother's face and found it very warm. Mother was sick. What should she do?

Beth glanced out the window. Her breath caught in her throat and her heart seemed to stop beating for a moment. Three Indian braves were squatting just out of rifle range, on a small rise in front of the house. They were motionless, staring silently at the house. Beth ducked back into the shadows of the room. Had they seen her? Did they know Father was away? She turned frightened eyes toward her mother.

"I know, Beth," her mother whispered weakly. "They have been there most of the night. You must take Jim Bob and slip out the back way. Go to the Davis ranch."

"We can't leave you, Mother," Beth cried. "Besides, they may be friendly."

"They're Comanches and they're wearing warpaint! I saw them clearly in a flash of lightning. They came quite close to my window. They are only waiting for daylight. You must take Jim Bob—you must go!" Mother pleaded.

"All right, Mother," Beth spoke soothingly. Father would not want her to leave Mother alone. Somehow she must get help! A plan formed in her mind. It might not work, but it was better than nothing.

Beth dropped a quick kiss on her mother's forehead and hurried to Jim Bob's room. When she shook him awake, told him of the Indians, and whispered her plan, Jim Bob nodded in frightened agreement.

"Are you sure you can find your way to the Davis ranch?" she asked.

"Yes. I'll hurry, too!" Jim Bob insisted stoutly.

Breathlessly, Beth watched Jim Bob crawl across the backyard to the barn. She sighed with relief when he came out again, leading Old Lightning and then moving as silently as the gray dawn, disappearing in the early morning darkness.

Mother was asleep. Beth tiptoed to the clothes chest in the corner of the room. She took out her father's long black coat and pulled it over her nightgown, then crammed her red braids beneath an old wide-brimmed hat. Her fingers trembled when they closed about an old rifle, unfireable because of a broken lever.

Beth opened the front door just a crack. The Indians sat motionless, staring at the house. Beth took a deep breath and stepped out on the porch. The lower part of her body was hidden by blocks of adobe that edged the porch to a height of about two feet. Swallowing the fear in her throat, Beth drew herself up as tall as possible, placed the rifle over her shoulder, and marched slowly across the porch. She turned and retraced her steps. Out of the corner of her eye, she watched the Indians. They remained as still as statues.

The longer she could delay an attack, the more time Jim Bob would have to bring help. Just then, Beth heard the sound of horses.

Two more Indians had ridden up and joined the others on the hill! The Indians were quarreling. Then one of the newly arrived Indians leveled a rifle at the squatting braves, while his companion slipped from his horse and bound the arms of the seated Indians.

The tall Indian, who seemed to be in command, handed his rifle to his friend and rode slowly toward Beth. He raised his hand in the sign of peace.

Beth's knees shook as she walked to the steps, placed the rifle at her feet, and raised a hand in greeting. When the Indian rode into the yard, Beth was startled to see how old and tired he looked. Yet, his face was kind and there was a twinkle way back in his dark eyes.

He looked at Beth's disheveled little figure. One of her braids had fallen down from beneath her father's hat, and her nightgown hung beneath the oversized coat, making her look even younger and smaller than she was.

The Indian spoke. "I am Ish-a-tai, chief of the Comanches. These three young braves are troublemakers; they have a sickness in their hearts!" A smile creased his face. "Now, I can cure that sickness forever!" Ish-a-tai raised his hand and motioned for the other Indians to join him.

The Indian with the rifle prodded the three bound braves to their feet and followed them down the hill and into the yard. Then the Indian who held the rifle threw back his head and roared with laughter.

Ish-a-tai spoke, and his words were like little pebbles falling sharply on rock. "If you leave the reservation in search of trouble again, I shall tell of your shame! I shall tell of how you trembled before a small brave woman-child with a broken rifle!"

Ish-a-tai turned to Beth. "You have saved your people and mine much sorrow and grief. Had you gone away, my braves would have stolen your cattle and they would have brought bloodshed and grief to my people."

"I—I couldn't leave. My mother is ill," Beth said.

"I will help." Ish-a-tai turned and walked into the house. Beth followed.

"It is the fever," Ish-a-tai said. "Bring hot water."

When Beth returned with the water, Ish-a-tai crumbled dry leaves and herbs into a cup. He placed the cup to her mother's lips and spoke soothingly. Mother opened her eyes and drank. In a few minutes her face was damp and cool, and she slept peacefully.

Then Beth heard the sound of running horses and many voices shouting and calling.

"Beth!" Jim Bob's voice called above the confusion.

Beth ran to the door and right into the arms of her father. Mother opened her eyes, smiled, and fell asleep again.

Then Father explained his early return. Cattle buyers had ridden out from Abilene to meet the drive. Father had received a good offer, sold his herd, and rushed home. He had just arrived at the Davis ranch when Jim Bob had ridden up. Father turned to Ish-a-tai. "I thank you for protecting my wife and my daughter," he said warmly.

Ish-a-tai's old eyes twinkled. "I shall give her a new name, an Indian name. Beth Braveheart!" He smiled at Father. "It is good to have such a daughter. She is almost as good as a son."

Father placed a hand on Beth's shoulders. "We wouldn't trade her for any son her age in the whole world." He smiled proudly down into Beth's eyes.

Beth blinked back a rush of tears. It would not do for Ish-a-tai to see tears in the eyes of Beth Braveheart!

Children's Friend, August 1963.
