Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Hidden Furs

FRED VAN DYKE

Angie sat on a braided rug in front of the hearth, rereading a worn primer. Her father walked in with a small box of clean furs and dropped them beside the fireplace.

"I'll sort the furs when I come in from milking," he told Angie. "Tomorrow, I'll take the furs to the general store at Mills Landing. There, I'll trade them for the items your mother needs. On the way home, I'll stop at Tom Jenkins' place and buy a milking cow."

Angie knew how badly they needed another cow. Her mother had been waiting for the fur money to buy flour, sugar, spices, and canned goods for the winter months.

Angie also thought about the leatherbound book of poems that she had seen a few months before on the shelf at the general store. That day in the store she had shown her mother the book and told her how much she would like to have it.

"It is lovely," her mother had commented, "but your father has to buy boots today. We won't have money to buy it."

Angie couldn't forget the book. She wanted to have the poems to read in the evening by lamplight. In the spring she could read through the day while she sat and tended the smokehouse fire. She imagined sitting out under the willow tree on summer evenings and reading. Someday she hoped to be a schoolteacher; then she could read the poems to her students.

Angie pictured the book as she heard her father carrying the milk pails down the slope toward the barn. Her mother stood beside the cookstove, frying meat for supper.

The hearth logs crackled loudly as the fire burned vigorously. The heat became so intense that Angie decided to go up to the loft and read from the fading daylight that came in from the small window above her bed. She had just settled herself comfortably when she heard horses galloping into the yard. Startled, she turned and looked through the window. Two rough-looking men, dressed in deerskin jackets and carrying rifles, dismounted. There was not time to warn her mother.

Terrified, Angie started to hide under her bed. Then she thought of the furs. If the men stole the furs, there would be no money for the cow or for all the things her mother needed.

Angie flew down the ladder, her primer clutched in her hand. She landed beside the furs. Quickly, she sat down on the furs and spread her skirt out until there wasn't a fur in sight. With shaky hands, she opened her book and pretended to read. She had no more than opened the book when the two unshaven men pushed open the door. Holding their shotguns, they stepped into the kitchen.

Mother stepped back from the stove, her face drained of all color. Remaining speechless, she saw what Angie had done.

"You two, don't move," the first man warned. "We don't aim to hurt you. We saw your husband down at the river no more than two days ago. We'll search for those furs he had."

Angie was too frightened to speak. But it would have been hopeless for either to have called out. Father was out in the barn and would be unable to hear with the door closed.

Seeing nothing in the first room, the shorter man in dirty boots scrambled up the ladder to the loft. Angie heard him overturning things above her in the loft. The bigger man ransacked the adjoining bedroom.

"The furs are not in here," the first man announced. "We'll search the smokehouse and barn." The intruders stomped out of the house without closing the door.

"Don't move until you're certain they're gone," Angie's mother warned, as she shut the door. "They won't find the furs outside. I don't imagine they'll give your father any trouble. Besides, he'll handle the situation if they go to the barn."

Angie listened without moving. Then she heard the men's horses galloping off toward the east.

Immediately, her father burst inside, looking angry and worried. Seeing that his wife and daughter were all right, he said, "I'm thankful you're unharmed! Did they get the furs?"

"The furs are safe," Mother informed him, "thanks to Angie!" Then she told him how Angie had hidden the furs.

Father looked down at Angie. "You have a lot of courage, daughter, and you acted fast. I'm proud of you. We won't be bothered again. Those two will be riding off in search of bigger profits. Tomorrow when I take the furs to Mills Landing, I'd like to take you with me. I'll buy—what was it you wanted the last time we were in the store?"

"A book of poems," Angie said, "but you need the money for the cow and Mother's things."

"Well," Father commented, "if you hadn't saved our furs, we wouldn't have any money at all. We'll but the book."

"Tomorrow evening," Mother added, "Angie can read us some poems from her new book."

"I will," Angie said, her eyes shining.

Children's Friend, January 1969.
