Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Apaches

C.D.

About the year 1885, Brother Z.B. Decker was living with his family on a ranch about twenty-five miles from any settlement. He kept a small herd of sheep that his twelve-year-old son, Louis, watched during the day; at night they were left in a bunch on the hill, where they could be seen from the house.

One day Inez asked if she might go with her brother to watch the sheep. Since Louis always took his lunch and stayed all day, Sister Decker hesitated, but as he expressed a desire to have his little sister with him, their mother at last consented.

The sheep moved from their camping ground at sunrise, and the children started after them. Inez carried the wellfilled lunchbasket that their mother had prepared, and Louis carried his big gun, which he always took with him.

While the sheep were grazing the children sat under a tree and read from a book they had brought with them and played jacks and other games; and when the sheep moved, they followed them. Thus the forenoon passed before they realized it. They were very much interested in a story Louis was reading when he happened to think about his sheep and looked up to see where they were. "I can't see one of the sheep," he said, springing to his feet. Then, looking at the sun, he exclaimed, "Why, it is nearly noon! We must have been here a long time. I wonder where the sheep have gone."

Inez was just going to speak when a terrible yell was heard that made the children turn pale.

"It's Indians," exclaimed Louis, "and they will be driving the sheep."

Then, noticing his sister's white face, he tried to convince her that there was no danger if they were brave. Putting his arm around her he said gently, "Don't be afraid, Inez, they won't hurt us if we can make them think we are not afraid of them."

His words encouraged her, but she could tell that he was frightened, for his voice trembled; she also knew his fears were mostly for her safety.

As he was telling her that he would put her in a safe place and would then go to see where the Indians were driving the sheep, six Apaches on horseback came in sight from the direction in which the sheep had gone. There was no chance to hide now, and as the Indians were coming straight toward them, they could do nothing but stand and face the foe.

Louis stood with his gun, which was as tall as he, in his hand, and his timid little sister stood as near him as she dared to, trying not to appear to be frightened.

The Indians shouted to each other as they hurried their horses along toward the frightened children, whose courage almost gave way when one Indian who seemed to be the chief called to two others behind him and they stopped to load their guns.

Just then a happy thought came to Inez, and she whispered to her brother, "Let us ask the Lord to keep them from hurting us." Louis nodded assent, and the two whispered a prayer for safety.

By this time the chief had stopped his horse in front of them. He spoke English so that they could understand him. He asked in a gruff tone if they were not afraid, where their home was, and if it was their herd of sheep he had seen.

Louis answered all the questions as bravely as he could. Then the chief jumped off his horse, walked up to the boy, and asked him for his gun.

"No, you can't have it," said Louis with as much courage as he could muster. The Indian was going to take the gun by force, but the boy's determination surprised him, and he decided to let the boy keep the gun. This was a great relief to the children, for they knew that the Apaches took a special delight in shooting people with their own guns.

Then the chief tried to get Louis to give him a sheep. Louis told him he could have one if he would pay for it, but the chief said he would not do that, and in an irritated manner he turned to his braves, who talked with him a moment.

Turning again to the children, the chief asked for their lunch. Louis took the basket from his sister and handed it to him. He divided the contents among his companions, leaving a small portion for the children.

As soon as the Indians had eaten their portion, the old chief sprang into his saddle and they all galloped off. The children did not speak a word till the Indians were out of sight. Then Louis turned to Inez, who stood almost paralyzed, and said, "Now, sister, didn't I tell you they wouldn't hurt us? But I'm glad they have gone, aren't you?"

She could only say, "Our prayers were answered." Then she began to cry. When she had dried her tears, her brother took her by the hand and led her in the direction the sheep had gone. When they reached home that night they related their experience and told of their simple prayer for safety. To their parents, it was a most miraculous escape.

Juvenile Instructor, March 15, 1902.
