Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Tell Me About Columbus

MARGERY CANNON

Adventurous boys today often think about flying through space to explore the moon or Mars. But five hundred years ago, boys didn't think about exploring space; they dreamed of sailing the ocean in search of new lands.

Christopher Columbus was an adventurous lad, born about five hundred years ago in Genoa, Italy. In the mornings he helped his father, who was a weaver. But in the afternoon, when he had finished preparing the wool for weaving, Christopher would hurry down to the waterfront. There he watched ships being built and talked to sailors about their adventures.

Even at home he thought about ships.

"Someday I will have one of my own. Then I can sail away and explore the world," he said.

This worried his younger brother, Bartholomew, who had heard people call the ocean the "Sea of Darkness."

"Sailors are gobbled up by monsters or burned alive in boiling hot water," he cautioned Christopher.

People then didn't know much about the ocean or the shape of the earth. Some even believed the world was flat like a pancake, and that ships that sailed very far away would lose their way in the darkness and fall over the edge, never to be seen again.

But Christopher Columbus did not believe this was so. Many sea captains and learned men had said the world wasn't flat, but round; they knew there were no such things as monsters and dragons waiting to swallow ships. Christopher was not afraid, and he planned to become a sailor.

Sometimes fishermen would take Christopher on short fishing trips at night. This made him even more eager for a life at sea.

Then one day, when he was about fourteen years old, he went on his first real voyage. It wasn't a long one, but it was the beginning of his life as a seaman. He continued to help his father in the weaving shop, but whenever possible he went on sailing trips along the coast of Italy.

On these trips he learned everything he could about ships and maps and astronomy because of his dream to sail to distant lands. When he turned twenty-two, he became a full-time sailor.

Columbus once wrote: "From my youth onward I was a seaman, and have continued until this day. Wherever ships have been, I have been. I have spoken and treated with learned men, priests, and laymen, Latins, Greeks, Jews, and Moors, and with many men of other faiths. The Lord has well disposed to my desire, and He bestowed upon me courage and understanding. Knowledge of seafaring he gave me in abundance; of astrology as much as was needed, and of geometry and astronomy likewise. Further, he gave me joy and cunning in drawing maps and thereon cities, mountains, rivers, islands and harbors, each one in its place."

Columbus married a captain's daughter, and they had a son named Diego. When Columbus's wife died, he married again and had a second son, whom he named Ferdinand. Like his father, Ferdinand also loved ships. When he was between twelve and eighteen, Ferdinand went on several voyages with Columbus.

He later wrote a book about his famous father. This is the way he described him:

"The Admiral was a well-built man of more than medium stature, long visaged with cheeks somewhat high, but neither fat nor thin. He had an aquiline nose and his eyes were light in color; his complexion too was light, but kindling to a vivid red. In youth his hair was blond, but when he came to his thirtieth year it all turned white. In eating and drinking and the adornment of his person, he was always content and modest. Among strangers his conversation was affable, and with members of his household very pleasant, but with a modest and pleasing dignity."

Christopher Columbus was a religious man. In his journals he tells about his regular private prayers several times a day.

There were also religious ceremonies held on board ship for the sailors. These services were performed by the youngest seamen.

Columbus heard about Marco Polo and his travels. He began to think more and more about exploring new lands as Marco Polo had done. At that time, the only way to reach China and the other strange new lands Marco Polo had seen two hundred years before was to sail around the coast of Africa. There was much talk of finding a shorter way. Columbus studied his maps. He knew the world was round. Surely he could sail west, all the way around the world, until he reached the Indies in the Far East. He talked about his plan and said, "I have seen and truly studied all books, cosmographies, histories, chronicles, and philosophies, and other arts for which our Lord with provident hand unlocked my mind."

It was several years, however, before Columbus could find someone who would help him with his plans. Queen Isabella of Spain finally agreed.

On August 3, 1942, Columbus left the port of Palos, Spain, with three small wooden ships—Nina, Pinta, and Santa Maria.

Columbus felt the importance of his voyage. He said, "The Lord sent me upon the seas, and gave me fire for the deed. Those who heard of my enterprise called it foolish, mocked me and laughed. But who can doubt but that the Holy Ghost inspired me?"

Ferdinand quotes his father as also saying: "God gave me the faith and afterwards the courage so that I was quite willing to undertake the journey."

Children's Friend, October 1970.
