Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

A Special Birthday Present

LUCILE C. READING

It was a warm autumn day in Salt Lake City, and the neighborhood children were all enjoying the last few days before the beginning of school. Ruth Ann and her friend had spent the morning under a big shade tree playing with their dolls.

At lunch that noon, Ruth Ann asked her mother, "Why didn't you tell me that today is President David O. McKay's birthday? He is our very own neighbor, and I'd have given him a present."

"I'm sorry, Ruth Ann," her mother answered. "I thought you had heard us talking about him being seventy-nine years old today." Then she smiled as she added, "But I wouldn't worry about a present for him. He'll receive so many that he probably wouldn't even know it if you did give him one."

Ruth Ann ate her lunch in thoughtful silence. A few minutes later Mother looked out the window in time to see Ruth Ann and Sandy talking earnestly about something. But it was nearly two weeks later before she thought again of the incident. That was the evening the phone rang and a woman's voice asked, "Do you have a daughter named Ruth Ann? I have a letter for her and want to be sure it reaches the right little girl."

The very next day the mailman brought an envelope with two letters inside it. One letter was for Sandy and the other was for Ruth Ann. Ruth Ann, who was only eight and couldn't read it by herself, listened with growing excitement as her mother began:

Dear Miss Barker and Miss Davis:

When Sister McKay and I returned from Los Angeles last evening we found awaiting us some flowers and a box of peaches with a note "from Ruth Ann Barker and Sandra Davis—Happy Birthday." Whether you sent the flowers or the peaches, we do not know, so we are thanking you both. . . .

As Mother continued to read the letter to Ruth Ann, the little girl's eyes grew big and bright in delighted wonderment to think that a great and busy man would take the time to write to two little girls who had remembered his birthday.

The letter was signed, "David O. McKay, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." It was dated September 22, 1952.

Children's Friend, September 1966.
