Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Three Indian Braves

ARVIS LAVERNE ROGERS

I was born at Kanosh, Utah, June 17, 1878. When I was four years old my father was called to leave his home and help settle in Arizona.

As I was growing up I learned to cook and sew and keep house and do the things girls should do. My mother was an excellent teacher, and when I grew older I used to work out for people.

It was while I was working with my aunt and uncle, who ran a boarding house at the mines, that I met George Samuel Rogers. He drove to the mines with loads of hay and watermelons. He would make the trip about every two weeks. This was in 1895. After I moved back home I started going with him and we were married at my home by Collins R. Hakes, my grandfather, on January 8, 1896.

In August 1897 we traveled to St. George by team and wagon. It was a hard trip and took us seven weeks. On the way home we found the water was so high in the river we had to camp for a week, waiting for the water to go down so we could ferry the wagon across. We came through Flagstaff and camped about five miles out in the pine trees. We had had our evening meal and were prepared for bed.

While we were kneeling in prayer we heard this terrible whooping and yelling and thundering of horses' hooves. The temptation was just too great, and I couldn't resist taking a peek. I turned my head just enough so I could look out the corner of my eye. My heart beat about three times faster than it should, for three Indian braves, all painted, were riding in on us just as hard as they could ride.

How he did it I will never know, but George, not even hesitating to take a peek, just kept right on praying and asking Heavenly Father to protect us from these Indians. They rode right to the wagons before they reined up. They were so close we could almost feel the breath of the horses as they stopped. The Indians looked in and saw George praying; then they gave a whoop, whirled their horses around and left. We could hear them yelling as they rode away.

Needless to say, we had a great deal to be thankful for that night. We were later told that Indians are very superstitious about people praying, and that was probably why they left without bothering us at all. We knew that the Lord had answered our prayers as he had done so many times before.

Roberta Flake Clayton, comp., Pioneer Women of Arizona (Mesa, Arizona, 1969).
