Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

He Was an Unusual Boy

MATTHEW COWLEY

A few weeks ago I was called to the County Hospital in Salt Lake City by a mother. I didn't know her. She said her boy was dying from polio and asked if I would come down and give him a blessing. I picked up a young bishop whom I generally take with me, for I think his faith is greater than mine, and I always like him along. We went down there and found the young lad in an iron lung, unconscious, his face rather a blackish color, with a tube in his throat. He had been flown in from an outlying community. The mother said to me, "This is an unusual boy—not because he's my child, but he is an unusual boy." I think he was eight or nine years of age.

After the hospital attendants put coverings on us, we went into the room and blessed the boy. It was one of those occasions when I knew as I laid my hands upon him that he was an unusual boy, and he had faith. Having faith in his faith, I blessed him to get well and promised him he would. I didn't hear any more about him until last Sunday. I was on my way to Murray to conference, so I dropped in at the County Hospital and asked if I might see the lad. The nurse said, "Certainly. Walk right down the hall." As I walked down the hall, out came the boy running to meet me. He ran up and asked, "Are you Brother Cowley?"

And I said, "Yes."

He said, "I want to thank you for that prayer." He added, "I was unconscious then, wasn't I?"

I replied, "You certainly were."

He said, "That's the reason I don't recognize you." Then he said, "Come in my room. I want to talk to you."

We went in the room. He still had a tube in his throat, and I said, "How long are you going to have that tube there?"

He said, "Two weeks. Two more weeks, and then I'll be all well. How about another blessing?"

I said, "Certainly," and blessed him again.

I was in a hurry, for I wanted to get out to my conference, but the lad stopped me and asked, "Hey, how about my partner in the next bed?" There was a young fellow about sixteen or seventeen.

I said, "What do you mean?"

He said, "Don't go without blessing him. He's my partner."

I said, "All right." Then I asked the boy, "Would you like a blessing?"

He said, "Yes, sir. I'm a teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood in my ward." I blessed him, and then my little friend went and brought another fellow in. Here was another partner. And I blessed him.

Now, except ye believe as a child, you can't receive these blessings.

Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, February 18, 1953.
