Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

"I Know That My Father Will Go"

ELIZABETH CLARIDGE McCUNE

No place on earth seemed so precious to me at fifteen years of age as dear old Nephi, Utah. How eagerly we looked forward to the periodical visits of President Brigham Young and his company! Everything was done that could be thought of for their comfort and entertainment, and with all, it was a labor of love.

One of these visits I shall never forget.

We went out with our Sabbath Schools and all the other organizations, with bands of music and flags and banners and flowers, to meet and greet our beloved leader and his company. On this occasion the people were lined up on each side of the street waiting for the carriages to pass. Among them were twenty-five young ladies dressed in white, who had strewn evergreens and wild flowers along the path. Brother Brigham, Brothers Kimball and Wells,fn with the entire company, got out of their carriages and walked over the flowery road. When Brother Kimball passed me he said to the group of girls around me, "You five girls right here will live to be mothers in Israel."

The company having been taken to our home, the dinner was served. How we girls flew around to make everything nice for the stylish city folks! As soon as they were seated at dinner, we slipped upstairs and tried on all the ladies' hats. That was a real treat. I venture to say that could the ladies have seen us next Sunday they would have been struck with the similarity of styles in Nephi and Salt Lake City millinery.

We all attended the afternoon meeting, the girls in white having reserved seats in front. The sermons were grand, and we were happy until President Young said that he had a few names to read of men who were to be called and voted in as missionaries to go and settle up the "Muddy."

This almost stilled the beating of the hearts of all present. Many of our friends had been called to go to settle the Dixie country, but the "Muddy," so many miles farther south and so much worse! Oh! Oh! I did not hear another name except Samuel Claridge. Then how I sobbed and cried, regardless of the fact that the tears were spoiling the new white dress.

The father of the girl who sat next to me was also called. Said my companion, "Why, what are you crying about? It doesn't make me cry. I know my father won't go."

"Well, there is the difference," said I. "I know that my father will go and that nothing could prevent him, and I should not own him as a father if he would not go when he is called." Then I broke down sobbing again.

Everything occurred to prevent my father from getting off. Just as he was nearly ready to start, one of his horses got poisoned. He had to buy another horse. A week later one of his big mules was found choked to death in his barn. Some of our friends said, "Brother Claridge, this shows you are not to go." My father answered, "It shows me that the adversary is trying to prevent me from going, but I shall go if I walk!"

* The First Presidency of the Church—Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Daniel H. Wells.
