Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Morning Chore

LUCILE C. READING

It was so dark that the sleepy seven-year-old boy could hardly find his way down the path to the barn. He had planned for days how he could get out of bed, dress, creep quietly down the stairs, take the milking bucket from the pantry shelf, and leave the house without waking anyone.

He had to feel his way in the dark barn to find the peg where the milking stool hung. His heart was beating fast as he placed the stool by the cow and sat down on it. The cow didn't even raise her head from the manger where she was munching hay, but a swish of her tail indicated she knew he was there.

The boy had seen his sister, Mary, milk the cow many times. He found it wasn't as easy as he thought it would be to get the cow's udder washed and then to draw out the warm, foamy milk from it. Before long his fingers and wrists ached. He had to stop often to rest them. He thought about going to the house to ask for help but decided against it. He was determined to finish the job alone.

The boy was so intent on milking that he did not realize how long it had taken, and he was surprised to find that daylight had come and smoke was curling up from the chimney when he finally left the barn and started for the house. As he entered the kitchen, Mother looked up from the stove where she was preparing breakfast and asked, "Why, Joseph, what have you been doing so early in the morning?"

He held up the filled milk bucket in answer, and felt a warm rush of joy at his mother's smile of approval. "Well," she said, "since it seems you are big enough, milking each morning will be your job." She paused and then questioned, "But why is it you were so anxious to milk that cow?"

Joseph lifted an earnest face to his mother as he answered, "I just want to help while Father is on his mission. And you see, Mamie (the name he called his beloved sister Mary) has so many other things to do, I thought if I could take care of the morning milk, she wouldn't have to worry about that!"

It was a shining moment for Joseph Fielding Smith (who later became the tenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints) when his mother put her arms around him and held him close as she said, "How pleased your father will be when I write and tell him that he has a fine young man to take care of milking the cow while he is away!"

Children's Friend, April 1970.
