Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Straw for the Manger

KATHRYN E. FRANKS

The boys and girls in Miss Bell's class at Belmont School gathered in the school auditorium to prepare for the yearly Christmas program.

Pete, the tallest boy in the class, was up on the stage nailing wood together for the manger scene.

Sara, a pretty girl with long hair, and Molly, with short hair and dimples, had been fitted for the angel costumes. Now they were busy pinning the flimsy white material together for their mothers to stitch.

The other children were lined up in the back of the room waiting to be called into the music room for chorus practice.

Lisa hadn't been assigned anything yet. She stood alone, among the empty seats. If I weren't so tall, she mused, or if I had long, blond hair, I'd like to do something besides stay backstage and pin on costumes, or stand in the doorway and welcome parents.

She was new in the class, and living on the outskirts of town in a trailer with her grandmother and father. It was only natural, she felt, that she wasn't very well acquainted.

Standing alone among the rows of empty seats, Lisa waited anxiously for Miss Bell to come back into the room. She tried to busy her hands, although there was nothing really for her to do. She had started stacking some songbooks when Pete, upstage with the manger scene, called out, "We haven't any straw. How can we make a manger scene without straw?"

Some were busy talking and did not hear. Others looked up with little concern, then turned back to their work.

Pete stepped to the front of the stage and called louder this time. "Hey, all of you! If any of you have any straw, I'll pick it up after I finish my paper route."

Why didn't someone speak up? Lisa wondered. Sara lived in a big house on the edge of town. She owned her own riding horse. She would have straw.

"Well—?" Pete waited impatiently for an answer.

We have straw under the trailer, Lisa's conscience reminded her. How could she offer, though, if the other girls hadn't. She shuddered at the thought of being conspicuous, but she could not take her eyes from the unfinished manger scene.

"I have straw, Pete," she said, "if you'll come get it."

The girls looked quickly at Lisa, then turned back to their work.

"Good," Pete answered. "I know where you live. It will probably be dark before I get there."

The room was embarrassingly quiet. Lisa picked up her books and hurried out the rear door without waiting for Miss Bell to come from the music room and excuse her for the day.

A cold wind blew from the north as Lisa hugged her thin coat around her and hurried across town. She walked along the outskirts untill she reached the trailer park. The trailers were back a distance from the road, protected in front by a grove of trees.

After Lisa explained to her grandmother what she planned to do, she went outside to look under the trailer. She ran back. "The straw is greasy and oily! What shall I do?"

She looked out the window at the field that stretched southward to the Norris farm.

"I'll have to cross the fields to the Norris farm," she told her grandmother. "Mrs. Norris will give me some fresh straw."

Grandmother was old, but she understood that things are important if they are promised. "Go," she said, "but be back before supper time—before it gets dark."

Lisa climbed under the barbed wire fence and ran down the slope to the gully. There she pushed through thistle and tall grasses and then scurried upward to the second fence. In the distance the bare trees of the Norris orchard looked small and far away. It hadn't seemed this far before, Lisa thought, as she panted up the last hill to the orchard. The rough, wooded gate opened into the orchard. Here Lisa followed a narrow path to the backyard.

Mrs. Norris welcomed Lisa and asked her about her grandmother. "As soon as I put this bread in the oven, we'll go to the barn and fill a clean gunnysack with straw." The good smell of fresh bread made Lisa hungry.

Daylight had started to fade by the time Lisa stepped out the door. Snow clouds slid over the first evening star.

At the second fence Lisa decided that if she cut across the cornfield, she would cut the distance to the trailer in half.

In the half-darkness she stumbled over the corn stubble with every few steps. As she hurried through the thickets, she tripped and fell, hitting her chin against a sharp stone. Half crawling, she pulled the sack until she regained her balance.

Lisa sobbed out as the sharp weeds tore her stocking and cut her hands. The taller cornstocks snagged at her coat, slowing her down as she tried to run.

Then as she reached the slope that stretched uphill to the last barbed wire fence, she spotted the tiny light from the trailer window. Like a distant star, it guided her forward.

Lisa barely had time to change her clothes before Pete came for the straw. "Thanks, Lisa," he said. She told him nothing of her trip to the nearby farm.

"Would you have time to arrange the straw around the manger for me tomorrow after school?" Pete asked. "I have a longer paper route now. I never get in before supper time."

"I'll do it—I'll be glad to."

After school the next day, Lisa, with her dark sweater around her shoulders, tip-toed quietly on the stage in the auditorium.

She was on her knees carefully spreading the straw when Miss Bell came into the auditorium. As she came through the door, she paused, stopped, then slowly she took a few steps forward. "Lisa!" she called excitedly, "you are just right! You are the person I want to play Mary." She walked toward the stage. "I asked Mrs. Laurel, our music teacher, to select a taller girl for the part. She misunderstood, and I just now found out that we have no one for the part."

Miss Bell stepped upon the stage. She took the sweater from Lisa's shoulders, and placed it, like a shawl, around her face. "Your features are just right. You will be wonderful."

Slowly Lisa lifted her face, her eyes wide in wonderment.

"Miss Bell," she answered softly, her fingers moving the wisps of straw, "I would love to—more than any other part."

Miss Bell did not see the tears that fell and lost themselves in the straw.

Miss Bell told Lisa, "You will kneel beside the manger with the colored lights soft upon you. Pete, who is playing Joseph, will stand beside you. Keep your fingers lightly on the manger while the choir and the angels sing in the background. You will keep motionless while the shepherds gather slowly around the crib."

Miss Bell hurried out of the room after giving Lisa instructions to be ready for rehearsal the next day. A joyful little song burst through Lisa's happiness and followed her across town to the trailer, where she rushed inside to tell Grandmother her wonderful news.

Children's Friend, December 1965.
