Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Lost Gold Piece

JOHN A. WIDTSOE

There were not many after-school jobs in Logan when I was a boy, but I found one that took only two or three hours a day. One day my employer told me I had done very well, and he gave me a five-dollar gold piece for my several weeks of work.

Five dollars! That was money! I was jubilant! I would give half of it to my mother, buy a new book, and save the remainder. Into the pocket of my trousers went the bright new gold piece, and off I ran to tell my mother of my good luck.

On the way home, I put my hand in the pocket to feel and caress the money. It was not there! I felt all through the pocket again. The gold piece was not there! Instead, I found a hole in the pocket through which the coin had slipped. It was terrible! I was so sorry that I sat down by the ditch bank and cried.

Then I slowly walked back the way I had come, looking every step for that gold piece. The sidewalk on Logan Main Street was made of planks. I looked in every crack for my lost fortune. Not a sign of it! Then I walked back over the same road, stopping, looking everywhere. No little shiny gold coin was there to lighten my heart! Again I walked slowly back and forth over the road I had been following when the precious coin was lost. But it was not to be found! It was lost for good.

Then I remembered that the Lord knew where that gold piece was, and that if he would help me, and wanted me to find it, it could not be lost for long.

So I got down on my knees behind a big tree and told the Lord all about my trouble, and asked him, if he thought it was the best thing for me, to help me find it. When I got up I felt so much better. I felt sure the Lord had heard my prayer.

Dusk was gathering. One could not see anything on the ground very clearly, especially a small piece of gold. But I walked right on, not so slowly this time, for I knew the Lord was helping. About halfway up the second block, there in the grass lay my lost five-dollar gold piece. It gleamed in the darkness, as if to say, "Come and take me; I want to make you happy." I almost shouted with joy. How glad my mother would be, and how I would enjoy that book I had planned to buy. I leaned up against the fence and said, "Thank you, O Lord, for finding my money for me."

Since that time I have known that the Lord hears prayers. And, since that day, I have been careful to have no holes in my pockets.

Children's Friend, September 1947.
