Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Standing Up for the Right

LLEWELYN R. McKAY

As a boy, David O. McKay enjoyed playing baseball on the town square. It wasn't long before he was chosen to play second base on the team that had been organized to compete with other teams of nearby towns.

On a Fourth of July, the Huntsville group (David's team) was playing with a visiting team and the grandstand was full of spectators. The game had been tied for several innings and everyone was excited. One of the Huntsville players had stumbled and sprained his ankle, so David was called on as a pinch-hitter to take his place at bat. David hit the first pitch—but it was a foul ball. Then the umpire called the next two throws "ball one!" and "ball two!" The following pitch he called "strike two!" The visiting team's pitcher, a large, burly fellow, came up to young David and told him that he was "out."

"The umpire called `strike two'," said David.

"I don't care what the umpire said; I say that you're out. Now take a seat over there on the grass or I'll whang you one with this baseball bat!" Then the bully picked up a bat and came menacingly toward David.

A hush came over the spectators as they watched this little drama. Would David, who was much smaller than his opponent, do as he was told, or would he hold his ground?

David knew that he was within his right, as did everyone else.

"You have miscounted the strikes," said David calmly. "The umpire has the final decision. Go back to your pitcher's box."

The pitcher took a long look at David's determined expression, turned around, and sauntered back to his place.

The next throw was a straight, swift ball directly over the plate. David connected for a "two bagger." The next man hit a single, which brought David to home plate for the winning score.

David was a very determined lad when he knew he was right, and he could not be bullied into giving in, although the odds were against him.

The Children's Friend, September 1969.
