Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Don't Lie to an Indian

J. H. PAUL

An early settler near Tooele, Utah, was Tom Hale. Long before the white inhabitants amounted to much in the way of numbers, his ranch and cabin were widely known. Both Indians and whites acknowledged his prowess, and he was especially famed among his red neighbors. His record as a hunter and a wrestler was heralded afar by the native tribes.

The Indians liked Hale and had given him the name "Strong Arm" because of his terrific grip in the wrestling contests. They liked him also because he had always dealt fairly with them, never taking advantage over even the least of them. In his numerous trades and deals with either new or old acquaintances, he always played fair, so they bartered freely with him for the various articles they needed.

Hale, moreover, had a saying that was also widely known, a sort of motto that was verified anew by each transaction the red men had with him: "Never lie to an Indian." In the simple life he lived, this rule held good for all people of either race, and neither friend nor foe had reason to complain that at any time he had sought to deceive them.

One summer day, as Tom Hale stood musing at the door of his cabin, his eye was attracted by a cloud of dust arising from the road out on the desert that lay westward of his home. The cloud came nearer; it was not a whirlwind, and, the day being calm, not a breath was stirring. Hale paused, for the sight was unusual; and as the little white billows of the desert rolled forward, he made out two human forms running swiftly toward him. Soon from out of the white mist sped a powerful Indian followed by a young Indian mother carrying her babe in a papoose basket tied to her head and shoulders.

As the two rushed panting up to Hale, the red man exclaimed, "Hide us quickly, Strong Arm. I am Arrowpine, the Ute Chief; the Shoshones are after us. They will kill me and carry into slavery my young wife."

Hale had met Arrowpine and had liked the man; they had hunted together and were friends. He thrust the pair into his cabin and pulled back a rug carpet from a hatchway in the floor; the Indians dropped into the cellar out of sight. Hale replaced the door and the carpet just as a shout from his young son Sol announced another, greater cloud of dust approaching out on the desert road.

Standing outside of the cabin, Hale watched the clouds of dust roll near; soon out of them came galloping a band of Shoshones mounted on Indian cayuses. They were fully armed, their faces streaked with red paint, their bows in hand and arrows ready, their faces eager and determined. Riding up to Hale and saluting the white man, whom he knew, the leader asked, "Have you seen two Indians, a chief and his squaw, come this way?"

For a moment Hale looked puzzled, and he stroked his chin; he had never lied to an Indian and hated to do so even in this emergency. As he turned and lifted his eyes to a hill on his left, a little cloud of dust arose there. With a shout as they saw the dust, the Indians wheeled their horses to the right and dashed toward the hill, thinking that Hale had intended to give them a hint to go in that direction. As soon as they were well up the hill, Hale removed the carpet and door from the hiding place of the Indian couple, who eagerly climbed out.

"We are here on a visit to Northern Utes," Arrowpine explained, "and were out by ourselves picking chokecherries when the Shoshones discovered us. They hate the Southern Utes and would like to get me for torture, because I have often defied them in battle. My young wife would meet a horrible fate if we should fall into their hands."

"Could you find your way back to the friendly tribe," Hale asked, "if one of us should lead you by a secret trail to the northern road?"

"Yes," answered Arrowpine. "We know the way from there and could elude the Shoshones."

"Who will go as their guide?" inquired Hale, looking around at his neighbors, who had come in upon hearing that Indians in war paint were about. None of them, however, was willing to undertake so dangerous an errand. Hale's question remained unanswered till his young son, Sol, then about nine years of age, spoke out, saying, "I'll go, Father; I know every step of the way and can be back in a few hours."

Instantly Sol's mother protested that he was too young to risk his life on such a journey, with the chance of falling into the hands of the raging Shoshones; but after some hesitation Hale said, "Mother, let him go. He will be as safe as anyone; and it will be hours before the Shoshones get back, even if they should return this way."

Food for the journey was quickly prepared for the Indians, and off toward the northern hills at a smooth trot went Sol, closely followed by Arrowpine and his young wife with the Indian baby on her back in the basket woven of sumac branches. The entire company, watching them, breathed with relief as the little party finally disappeared among the cedars.

The anxious hours dragged slowly; but at nightfall, a faint shout was heard from the cedars on the distant hillside. The call came nearer, accompanied by the steady beating of feet—the Indian dog-trot; and out of the twilight into the arms of his waiting mother emerged the lad, exhausted but otherwise not one bit worse for his perilous adventure.

Seven years had passed from the time of this incident. Sol Hale, now sixteen, had become skilled in frontier life and outdoor experiences, which had included several visits to Indian tribes. Arrowpine was again in the North, engaged in training a select body of his younger braves, as blunder by inexperienced travelers going to California had resulted in the death of one of Arrowpine's younger braves, and not even the influence of their wise chief had been able to keep them from taking revenge on the whites.

When Arrowpine had found that he could not restrain his men, he had placed himself at their head, with the desire to lessen their depredations. Word of the onslaught sent the people for miles around to the Hale ranch for safety. On came the Utes, sweeping up all the horses, cattle, and sheep they could come across. Hastily the livestock were driven to the Hale ranch, where a large enclosure with water from a spring afforded easy facilities for guarding them.

With the stock thus folded, all seemed well, and the people could await with confidence the approach of the marauding Utes. Then Tom Hale suddenly remembered some choice animals in a distant pasture over the mountain—stock that had been overlooked and forgotten while the others were being driven in. It would not do to leave them out, so Hale called for a volunteer to go and bring them. At first no one spoke. Then Sol Hale spoke up, declaring himself willing to go. It was decided, over his mother's remonstrances, to let him try it; and away he went afoot upon the precarious task of bringing in the distant livestock before the Indians could reach them.

When he had crossed the mountain and reached the pasture, he found it already raided. The Indians had been there and had driven off the animals, though which way they had gone was uncertain. Yet he judged, from certain signs he had been trained to recognize, that the Indians were even then getting between him and the ranch house, so he took to the cedars to make a long circuit back. To keep under cover, however, he had to make so wide a detour that darkness came on and he was still many miles from home. He was hungry, and it was growing cold.

As he threaded his way, stooping, hiding, crawling at times, he came upon a calf, which he recognized as one of the Hale animals. He knew that it would presently seek its mother, so, urging it forward a little, he followed its zigzag meandering in the darkness till, in answer to its bleat, came the welcome "Moo-oo" of its mother, telling them which way to go. As the calf knelt on one side beside the cow for its milk, Sol knelt on the other, milking into his mouth till hunger and thirst were satisfied with the warm, welcome fluid. Then the cow lay down with the calf beside her. Some claim that Sol wedged himself between them to keep warm. At all events, he fell sound asleep on a bed of leaves.

Just before daylight the boy awoke, impressed with the feeling that he was in great danger. As he stood up and tried to see in the darkness, he fancied that shadowy forms of tents loomed not very far away. When his eyes became accustomed to the darkness, he made out a few tents, besides many human forms stretched out upon the earth. It was the Ute camp, and he had been sleeping within 300 yards of it. There it was, slowly becoming visible right before his eyes.

He knew the ways of Indians and was well aware of the fact that he could not get away. That they had not found him already was due merely to circumstance that animals were all about, so that the guards had paid little attention to this one, which they must have heard and seen. He decided to do as trained scouts everywhere have done under such circumstances: he would go straight into the encampment.

As he walked toward the big tent, Indians lying on the ground sprang up and seized him. They threw him to the earth, then bound his hands and feet. Hearing the commotion, a chief came out of the tent. It was Arrowpine, whom the youth recognized. The chief spoke sternly.

"What are you doing here and why did you come into my camp?" he asked in anger. "Are you a spy?"

"I came here," answered the youth, "to find my father's animals, which your men have driven away."

"Who is your father?" demanded the chief, "and who are you?"

"My father is Tom Hale; I am Sol Hale and no spy, but a friend of the red man," the boy responded.

"Are you Strong Arm's son?" asked the chief, peering doubtfully through the dim light at the prostrate form beside him. "Don't lie to me."

"I do not lie; neither did my father ever deceive you or your people," declared the boy in strong tones.

"Stand him up," the chief commanded; and they stood him erect before Arrowpine, who eyed him keenly. But the boy had changed so much in seven years that the Indian leader failed to recognize him. "Can you prove to me," the chief asked, "that you are Strong Arm's son?"

"Seven years ago, when you were hidden in my father's house to get away from the Shoshones, I led you and your wife with her baby boy through the cedars and along the secret trail to the northern road; and I had to run all the way back, for the Shoshones might have captured me."

In answer to other questions by the chief, Sol gave significant details of the journey—details that only those who made it could accurately relate: how they had stopped only once at a tiny spring to drink and rest a few minutes before running on again; what the chief had said as they parted that day; the token that the chief had given him as a mark of his gratitude—a grizzly's tooth, which the boy had strung upon his leather-woven watch chain, and which he now asked the chief to look at.

The chief had closely watched the youth during this testimony, his features changing and his face lighting up as he remembered the race through the cedars; and now, in the clearer light of the dawn, he recognized in the youth the boy who had stood by him in his hour of need.

"Unbind him," the chief commanded his men; and they untied the rawhide thongs they had wound about him. Sol rubbed his wrist and ankles, then faced the chief.

"Would you know your father's animals if you saw them?" asked Arrowpine, this time in a friendly and considerate voice.

"I could pick them out anywhere," young Hale answered.

"Then follow me," said the chief, striking off toward a large enclosure where the animals secured during the raid were being guarded by watchers.

The chief spoke to his men, who straightway proceeded to drive the animals one by one past a makeshift gate where the chief and young Hale stood. When one of his father's stock would pass, Sol would say, "That's ours," and the guards would turn it out of the enclosure. One after another he picked out his father's animals till he felt that he had nearly all of them.

Just then a handsome mare came trotting up to the gate, her eyes shining, nostrils blown, head erect, and tail held high, as she pranced and plunged, showing that the blood of her Arabian ancestry had lost none of its fire by her transfer from the deserts of Asia to those of America. She did not belong to the Hales; she had been imported for breeding purposes by a near friend and neighbor.

As young Hale saw her come forward, he began to think of the loss the whole community would suffer if he did not claim her and take her home to his father's friend, and a battle as fierce as those waged on fields of carnage began to rage in his brain. The horse was not his father's, to be sure; but these Indian thieves had no right to her, so why should he not deceive them and recover her for the people, especially, he argued to himself, since the Indians would probably make little good use of her and by abuse and neglect would soon destroy her extraordinary value. On the other hand there arose in his mind the words of his father—"Never lie to an Indian"—and after brief hesitation, with the Indians eying him closely, he shook his head, saying, "She is not ours."

The chief immediately called for a guard to escort young Hale and his stock back to the vicinity of the Hale ranch. A murmur of disapproval, amounting almost to mutiny, rose in words and gestures of increasing excitement from the assembled braves. They had understood little of the English conversation between Arrowpine and young Hale, and they now perceived they were to be cheated of both their intended human victim and many of the animals they had rounded up in the raid.

In words of fervor and eloquence, Arrowpine now addressed his men, relating how the life of their chief and his wife and young son had been saved by this son of their famous friend, the well-known Strong Arm.

The braves, after talking it over, accepted the chief's decision. A select guard forthwith escorted young Hale and the livestock back to the vicinity of the ranch. As Sol drove in the stock, he found a large company in a high state of nervous tension awaiting news of him. By this time they believed him to be killed or captured.

There had been little sleep at the ranch through the night. Sol's mother had paced the floor of her room; his father with scouting parties had scoured the country in all directions in search of him, but they had not been numerous enough to invade the Indian camp.

That morning the Indians moved off with their plunder.

Improvement Era, February 1930.
