Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

A Long Night

IRIS SYNDERGAARD

Her early breakfast finished, Hilda stood beside the cabin. She watched Father drive the wagon around the big bend by the river. She could not see Mother, who lay in back of the wagon because she was too ill to sit with Father.

When the wagon was out of sight, Hilda said, "You go play, Matthew. You too, Jane,"

Hilda felt very lonely but very proud of her ten years. Father had told her she must take care of her little sister and brother and their cow, Bessie. Father would have to drive most of the day to get Mother into town, where she could be taken care of by the doctor.

The day passed. In the morning the children played on the great red rock above the cabin. After lunch they made stick houses in the damp sand beside the swift river.

Hilda fixed beans with cold johnnycake for supper. At bedtime the three children knelt down for family prayers.

Jane stood up. "Do we have to sleep in the loft, Hilda?" she asked. "Can't we sleep down here?"

"Yes," Hilda said. "There is room in the big bed for all of us."

She banked the fire to burn slowly through the night, and then she snuggled into the soft, warm bed beside Jane.

Hilda knew she had been asleep a long time when she wakened suddenly. She lay still. A sound had wakened her. "It must be Matthew," she said to herself. "He snores when he sleeps on his back."

But Matthew lay quietly on his side. Hilda decided she had imagined the noise. She pulled the warm quilt up and closed her eyes.

In the dark night, the sound came again. Her skin prickled with fear, because Hilda knew what it was. She had heard the roar of a hunting mountain lion before—but never so near.

"Our house is tight," she told herself. "No lion can get in." Suddenly Hilda thought of Bessie. Only yesterday she had heard Father tell Mother the cow was not safe in the lean-to. It was too open. Hilda knew it could never keep a prowling lion out.

The lion will not come down to the river. It will stay high on the mountain among the trees, Hilda thought to herself.

For some time all was still. Then, nearer, the lion roared again. Matthew stirred in sleep. Jane sat up.

"I hear a noise, Hilda," she said. "Is someone outside?"

"No, Jane," Hilda answered quickly. She was glad Jane was awake. Maybe with both of them listening they could tell how close the lion was to their cabin.

The next time the lion roared, it was very close. Hilda was sure it must now be on top of the big red rock above the cabin. She wondered why it would come so near. Father said wild animals were afraid of people.

It was their cow the lion was after.

Hilda knew what she must do. Without stopping to put on her shoes, she ran to the door.

"Jane," she said as she unfastened the leather thong that held the door tight, "stand right here. Open the door wide when you hear me call. I must get Bessie."

Outside, a quarter-moon hung low in the west. By its dim light, Hilda ran along the path to the lean-to. She could hear Bessie stamping in her stall. When Hilda unlatched the low gate, the cow snorted with fright. Hilda quickly took a rope and tied it around the animal's neck. "There, Bessie," she murmured, as she led the cow onto the path.

Hilda looked at the black shadows under the rocks beside the lean-to. She was afraid she would see the crouched figure of the mountain lion. Bessie was also very frightened. She pulled against the rope with all her strength. Hilda knew the cow must not break away and run into the night. She would not get far before the lion would catch her.

"Jane," Hilda called, tugging at the rope. "Come and help me."

The small figure of her sister ran from the cabin. "Shove the cow from behind," Hilda panted.

Together they pushed the terrified cow to the cabin and got her inside. Hilda banged the door shut and fastened it.

"Jane, put more wood on the fire. Matthew, help me push the dresser in front of the door."

Hilda tied the cow to the bedstead. She sat beside Jane and Matthew in the middle of the big bed. The children sang songs and tried to remember stories as the minutes crept by. Often they sat very still to listen.

Hilda knew the lion was pacing around and around their cabin. She knew it stopped circling sometimes to sniff at the door. The younger children also knew it.

Once Jane whispered, "Can it come in the door?"

"No," Hilda said firmly.

"Can it break the window?" Matthew's voice squeaked.

Hilda answered "No" again, but not so firmly. The panes of glass looked very thin.

"Let's all say our prayers again," she said. "Heavenly Father will keep us safe."

Hours later, over the great red rock, the sky finally grew pale as the new day began. It wasn't very long until they heard a familiar, welcome sound—the clop-clop of Father's horses.

Later, after Father told them Mother's infection had been treated and she would be home soon, Father asked Hilda if she was sure the lion had really come down to the cabin.

Hilda took her father's hand. She led him toward the spring that ran behind the cabin. She pointed at the damp mud. Father said nothing, but he nodded his head. Beside the stream were enormous footprints left by a mountain lion.

Children's Friend, April 1969.
