Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Lost Cow, Found Cow

HENRY D. MOYLE

When I was a young boy, my father entrusted the family cow to my care, both at our home in Salt Lake City as well as at our summer home in the mountains, in Big Cottonwood Canyon. My first trip from the city to the mountains with the cow was made on the back of my Indian pony. . . . It can be hard work leading a cow by a rope attached to her halter with the other end wrapped around the horn of the saddle. It took most of the day to get the cow just from Salt Lake City to the mouth of the canyon.

Around noon I stopped at a farm located on Highland Drive below Sugar House. I milked the cow to make traveling easier for her and fed the pony and the cow. The fresh warm milk tasted good with the sandwiches Mother had put in my saddlebag.

We began to climb the canyon road, and continued our journey uneventfully until early evening, when the cow suddenly balked. I lost hold of the rope and the cow took off up the hill in the thick scrub oak brush. I left my pony on the canyon road and went to find the cow. I climbed through the brush, but I could not find her, and it was getting darker all the time. When I felt I had done all I could to help myself, I knelt down to pray. I knew then that the Lord hears and answers our prayers when we do our part. I felt good when I stood up. I was not afraid any more. I walked a short distance up the hill and came upon an old irrigation ditch. A short distance up the ditch I saw my cow hidden by the bank.

After thanking the Lord for answering my prayer, I drove the cow ahead of me in the ditch until we came out into a clearing. I tied the cow to a bush, then went down the canyon road until I was once again seated comfortably on my pony. I retrieved the cow and soon arrived at our summer home.

If I were you I would pray and develop the ability of talking to the Lord and depending upon him to help when his help is necessary. You will find throughout life he will always be there to help you. Without his help, we do not accomplish much. With his help there is nothing we cannot accomplish if we will.

Improvement Era, February 1963.
