Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Walking Question Mark

DOROTHY D. WARNER

The thin, red-haired boy with the bright blue eyes was busy thinking as he hoed his father's corn. "What a pity farming takes so much time. There are so many other things in the world I would like to learn about."

It was in the colony of Connecticut in 1771; the boy was twelve-year-old Noah Webster. Ever since he could remember, he had asked questions about everything: "Why do cows give milk?" or "Where is that bee going?" His parents had not been able to answer his questions to his satisfaction. They did not know the meaning of many of the words he read.

On Sunday afternoons under the gnarled apple trees, Noah read every book or newspaper he could lay his hands on. Every printed page to him was an exciting and new country to be explored. he had read only a dozen books, but he was sure that, somewhere, there must be many more that would answer all his questions. Already he realized that getting an education was similar to gathering walnuts—one had to crack the outside shell to find the nutmeat inside.

In his bed at night beside his eldest brother, Noah huddled close to a single candle to try to read a bit of the weekly newspaper, but Charles would complain, "Blow out the candle, Noah. How can a working man get enough sleep this way?" Reluctantly, Noah did as he was told, but he did not always go to sleep at once.

Noah liked to think about what he had read—the high taxes on glass, sugar, paper, and tea that the British had now imposed on the colonies. The colonists were angry, and they were calling the British "lobsters" because of their red coats. The American colonists were a spirited people, and Noah had read where they would not long tolerate abuse.

Sometimes Noah lay there and thought about school. He wondered if he would have to quit going to school when he turned fourteen, the age when a working boy became a man. He prayed each night that somehow he might be able to continue learning.

The harvest was over, and the mornings were cold now. Noah got up early to help his father mend harnesses, shoes, and fences, and gather in the frosty pumpkins.

"If you keep up with your work, you may continue your schooling until you finish all the schoolmaster can teach you," his father told him.

So each morning Noah brushed a kiss on his mother's cheek and hurried the four miles to school.

Once he overheard his mother say to his father, "That son of ours is a walking question mark." Her voice was proud when she said it. Noah guessed it pretty well did describe him.

At school, without a word of greeting, the stern schoolmaster, who either taught from the Speller or the Bible, whacked on his desk with a long stick and all the students, large and small, lined up in a row for the spelling lesson.

"Satan!" shouted the schoolmaster, thumping his desk so hard one small girl crouched in fright.

"Satan, S-A-T-A-N!" the pupils loudly chorused. One boy hesitated over the word and received a sharp whack with the stick. The students went on this way, reciting the twenty spelling words they must know each day.

The children were never given any homework because they had no time to study at home. Arithmetic came suddenly out of the schoolmaster's head. They learned of dead kings, vanished cities, and dates of events long past.

Noah wanted to know much more about the world at the present. "Please, sir," he said one day to the schoolmaster, "do you know what makes the King of England so unfair to us?"

The schoolmaster glared at Noah over his spectacles. "That is no part of our lesson," he scowled. "You will have to ask the King himself."

The class tittered, but Noah did not mind.

He tried again, this time to secure a book to read at home. "Can you tell me, sir, where I may borrow books?"

"Too much reading is bad for a boy," his schoolmaster answered. "You should be able to read from the Bible and spell—more than that you will never need."

Noah managed to learn Latin and to borrow books from his young minister. Finally, when Noah was sixteen, after much hard work, his father borrowed money to put him through Yale College. Though he studied law, one of his first jobs was as a schoolmaster.

When Noah wasn't teaching, he worked on a new speller. He called it the Blue Speller, and it was a wonderful change from the dull schoolbooks of his day. American parents, children, and teachers loved his new book. It had colorful stories about history, geography, science—subjects never before put into schoolbooks.

There were funny animal fables, each with a moral plainly stated to help a child grow wise. No descriptions of the devil and his ways, but an essay entitled "How to Be a Good Boy." And Noah did not stand over his pupils with a stick and force them to learn.

"A is for apple pie made by a cook. B is for boy who is fond of his book," was the way the alphabet read, and children were eager to pen it each day.

The Blue Speller became the backbone of American education of that day. It sold 100 million copies, exceeded only by the Holy Bible.

Noah traveled south to help improve education there, and he made a friend of George Washington when he called at Mount Vernon to show him his speller. Later, when the time came to draw up the Constitution of the United States, Washington remembered Noah Webster's Sketches of American Policies and asked him to come to Philadelphia to help.

Noah Webster, the country lad, taught himself twentyfour foreign languages during his lifetime, and he decided he would write a correct and modern dictionary—complete with Greek and Latin sources. So at the age of sixty, he began this great task, which was to take him twenty years to complete. He knew that if this great nation was to grow, it must have up-to-date words and references.

This alone would have been a life's fulfillment for an ordinary man, but Noah Webster also wrote A Grammar of English Language, A History of the United States, and Bible in the Common Language.

Children's Friend, May 1969.
