Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Dawn Boy

THELMA J. HARRISON

Setting Sun, wrinkled and tired, sad and old, sat before the door of his tepee. It was nighttime. The stars twinkled; the moon shed silver-pink beams on a darkened earth; a bird called sleepily; an owl sent forth its weird screech; and from a distance came the wail of a coyote. But Setting Sun neither saw nor heard, so deeply was he wrapped in his own thoughts.

He thought, "No sons have I. No sons! Seven sons were sent to me by the Great Spirit—brave sons they were, handsome as the turkey bird, straight as the water reed, agile as the rainbow fish, fleet as the tawny deer. Good sons they were—gentle like the doe, industrious like the squirrel, courageous as the she cat protecting her young."

As Setting Sun thought, he sighed, but the words went on in his mind: "Seven sons has the great Spirit given me; seven sons have been killed in battle; seven great warriors have gone to the Happy Hunting Grounds.

"Seven sons have I trained that they might be good chiefs; seven sons have I trained so that any one of them would be a fit guide for my people when I, Setting Sun, should die; but now they are all gone even as are all the stalwart young braves of the tribe, for this year there have been many wars. Only the old men are left. If I should pass to the Happy Hunting Grounds, there is no one with wisdom to guide my people; there is no one to read the signs in the heavens; there is no one wise in the secret of herbs. Only the young boys are left. From these youths, I, Setting Sun, must choose one—one who will be a just, wise chief, though very young; one who will guide my people wisely and well. But whom shall I choose? Whom shall I bring to my tepee to train in the ways of a chief?"

For a long time Setting Sun sat, thinking, thinking, trying to decide which boy.

The stars grew pale. The moon disappeared behind a mountain peak. A cool breeze began to creep through Setting Sun's blankets and chill his old bones. Finally, stiff and weary, he arose and went into his tepee. He was very tired but his mind was at rest, for he had made his decision. He had decided that he, Setting Sun, would not himself choose the boy to become chief of his people. He would hold contests, and the boy would show himself.

Next day all the tribe knew of Setting Sun's decision. All the boys were excited and happy. Each boy was thrilled with the idea that perhaps he would become chief of his tribesmen.

For a fortnight contests were to be held—contests in running, in fishing, in hunting. Setting Sun would find who could shoot the surest arrow, who could endure longest in the war dance, who was the swiftest runner. It was also said that by these contests, Setting Sun would know who was fair and just, who was honest and good, for Setting Sun was old and very wise.

And so the contests began. All the young boys assembled with their bows and arrows for hunting, with their spears for fishing; each had resolved in his heart that he would be the one Setting Sun would take to his tepee. Mothers and sisters and little brothers came, all hopeful and confident that the one they loved would outshine the others.

Of them all, one stood forth from the others; one surpassed in all the feats. That one was Dawn Boy, son of Singing Arrow, who was a great warrior and a friend of Setting Sun.

In the races, Dawn Boy was always the fleetest; in the war dance, Dawn Boy endured the longest; in the shooting contest, not one of his arrows missed the mark. When Setting Sun sent them out to hunt, Dawn Boy was the first to return. With a deer slung over his shoulders and a turkey bird hanging on his belt, he came into camp. When they went to the river to fish, Dawn Boy speared the greatest number in the shortest time. Always joy and strength seemed to radiate from him.

"But," thought Setting Sun, "everything has been easy for Dawn Boy. Nothing has been difficult. Not yet do I know if Dawn Boy is fit to become chief. I must find one more task. I must find something that is difficult for Dawn Boy, something he does not enjoy doing."

So to each of the boys was given one more task. Each one was to make a belt for Setting Sun. The belt was to be made of beads; it was to be beautiful and original in design. One day was given in which the boys should learn the art of beading; then the contest would begin. In three more suns, the belt was to be finished.

So each boy set forth to make a belt. None complained. It was a test given by Setting Sun, wise and beloved chief. It was a final test to find who was worthy to be taught in the ways of wisdom.

Diligently the boys worked. The first day passed, and some progressed rapidly; some, more slowly; Dawn Boy, not at all. Though he tried repeatedly, he could not make a design that was really beautiful.

Dawn Boy's mother watched sympathetically, but she could not help. Setting Sun watched too. He watched when he did not seem to be watching.

"At last," said Setting Sun to himself, "I have found something that is not easy for Dawn Boy—something in which he does not excel. About the belt I do not care. I wish only to see how he acts in time of trouble. I wish only to see if he behaves in a manner fitting a chief."

For half a day Dawn Boy worked. Three designs he started. Three designs lay unfinished. Dawn Boy knew that none of them was good. Finally he arose and, saying no word, disappeared into the nearby woods.

"He's a quitter," thought Setting Sun. "If it's hard for him to do, he's a quitter. A good chief is never a quitter. However, I think I shall follow him and see what he does."

Silently, so that not even a twig crackled, Setting Sun followed Dawn Boy.

On Dawn Boy went, farther into the woods until he came to the winding river. Then he stopped, looked around him to see that he was alone, and, finding himself alone, stretched his arms toward heaven. Looking up, he said, "Great Spirit, ruler of the sun, the moon, and stars, to you I, Dawn Boy, come for assistance. Help me, Great Spirit, to fashion a design for the belt of Setting Sun. Help me, Great Spirit, to work with speed that I may make up the time I have lost. As thou hast helped me before, Great Spirit, I pray thee to help me again that I might dwell in the tepee of Setting Sun; that I might learn to be wise and good as befits a chief." Then Dawn Boy went back to the others.

Setting Sun remained hidden until Dawn Boy was well on his way; then he too went back to camp.

Once again Dawn Boy set to work. Once again it seemed he could make no design; and then a strange thing happened. Crawling up a small twig lying near Dawn Boy's foot was a worm. Dawn Boy reached for the twig to move it lest he step on the worm and crush it, but as he raised the stick, he saw that on the worm's back were many colors. He saw that on the worm's back was a pattern, intricate of design, beautiful in color.

Joy flooded Dawn Boy's face. The Great Spirit, who designed the heavens and the earth, the birds and the animals, had heard his prayer; the Great Spirit had sent one of his own designs to place on the belt of Setting Sun.

Intently Dawn Boy studied the design. Yes, it was the loveliest design he had ever seen. The pattern was repeated over and over again in sections on the worm's back.

Quickly Dawn Boy chose colors from his bowl of beads that corresponded to the colors on the worm's back; then diligently he worked. Occasionally, when it looked as though the worm would crawl from the twig and away, Dawn Boy placed another twig for the worm to crawl on, lest the little creature disappear before he was able to finish the pattern.

At length Dawn Boy finished the first square of his design. He paused to admire it. It was identical to that which was on the worm's back. The pale blue, the deep blue, the black, the white, the orange, and the yellow looked just as beautiful on the bead belt as they did on the worm's back. But not for long did Dawn Boy stop to admire, for he was far behind the others. Back to work he went to repeat the pattern over and over again, just as the Great Spirit had done.

Finally all the belts were finished—all, that is, except Dawn Boy's. Undaunted, he worked on. Not yet had the third sun set. He must finish his task. At last, just as the great, golden sun slipped from view, Dawn Boy finished. He took his belt to the place where Setting Sun and the others were waiting. He hung his belt over the display rod that Setting Sun had prepared. He heard murmurs of admiration as the tribesmen viewed the beautiful belt he had made.

Setting Sun, however, did not look at the belt. He arose and, with an upraised arm, silenced the group. Then he began speaking.

"Seven sons has the Mighty One given me—seven sons, stalwart and handsome, courageous and good. And now, to me he has given an eighth son to dwell in my tepee. He has given me a son like unto the seven; he has given me Dawn Boy, offspring of Singing Arrow.

"Fleet he is like the deer; strong like the pine tree; quick like the winging bird; sure like the arrow. But it is not for these reasons I take him in my tepee. A beautiful belt he has made for me, choice among all others. But it is not for this reason I take him to train in ways of wisdom.

"I take him because of his mighty faith—faith in the power, the goodness, the helpfulness of the Great Spirit. Because of this faith I know that when you, my people, are in trouble—that when he, your chief-to-be, has difficulties—to the Great Spirit he will appeal for help and guidance. Because of his great faith, I, Setting Sun, have faith in him—faith that when I am gone, he will be a good and mighty chieftain for my people."

When he finished, Setting Sun led Dawn Boy into his tepee.

A great cheer arose from the people—a cheer for Setting Sun, the old chief, good and wise, brave and true, and a cheer for Dawn Boy, the young brave who would follow in the footsteps of Setting Sun.

A Story to Tell (Deseret Book Co., 1971).
