Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Lost Skates

J. C. NOLAN

One afternoon Jimmie was sitting on the front porch, thinking about his lost skates. He was thinking about them because down the street, near the corner, a little boy was skating back and forth. Watching this boy made Jimmie think about his own skates.

The boy at the corner went slowly and uncertainly back and forth. He seemed to be just learning to skate. Occasionally he tumbled, but most of the time he got along quite well.

As he came close, Jimmie was surprised to see that the boy's skates looked quite new.

"They are very much like mine," thought Jimmie. Just then the boy skated past him.

"They are just like mine," thought Jimmie. Then, when the boy skated past again, Jimmie saw, printed on the straps, the word Jimmie.

"Why, they are mine!" shouted Jimmie.

He stepped in front of the boy. "Where did you get my skates?" he demanded.

The little boy stared at him with round, frightened eyes. "They're not your skates," he said. "They're mine. The junkman gave them to me."

"I don't care who gave them to you," said Jimmie, crossly. "They are mine. What's your name?"

"Stephen."

"Well! See! My name is Jimmie, and here it is, right here, where I printed it myself—Jimmie. So they are mine!"

The little boy looked worried. "The junkman gave them to me. He found them in the gutter where they had been thrown away."

"They must have rolled down the walk when I took them off," said Jimmie, recalling that day when he had fallen and hurt his cheek. "Well, anyway, I didn't throw them away. And they are mine. Give them to me!"

The little boy sat down and began to tug obediently at the straps. "I guess you're right," he said. "They must be yours."

Jimmie took the skates and ran home. At his own door-step he looked back. The boy was still sitting where Jimmie had left him, but now he was leaning over, his head on his arms, crying.

Jimmie had thought he would be perfectly happy to have his skates back again. He had been so sorry to lose them, and he had hunted high and low for them! But he couldn't help thinking about that little boy. He kept remembering how he had looked, hunched over on the sidewalk with his head down, crying. Jimmie thought so hard about it that he couldn't enjoy his dinner.

As he was getting ready for bed, he suddenly made up his mind. He slipped his bathrobe over his pajamas and went downstairs into the living room where his mother and daddy were.

"I want to talk to you," said Jimmie.

"Why, what is it, son?" asked his mother.

Then Jimmie told them about the boy who had been skating at the corner that afternoon. He told them how the boy had looked—so small and shabby—and how he had put his head down and cried.

"And I think," said Jimmie, at last, "that if you don't mind, Mother, I'll give the skates back to him. He really believed they were his; and somehow it doesn't seem right to take them away, just because the junkman made a mistake and thought they had been thrown away, there in the gutter."

"I think you are right," said his mother. "And I'll tell you something else I think"—and she kissed him—"I think you are a good boy."

And next morning, Jimmie and his mother drove over to the little house by the railroad tracks and gave Stephen the wonderful skates to keep for his very own. Stephen was happy—and so was Jimmie!

A Story to Tell (Deseret Book Co., 1971).
