Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Skating to Danger

MARIE LARSEN

As Wally fastened on his ice skates, his heart beat with hopefulness. The ice-covered meadow was vacant! Joe and the other boys hadn't come skating yet. There was no one to drive him away. This time he'd be able to skate—perhaps even until he learned to keep his legs from going in different directions and from sailing out from under him at the most unexpected times.

"I could skate just as well as anyone in a little while, even if this is the first time I've lived around ice," Wally told himself as he drew the last strap tight. "I've practically memorized the skating manual Mr. Penroy loaned me. I can make my skates work, I know I can! If the boys will only let me try!"

Carefully he stood up. He balanced perfectly and sighed with satisfaction. Then suddenly his feet began slipping along the ice. His body rocked back and forth and his arms made wild circles in the air. His feet slid up off the ice and out from under him. There was a swush! and a splat! and a stinging coldness as he sat down, hard.

"The kid from the city skates kind of fancy," someone chuckled behind him. Wally twisted his aching neck toward the sound of the chuckling. It was Joe! Already he and the boys were here, leaning over the long split poles that fenced the ice-covered meadow from adjoining fields. And they were laughing at him!

Joe straddled the pole fence. He waved an arm. "Go on, beat it, kid!" he said sourly. "We want to skate now. And we don't want you falling under our feet like you did yesterday."

Wally slipped along in a sitting position until he reached a clump of protruding sod near the fence. He stood up and took a deep breath.

"Look, fellows. Mr. Penroy gave me permission to skate in this meadow. I asked him when the river first began freezing and backing up right after we moved here from the city." He gazed at them steadily. "You've sent me away every day, but this time I think I'll stay!"

Joe pushed ahead of the others. "He gave you permission to skate, did he? If you'd skate, it would be different."

Wally thought of the manual. "Maybe I haven't done a lot of skating. But I've a book that tells how—and I'm sure in time I can do it right!"

Joe roared. "Learning to skate from a book! Just like a city kid."

Wally felt a warmness creeping up along his neck. He pressed his lips tight to keep from saying all the things he felt. He stood up again, holding his knees tightly together until he felt confident. Then he pushed one foot slowly forward and at an angle, leaning ahead just a little. When he lifted his other foot a bit he found he didn't wobble as he had done before. He slid it along the ice. His heart leaped. He could keep his feet going. He was skating!

Behind him he heard the sound of skates being dropped to the ice. Joe and the boys were putting on their skates. Perhaps they would leave him alone now that he was showing them he could skate. Slow, yes. But skating just the same!

Soon he heard the swishing of skates behind him, and suddenly the boys were all around him, skating this way and that, zooming very close to him, then twisting away. Wally felt chocked. They were not going to leave him alone even today. And now they were trying to confuse him. He could tell, and he tried not to look at them. But when Joe came skating directly toward him, yelling as he came, Wally's ankles wobbled. He tried to remember what he had read about turning. He curved one skate to move out of Joe's way—and then his feet and skates left the ice. Wally hit his head on the hard coldness. There was a swishing sound as Joe curved expertly away, a dull ache in Wally's head as he tried to see him go.

When Wally tried to sit up he felt sick inside. He looked sadly down at his skates and began unbuckling the straps. It was no use. They didn't intend to let him skate. For some reason they didn't like him; they didn't want him to learn at all!

Wally got up and crossed the ice to the pole fence. He sat down and let his skates drop to the sod beside him. He watched the boys cutting fancy figures across the ice-covered meadow, then sailing swiftly toward the icy river to veer expertly away at the very edge of the thinner ice. They had to be good to do that, Wally thought. The ice on the river was dangerous. Mr. Penroy had warned him against trying to skate on the river ice. But Joe and the other boys knew just when to turn back. It looked like a game they were playing. As they circled in the center and whisked away again, he couldn't help wishing he could be good enough to join them.

He watched Joe sailing ahead of the others toward the river again. He was getting mighty close. He should turn now, Wally thought. The other boys turned but Joe kept on. Wally tensed. Surely Joe knew the danger of the river ice—

"Joe!"

Wally didn't know what made him cry out. Somehow he felt a sudden alarm for the boy even before he saw the ice start to split. Joe must have seen it too. He tried to twist away, but his skate caught in the cracking ice. He lost balance and fell flat upon his stomach. Weblike cracks suddenly appeared all about him with the heaviness of his fall. And then Wally saw the ice sink beneth Joe, a huge slab of it, leaving Joe clinging frantically to the edge of a hole.

"Help me! Quick!" Joe screamed.

Some of the boys turned at his cry. They sped toward him, but they stopped at the edge of the weblike cracks.

"We can't get nearer, Joe!" one of them said. "That ice won't hold anybody!"

"You've got to get me out! The ice is giving way!" Joe's face was white. "Hurry!"

Wally had been unable to move before, but he stood up now, clutching the fence poles with trembling fingers. They must help Joe! If the ice he was clinging to gave way he would go under! But what? He had read something—There was something he should remember—

His shoulder brushed against the split poles as he moved. He felt its rough flat surface where it had been split for fence making. His heart leaped. The poles! If one of them was long enough to stretch across the weblike cracks—across the caved-in ice to good ice—Joe might be able to cling on until they could help him!

Wally gave a shout for help and began tearing at the top pole. Some of the boys heard him, realized his intentions, and skated swiftly to help. The pole creaked with the effort of their pulling. Then it came free, and they slid in along the ice to the edge of the weblike cracks. Together they pushed it, flat side down, across the hole. Wally took a deep breath. It reached! He felt a deep relief when he saw Joe reach for the rail and cling to it with trembling hands, but he held his breath until he was sure the ice was going to hold.

"Can you make it now, Joe?" someone asked.

Joe turned a white face toward them. His lips were blue, and his teeth chattered. He tried to pull himself up, then said helplessly, "I'm too cold."

Wally said quickly, "I'm the smallest. I'll go out along the pole and help him. Someone go build a fire by the fence. Mr. Penroy won't care if you use one of the poles, I know. The rest of you be ready to drag the pole across the ice if it starts to give way."

He crawled slowly out along the pole toward Joe. He felt Joe's icy fingers clutch his and he pulled hard. He closed his eyes and hoped with all his heart that the pole would hold up. Then he felt Joe free of the hole. He felt him sliding along behind him as they started inching back toward the others.

Helping hands pulled Joe up and carried him toward the fire someone had started. Wally followed along behind them and stood off away from the excitement-stirred circle. Presently he turned to pick up his skates. Joe would be all right when they got him dry and warm.

As he turned away he heard Joe ask, "Where's Wally?"

"You mean the city kid?" someone wondered.

"I mean Wally," Joe said, flatly. "When you call him a city kid it should be with respect. He thought of using the pole, didn't he?"

The circle split. Wally saw Joe sitting by the fire, wrapped in coats.

"Come here, Wally," Joe motioned. "I want to thank you for getting me out." As Wally walked nearer, he went on, "You know, Wally, I've been acting smart. I was even trying to be smart when I went out on the river ice. But I think I'm through being smart. If you still want to learn to skate, we'll leave you alone from now on."

Joe looked around at the other boys. Wally followed his gaze. Some of the boys dropped their eyes and chopped at the ice with the sharp points of their skates. Wally grinned and straightened his shoulders.

"I'll see you tomorrow then," he said.

"Wally—" someone spoke up as he turned again. "Wally, that book on ice skating—the one you have been reading—I think some of us need to read a little of it. How about bringing it along?"

The boy meant it, Wally could tell. And a feeling started to grow inside him that made him want to shout. He thought of several things he could say—things they probably expected him to say to get even. But he grinned instead.

"I'll bring it," he promised.

Children's Friend, January 1948.
