Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

A Most Important Boy

ROSALIE W. DOSS

"Good morning, Senor Martinez! How are you this fine morning?" said Juan. He smiled at the old man, who was leaning over his workbench.

"Fine!" replied Senor Martinez, looking up from his work.

"Come, Juan, look at this belt I am working on. Does the bird design look right?"

"Oh, yes, Senor Martinez," said Juan, examining the beautiful piece of leatherwork. "The bird is so real it looks as if it could fly right off the belt."

Senor Martinez smiled happily. "Thank you, Juan. You are a big help."

Juan went on down the village street. He was on his way to get a jug of goat's milk from Senor Morales, who lived at the other end of the village. The milk was for Juan's baby brother, Pepe. Juan went after the milk every morning. And every morning he stopped along the way and greeted his friends and neighbors.

This morning, under his bright smile, Juan felt just a little sad. He said, "If only I could make beautiful things out of leather the way Senor Martinez does. Then I would feel important. Senor Martinez must be just about the most important man in our village."

But Juan did not stay sad for long. When he saw Senora Garcia coming out of her neat, whitewashed little adobe house, Juan sang out, "Good morning, Senora Garcia."

"Ah, it is you, Juan," cried Senora Garcia happily. "I was waiting for you to come by. Today is my market day. Could you give me a hand with these baskets? I want to sling them across Benito's back."

"I would be glad to help, Senora Garcia," said Juan.

Benito, the little brown burro, stood very still as Juan helped Senora Garcia place the baskets on his back. The baskets had to be balanced just right so that they would not be burdensome for the little animal to carry. In the baskets were ears of corn, squash, sticks of sugarcane, and strings of ornamental gourds.

Senora Garcia not only took her own produce to market, but she also transported some of the things her neighbors grew. Senora Garcia was the only person in the village who owned a burro.

When they had finished loading Benito, Senora Garcia gave Juan a stick of sugarcane. "Gracias!" she said. "I never would have been able to load Benito without your help, Juan."

Juan went off down the street nibbling on the sweet, delicious sugarcane. How he wished he owned a burro! Then he could go to market for his neighbors the way Senora Garcia did. Then he would surely feel very important.

The sad feeling began to come back again, but it did not last long. All along the street Juan met people he knew, and always Juan's bright smile flashed as he greeted them.

At Senor Morales' house there was much shouting and confusion.

"What is it, Senor Morales?" asked Juan. But he already had an idea of what had happened.

"My goats are loose again. The rascals broke out of their pen," cried Senor Morales.

"I will help you catch them," said Juan, setting down his jug. Almost every morning Juan helped Sennor Morales catch his troublemaking goats, who liked nothing better than breaking out of their pen.

With Juan's help, it did not take long to get the goats back into their pen.

After Senor Morales had thanked Juan and filled his jug with milk, Juan started back home. But all the way he kept thinking how wonderful it would be to have a fine herd of goats, even if they were mischievous. He could supply the other villagers with milk the way Senor Morales did. Then he would really be important.

Juan gave the jug of milk to his mother and went back out into the yard. He kept thinking, "Everyone in this village is more important than I am."

At that moment it happened! Juan's thoughts were so far away and so sad that he did not notice the big rock. Flip! Flop! Crash! Bang! Juan tripped over the rock and fell to the ground very hard. A sharp pain started at his ankle and shot right up his leg.

"Are you hurt, Juan?" cried his mother.

"I think I hurt my ankle," moaned Juan.

His mother carefully felt Juan's foot and ankle. Then she breathed a deep sigh of relief. "It is only a sprain. Stay off it a few days, and your ankle will be as good as new."

The next morning the sun was already high in the sky when Juan asked from his chair near the window, "Who will go after Pepe's milk today?"

"I will go as soon as I finish my household chores," said Juan's mother.

But Juan's mother did not have to go. There was a shout outside. It was Senor Morales. He said, "When Juan did not show up for the milk, I brought it myself. I was worried. What happened to Juan?"

Before Juan or his mother could answer, old Senor Martinez hobbled into view. "Where is Juan? I missed him this morning."

"So did I," spoke up another voice. It was Senora Garcia.

Then Juan and his mother explained about the sprained ankle and how Juan would have to rest his foot for a few days.

By this time a crowd had gathered outside Juan's window. They all told Juan how sorry they were about his accident.

Juan smiled at his many friends and neighbors and said, "I did not think anyone would miss me. I did not think I was important!"

"How could I handle my stubborn goats if you didn't give me a hand?" asked Senor Morales, grinning broadly.

"How could I get to market without your help?" said Senora Garcia. "Benito and I both look for you every morning."

"And how could I ever begin my day without your cheery greeting?" said old Senor Martinez. "Your kindness and merry smile make you the most important boy in our village."

Juan's smile now became bigger than ever. There was not so much as even a little twinge of sadness left in his heart. Of course, Juan did not really think he was the most important boy in the village, but it was a warm, happy feeling to know that his friends and neighbors thought so much of him. It made him feel useful and wanted. And what can be more important than that!

Children's Friend, March 1968.
