Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

"I Can't Do It, Coach"

CREED HAYMOND

To Harvard Stadium in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in May 1919, the great American colleges had sent their best men, seventeen hundred in all, to compete at the annual meet of the Intercollegiate Association of Amateur Athletics of America. Creed Haymond, a Mormon boy, was captain of the Pennsylvania team. The night before the meet, Coach Lawson Robertson came to his room. He was in good spirits. In the tryouts Penn had qualified seventeen men. Cornell, Penn's most feared rival that year, had qualified only ten. As the scoring for the first five places in each event was five, four, three, two, and one, naturally the number of men each team had in the finals greatly influenced its chance to win.

"Creed," Robertson said, "if we do our best tomorrow, we will run away with it."

"We're going to do our best, Robby."

The coach hesitated. "Creed, I'm having the boys take a little sherry wine tonight. I want you to have a little."

"I can't do it, Coach."

"But, Creed, I'm not trying to get you to drink. I know what you Mormons believe. I'm giving you this as a tonic, just to put all of you on your mettle."

"It wouldn't do me any good, Robby; I can't take it."

"Remember, Creed, you're the captain of our team and our best point winner. Fourteen thousand students are looking to you personally to win this meet. If you fail us, we'll lose. I ought to know what is good for you."

Creed Haymond believed he had the best coach in the world (and with reason, for Lawson Robertson was to be chosen head coach of the Olympic teams of 1920, 1924, and 1928). Creed knew too that other coaches felt a little wine to be useful when men have trained muscle and nerve to the snapping point. He also knew that his team needed his best efforts. He intensely wished to give them, but he looked Robertson in the eye and said, "I won't take it, Coach."

Robertson smiled a little. On his grim Scottish face there was a curious expression. "You're an odd fellow, Creed. You have ideas of your own. Well, I'm going to let you do as you please."

He went away and left the captain of his team in a state of extreme anxiety. Supposing, Creed thought, he made a poor showing tomorrow; what could he say to Robertson? He was to go against the fastest man in the world. Nothing less than his best would do. His stubbornness might lose the meet for Penn. His teammates were doing as they were told. They believed in their coach. What right had he to disobey? Only one right, one reason, this teaching he had been following and believing all his life, the Word of Wisdom! He knelt down and earnestly, very earnestly, asked the Lord to give him a testimony as to the source of this revelation which he had believed and obeyed literally. Then he went to bed and slept the sound slumber of healthy youth.

Next morning Coach Robertson came to his room and asked anxiously, "How are you feeling, Creed?"

"Fine," the captain answered cheerfully.

"The other fellows are vomiting. I don't know what's the matter with them," he said seriously.

"Maybe it's the tonic you gave them," Creed volunteered.

"Maybe so," Robertson answered.

Two o'clock found twenty thousand spectators in their seats.

As the events got under way, it became plain that something was wrong with the wonderful Penn team. In that beautiful race, the quarter mile, the grinding test of speed and endurance, Pennsylvania's man was figured to take second place and win four precious points. The startled penn supporters watched the field run away from him; he came in last. In the half-mile event the intercollegiate champion of the year before was Penn's entrant—this time he finished fifth. Two Pennsylvania men were entered in the pole vault and were expected to take first and second places and win nine points. At a height below their own records, they tied for third place and won between them five points. The man entered for the high jump, confidently counted on as a point winner, did not place. The one who should have taken third in the low hurdles did not run.

The 100-yard dash was announced. The six fastest men in the colleges of America took their marks. This and the 220-yard dash to be run later were Creed Haymond's races.

"Take your marks!" The six sprinters crouched. Each put his fingers on the ground at the line and his feet into the hole he had kicked for the start.

"Set!" Every nerve and muscle strained.

The pistol shot—and every man sprang forward into the air and touched earth at a run, that is, all except Creed Haymond. A tall runner had used that second lane in a previous race, and he had kicked holes for his toe an inch or two behind the holes Creed had chosen for his. Under the tremendous thrust Creed gave, the narrow wedge of earth broke through, and he came down on his knees.

In a flash, Creed Haymond was up and running. At sixty yards, the last in the race—then, seeming to fly, he passed the fifth man—the fourth—the third—the second. Only the leader was between him and victory. With his heart almost bursting with the strain, Creed swept in a whirlwind past the leader to victory.

Through some mistake in arrangement, the semifinals of the 220-yard race were not completed until almost time to close the meet. With the same bad break that had followed the Penn team all day, Creed Haymond was placed in the last heat. Five minutes after winning the heat he was called for the finals of the 220, the last event of the day. One of the other men who had run in an earlier heat rushed up to him.

"Tell the starter, Haymond, that you demand a rest before running again. You're entitled to it under the rules. I've hardly caught my breath yet, and I ran in the heat before yours."

Creed went panting to the starter and begged for more time. Just then the telephone rang, and the starter was ordered to begin the race. Regretfully, he called the men to their marks. Under ordinary conditions Creed would have had no fear of this race. He was probably the fastest 220-yard dash runner in the world, but he had already run three races during the afternoon.

At a high point in the grandstand, Coach Lawson Robertson of Pennsylvania and Coach Tom Keene of Syracuse sat with their stopwatches in hand.

With surprise they saw the starter order the breathless men to their marks and, standing behind them, raise his pistol; then the white puff of smoke. This time the Penn captain literally shot from his marks—he was sprinting away from the field. Running his race alone, unpressed by competition, the little Penn captain drove himself to the tape in a burst of speed, eight yards ahead of the nearest man. As he crossed the finish line, both coaches, directly above him, snapped their stopwatches; they looked at the runners and then at each other, almost with awe. Both watches registered exactly twenty-one seconds.

Penn had lost the meet; to everybody's amazement, Pennsylvania, out of seventeen entrants, had only one intercollegiate champion, Captain Creed Haymond.

Later, Robertson laid his hand on the shoulder of the captain of his team and said, "You just ran those 220 yards in the fastest time ever run by any human being."

A Story to Tell (Deseret Book Co., 1945).
