Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

No Two Diamonds Are Alike

DARYL V. HOOLE

Ella struggled to hold back her tears as she ran along the stone walk to Aunt Susan's apartment at the rear of her home. As Ella rushed up to her aunt, the tears, which had been too near the surface too much of the time lately, spilled over. "Oh, Aunt Susan," sobbed Ella, "nobody likes me. I'm just no good. I wish I weren't such a dumb—" More sobs blotted out the rest of her words.

Aunt Susan laid her knitting aside and waited for her young niece to go on with her problem. "Why do you feel that no one likes you? What makes you think you're dumb and no good?" she encouraged.

"It's just terrible, Aunt Susan, to live with Bevie and Ruth. They make me feel awful. Bevie is so friendly with everyone and can always find so much to talk about. Everybody just loves her. Almost every phone call at our house is for her. She gets invited to all the parties and has all the fun. Whenever I'm in a group of people, I either say the wrong thing or—or else I can't think of anything to say at all. Bevie isn't afraid to talk to anyone, and she's so clever and full of fun. Oh, I wish I could be like Bevie.

"And Ruth makes me feel so dumb and stupid. She can do anything. Mother and Daddy are forever bragging about her accomplishments. I never do anything worth mentioning. It seems all I hear around our house is talk about her scholarship from the university, or how the new three-piece suit she just made is so beautiful, or something else she has done. Even the bishop said the other day that when Ruth goes away to school he doesn't know what he'll do for a Sunday School organist. She's always in demand for her piano playing. Everyone says things like `There's just no one quite like Ruth,' or `She's the most talented and capable girl I've ever seen.' It goes on and on, and the more she does, the dumber I feel."

Aunt Susan thought for a long time before responding to Ella. Finally she said, "I can understand how you feel, Ella. It would be difficult to live with two very popular, talented older sisters. It could make you feel quite inferior. I would like to make three suggestions to you. You might like to write them down and read them often—even memorize them—so that you'll remember them for the rest of your life.

"First, you're comparing yourself with someone else. This is unfair. You're much younger than your sisters. Bevie has had several years more practice talking with people and learning to express herself well and saying clever things. I feel sure you'll gain in confidence and will feel you have more to contribute to conversations as you grow older. Time has done a lot for Ruth, too. As I think back to her piano playing when she was your age, it sounded just the way yours does. Who's to say what accomplishments will be yours by the time you graduate from high school? You've been busy laying your foundation for life these past thirteen years. It's just about now that you can start to build on that foundation and really do things. It's all wrong to compare yourself with others, Ella. The only real basis for comparison is within yourself. Don't feel bad if your piano playing—or anything else—isn't as good as Ruth's. Just make certain that you play better now than you did a year ago. It's wonderful to have people such as Ruth inspire you to do better and reach loftier goals, but compete with yourself—not someone else!

"Now, the second thing I want you to remember always is this: What someone else does needn't detract from what you do. Just because Bevie has lots of friends doesn't mean that you have any fewer friends of your own. Just because someone has beautiful eyes doesn't mean that your eyes are ugly. Nothing Ruth knows or does or has need detract from what you know or do or have.

"And third and most important, Ella, our Father in heaven has taken great care to create each one of us individually. Don't try to make yourself like someone else. Be grateful for your own talents and gifts and do your best to cultivate them. Why, it was just last week at Relief Society that I heard several mothers discussing baby-sitters. They mentioned your name and said how confident they feel when you are with their children and how much their children enjoy you. Sister Astin said that because of your conscientiousness toward responsiblity and your ability to handle children exceptionally well, you make an ideal baby-sitter.

"Have you ever realized, Ella, that when someone is ill, you know just what to do to bring the most comfort? I recall my bout with rheumatism last winter—it was you who took the time to run my errands, keep fresh flowers at my bedside, and cheer me. You have a fine mind, Ella. I've observed that you have a quest for knowledge. You love school and do very well there. I could go on, Ella, for you have many gifts and talents that make you special just the way you are.

"I read something last week I want to share with you. I hope it will impress you as it did me. Did you know that no two diamonds are, or ever have been, alike? This diamond I am wearing on my finger is unlike any other diamond on earth. That's one of the reasons the diamond has become, since ancient times, the gem of kings and emperors and holds the greatest value of all worldly possessions. No two diamonds are alike, but they are all jewels. Never forget that you are a jewel, Ella."

Ella's heart felt lighter than ever before.

Daryl V. Hoole and Donette V. Ockey, With Sugar and Spice (Deseret Book Co., 1966).
