Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Magic Running Shell

ADDIE ADAM

Jeff ran down the beach, his bare feet raising little spurs of sand behind him. A sandpiper, hunting for fish in the surf, ran away on long stick legs. A gull feeding on a bit of popcorn flew away with an angry squawk.

But still Jeff ran on until, breathless, he flopped down on a sand dune beside a man who wore dark sunglasses and a pink checkered shirt.

"Hi," the man said. "Are you training for the Olympics?"

"No," Jeff giggled, "I'm not old enough." Then he said, "My Sunday School class is having a picnic here in the pavilion this afternoon, and we're going to run a race. I'd like to win the prize. It's a model sailboat."

"Well, you seem to run well," the man observed.

Jeff shook his head. "No. You see, I'm younger than most of the kids, and I have short legs—" He looked out at the ocean where waves curled, showing their white ruffled edges. "I can't run as fast as they do."

Neither spoke for a few minutes, the man absentmindedly rubbing a shell in his hand.

"That's a jingle shell," Jeff said. One of his hobbies were collecting shells.

"Yes, but this one is special. It's a magic thinking-shell."

"Really?" Jeff asked.

"Well, did you ever see a jingle shell with a streak on it that looks like paint?"

They examined the thin shell closely, and Jeff admitted he had never seen one like that.

"Well, there you are!" the man said happily. Suddenly, he snapped his fingers. "I have just what you need! A magic running-shell!" He fumbled in his pocket and produced another jingle shell, laying it on the sand beside the other.

"They look alike to me," Jeff observed.

"Oh, no," the man answered. "Did you ever see a jingle shell with tiny marks like bird tracks?"

Jeff examined the shell and admitted he hadn't.

The man picked up the shells and wrapped each in a leaf from a sea grape shrub nearby.

"You keep this running-shell in your pocket when you run, and I'm sure you'll run better than you ever have."

And Jeff did! For a moment in the race he was afraid he wouldn't win, but the little wrapped shell in his pocket gave him confidence, and he won the race.

The next morning Jeff found his friend on the beach. This time the man was wearing a bright yellow shirt with green palm trees on it.

The man looked up. "Don't say anything until I apologize," he said when Jeff reached him. "I accidentally gave you the wrong shell. I'm sorry."

"But I won!" Jeff said. "See, here is my sailboat!"

"That's wonderful!"

After they examined the little carved boat complete with sails, the man and the boy pulled the shells from their pockets. Sure enough, the man had the running-shell and Jeff had the thinking-shell.

"I guess it just proves that the magic wasn't in the shell," the man sighed. "It was inside you. You know, even with the running-shell, I could never run fast enough to win a sailboat."

Children's Friend, July 1970.
