Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Hothead

MURRAY T. PRINGLE

Alexander Selkirk appeared to be a pleasantly average boy, neither better nor worse than any other. That is, with one exception.

Alexander Selkirk had a fiery temper that would erupt at the slightest excuse!

Alex was a likable lad when he wasn't angry. His friends tried to teach him to control his temper, because they knew that sooner or later it would get him into trouble. Alex tried, but it was never very long before it broke loose again and he would be doing or saying things that would have been better left undone or unsaid.

Unknown to either Alex or his friends, the day was fast approaching when the fiery Scottish lad was going to land in some very hot water because of this. It was going to make him a prisoner for four long years and cut him off from home, friends, and everything else he loved, and on more than one occasion, it almost cost him his life. Yet, strangely enough, it was also going to change his name and make him famous! This is what happened:

Two teenage lads stood on a wharf and stared excitedly at the variety of ships that sailed in and out, or rode at anchor, in the harbor of the British seaport town of Plymouth in 1695.

"Ah, 'tis a lovely sight, is it not, Dampier?" breathed Alex, his eager eyes noting the bustling activity aboard the ships.

"It is, indeed," Dampier nodded. "And we'll soon be a part of it. Wonder which ship is ours?"

"There it is!" cried Alex, pointing down the quay. "The Betsy. Aye, what a bonnie ship! The most beautiful one in all England, I'll wager!"

Dampier followed the direction of his friend's outstretched arm and saw a trim, sleek sailing vessel riding at anchor a scant hundred yards distant. Every line of her bespoke speed and efficiency.

"Come on!" cried Alex, striding in the direction of the ship. "Let's report aboard!"

"Whoa!" Dampier grabbed his friend's arm. "Not so fast. You'll be needing that, I fancy." He pointed to Alex's bulging duffle bag.

Alex blushed. "Don't know what I'd do without you, Dampier," he said, shouldering his heavy bag.

"Probably forget your head," Dampier grinned. But the grin was soon replaced by a worried frown. Searching his friend's face anxiously, Dampier said, "Now, remember, Alex, you've made me a bargain. Whatever you do, hold onto that frightful temper of yours!"

"G'wan with ye!" Alex chuckled, giving his friend a playful shove. "I promised ye, did I not? Come, let's be off to tell the captain he has two new crew members!"

Thus it was that on a pleasant day in June 1695 the two boys boarded the ship and set sail on a voyage that was to prove anything but dull for a lad named Alexander Selkirk.

During the first few weeks of the voyage, things went splendidly. Alex, under the ever-watchful eye of his friend, seemed to have conquered the habit of losing his temper. And then it happened. One day while Dampier was aloft in the rigging, Alex got into an argument with the captain, no less! The argument grew hotter and hotter and finally the captain, who had done his best to reason with the impetuous lad, shouted, "One more word out of you, me bucko, and I'll set you down on yonder isle!" He waved angrily at the deserted island of San Juan Fernando, which lay starboard of the sailing ship.

Alex, boiling mad, shouted, "Go ahead! See if I care. I'd rather be on a deserted island than to keep on sailing with the likes o' ye!"

"By thunder," roared the captain, "that's done it!" He ordered several anxious crewmen standing nearby to lower a boat and take the hotheaded youngster to the island.

As Alex climbed over the rail, Dampier, who had hurried to his friend, whispered, "I'll get another boat and come back for you, Alex. Don't worry." Stowing aboard a few necessities, the sailors rowed to the island, put the Scottish boy ashore, and returned to the ship.

Alex stood on the beach glaring at the ship, but his defiant attitude collapsed as he watched the vessel slowly disappear from sight. Suddenly the terrible realization dawned on him that he was alone on an island near which no trade ship ever came. He was cut off from the world—perhaps forever!

For four long years Alexander Selkirk lived on that lonely island, striving desperately to stay alive. He had many adventures during that time, and by the end of the fourth year he was convinced that he was doomed to spend the rest of his life there. Then one day he saw something his eyes could not believe—a ship! It stopped close to the island and dropped anchor.

Half running, half stumbling, Alex dashed across the beach, wildly waving his tattered shirt. A small boat set out from the ship and when it nosed onto the beach Alex gasped in astonishment. The first person to step ashore was Dampier! His friend had not forgotten and had finally managed to have a ship pick him up.

But it wasn't till the rescue ship returned to England that the strangest part of the castaway's story began. For it was there that a man who wrote adventure stories came to see Alex. He asked Alex to tell him all that had happened during his four years on the island and said he would make it into a story. Then, if he sold it, he would give half the money to Alex.

The young adventurer agreed, and day after day Alex unfolded his story while the writer made notes. At last it was finished, the writer left, and Alex visited old friends and soon forgot about the man.

Alex's friends were amazed at the change in him. Gone was his fiery temper; no matter what anyone did or said, he wasn't angered the least bit. And though his friends were greatly surprised, they were also very glad to see such a change.

Then, some months later, Alex had a visitor. It was the writer, who had come to give him his share of the money received for the story of Alex's life on the island.

And that's how Alexander Selkirk became famous. Even though a name other than his own was used in the story, everyone knew it was the story of the impetuous Scottish lad who lost his temper once too often.

To be sure, the story was "dressed up" a little, but it was mostly true. Why the writer, Daniel Defoe, chose to give Alexander Selkirk a different name in the story is not known for certain, but maybe he had the right idea, after all. For the name he chose was "Robinson Crusoe"!

Children's Friend, April 1955.
