Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Christmas

ARDETH G. KAPP

The late harvest that year was followed by an early frost, and many of the crops were under a blanket of snow.

As Christmas approached, we children played the wishing game in the Eaton's catalog until the toy section was well marked by the curled edges of the pages. We tried hard to limit our long list of wants to a few special items, knowing that we must be selective since Mom and Dad had to pay Santa for his Christmas treasures. But after a family council to consider a serious matter, our choices were easily made.

Brian, our twelve-year-old crippled cousin who had just been ordained a deacon, was more anxious than ever to walk, and if enough money could be raised, it was possible that the Mayo Clinic could help him. This would require a great sacrifice, but the choice was ours. We could each make our own decision and, if we chose, we could request that the money for our Christmas be given to Brian in hopes of providing medical attention that would allow him to abandon the wheelchair that we had all taken turns pushing so often.

I remember that the Eaton's catalog got lost somewhere in the shuffle as we each talked with great anticipation of our part in helping Brian.

Christmas Eve came and with it the children's part at the church. I remember being a little disappointed that Santa wore his shabby old suit to our party, but Mom explained that he kept his good one to wear when he came that night to make his official visit, and that seemed like a good idea to me.

Christmas Eve found cousins, aunts, and uncles all at Mamma Leavitt's big two-story house (she was such a special grandmother that we all called her Mamma Leavitt) and there in her home twenty-one children were tucked into beds of some sort—after hanging up twenty-one stockings, of course.

Even as a child I remember that the air was filled with gaiety and smiles radiated from the faces of young and old.

The next morning our socks were bulging with goodies. Old dolls had beautiful new wardrobes that Santa had skill-fully prepared, and old toys had new paint, and Brian was going to the Mayo Clinic.

It didn't take long to tidy things up since there were very few wrappings, but that was good, because we had exciting things planned with our dads while our moms were busy getting ready for the big dinner. The second best turkey in Dad's flock was roasting in the oven and filling the air with that Christmas dinner smell while the very finest turkey had been selected to go into the big box along with homemade pies, jams, jellies, fruits, and vegetables. On top was a hand-made apron carefully wrapped in a piece of soft white tissue paper that was tied with a bit of ribbon that had served that same purpose many times before.

Each of us, all bundled up, was lifted onto the big wagon along with the box of goodies and away we went through the deep snow, listening to the steady rhythm of the horses' hooves until we reached the river about three miles away, where Mr. and Mrs. Opstall lived in their little log house.

The Opstalls were an elderly couple from Belgium who had once been wealthy but who had sold all their earthly possessions to flee to freedom in Canada. As we jumped off the wagon into the crunchy snow, we each waited eagerly to be given one of the items from the big box. My brother got to carry the turkey and I carried one of Mamma Leavitt's delicious mincemeat pies. It was quite a job trudging through the deep snow, trying to follow in our dad's big steps with our arms loaded.

Inside the home, the bare floors were warmed by a glowing fire, and the long slab table in the middle of the one-room house was gradually piled higher and higher as we each presented our expression of love.

The Opstalls couldn't speak a word of English, but I remember thinking that I knew exactly what they were telling us. It didn't seem as if the words really made any difference, but I was puzzled by their tears when they seemed too happy, and I recall Mom trying to explain this to me later. It didn't make much sense, but as long as they were happy, I guessed it was OK if they wanted to cry.

I'll never forget sitting down to the big dinner with a special place for everyone, including Brian in his wheelchair at the corner of the table because it seemed to fit better there. And down at the far end Papa Leavitt bowed his head and gave a prayer that lasted ever so long.

That night we all got to stay up late and we just sat around in the big living room with our moms and dads and talked about things.

After our family prayer that night, when I was tucked into bed, indelibly imprinted on my mind was the lesson that Christmas is an excited good feeling inside, and how I wished every Christmas might be like this one!
