Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Once You Get to Know a Fellow

BERNADINE BEATIE

Bud Hale lifted the corral gate, swung it into position, then straightened and shook the rain from his hat. His sight of Sam Roberts, sitting dry and comfortable in the shed, brought a flush of anger to Bud's face. If Sam hadn't put the hinges on backwards, they would be back at the ranch by now!

"Why didn't you saddle the horses?" Bud called out angrily.

Sam rose lazily. "You'd find fault with the way I saddled them," he said, "like you do with everything."

"Humph!" said Bud, walking toward the shed where his quarterhorse, Starface, and the gentle little pinto Sam rode were tied. No use expecting Sam to do anything. He had known that ever since he drew Sam's name from Jake Johnson's hat.

"Oh, boy!" Bud had groaned. "I'm stuck with Sam Roberts!"

"Sam's not so bad, Bud," Jake had said. "He's a city boy, but he can learn."

"Ha! ha!" Mike Davis spoke up. He had been Sam's buddy the one week Sam had spent at the T Bar M last summer.

"Give Sam a chance, boys," Jake had drawled. "Once you get to know a fellow, you'll usually end up liking him. Anyway, that's been my experience."

"Not Sam Roberts!" Clem Waters had said, leaning back in his bunk. "All he does is brag about how rich and important his family is."

"That's enough!" Jake had said, unwinding his lanky sixfoot frame from a chair at one end of the bunkhouse. "You know the rules!"

Bud had nodded gloomily. Jake was a stickler for rules, and any boy who broke them usually found himself confined to the bunkhouse over the weekend. This was the worst possible punishment, especially for Bud, for it was then that the regular ranch hands took time off to teach the boys trick riding.

The T Bar M wasn't like most summer dude camps. It was a real working ranch, and part of the fun was in helping with the regular ranch chores. Jake Johnson, the ranch foreman, "rode herd" on the boys and had worked out what he called a buddy system. The boys who came each summer drew names of newcomers and were responsible for teaching their new buddy the ropes. If the two hit it off, they could remain partners; otherwise they changed buddies every two weeks.

Bud approved of the system—it was safe and practical—but he was glad this was the last day he'd be saddled with Sam Roberts. It had been a long two weeks. Looking up from cinching the saddle, he noticed that though Sam's new western hat was set at a jaunty angle, there was a lost, lonely look in his eyes. Bud felt a brief twinge in his heart, remembering his first day with Sam. Sam had looked lonely then, too, and he had asked, "Bud, why don't the fellows like me?"

Maybe he should have told Sam to quit bragging about his family, Bud thought, but that was something you hesitate to tell a fellow. Besides, there were other reasons. Sam just didn't know how to do anything. Sam had tried the first few days, but he did everything wrong. Today he had even put the hinges on the wrong side of the corral gate near the line shack Bud was repairing.

"Can't you do anything right?" Bud had exploded.

"Do it yourself!" Sam had replied. "You know everything!"

Now, because of the delay, they'd be out after dark. Bud finished saddling the pinto and motioned to Sam. "I'll just bet we'll be stuck in the bunkhouse over the weekend," he grumbled.

"Who cares?" said Sam.

"I do! The hands are going to round up some calves so we can practice calf roping." Bud looked at the clearing sky. "You know, Sam, we could make it by dark if we cut across country," he said.

Sam's eyes widened. "Isn't that against the rules? We'd have to cross Satan's Wash."

"Yes," said Bud, "but nobody'll know. It'll be safe enough. It takes a real gully-washer to flood the wash."

"It's okay by me," Sam said.

When the boys reached Satan's Wash, they were surprised to see that it was running a foot deep in water. Bud pulled Starface to a stop.

"It must have rained harder up in the hills," he said. "It's okay, though, we can make it."

"I—I'm not a very good swimmer," Sam said, looking uncertain.

"You ride Starface. He isn't afraid of water." Bud swung to the ground as he spoke. "You lead the way, Sam, and I'll be right behind. Head toward that big boulder across the wash. Starface will do the rest."

As soon as he swung up on the pinto's back, Bud knew he was going to have a fight on his hands. The pinto's eyes rolled wildly, and he balked at the water's edge. Starface was already halfway across before Bud was able to force the frightened pinto into the water.

"Easy, boy," Bud murmured soothingly, when he noticed that the water was higher now, and flowing faster. He was relieved to see Starface scramble up the bank to safety. Suddenly a great roaring filled Bud's ears. He glanced upstream and suddenly his eyes widened in horror: a wall of water was cascading down the wash!

The pinto gave a high, shrill cry of terror, lost his footing, and was swept down and under as the water hit. Bud lost the reins as the floodwater closed over his head. He was strangling, but he had presence of mind to kick free of the stirrups. When he surfaced, gasping and sputtering, he saw a huge, uprooted tree bearing swiftly down upon him. Scraggly roots, like the arms of a giant sea creature, towered high above his head. Bud grabbed, and his fingers closed about a root. He clung on frantically and glanced fearfully upward. If the tree rolled, it would carry him under, and he might even get tangled up in the roots. But the tree wasn't moving. Bud gave a gasp of relief when the tree swung a bit and he could see that the branches were caught between two large boulders upstream.

"Bud! Bud! You okay?"

Bud looked toward the bank and saw that Sam had run downstream and now stood opposite him, knee deep in water, holding a lasso awkwardly in his hands.

"I'm okay, Sam! Toss!" Bud yelled.

Sam whirled the noose over his head and threw. The loop landed only a few feet in front of him. Bud groaned as time after time Sam made the same poor throw. The tree lurched. Bud caught his breath in fear.

Strangely he found himself remembering the first day he and Sam had worked together. "How about teaching me to use a lasso, Bud?" Sam had asked. "Wait until you learn which end of a calf to rope!" Bud had replied. "Fat chance I have of learning anything around here!" Sam had grumbled, and had never mentioned it again.

Clinging there, drenched to the skin and shaking with fright, Bud realized suddenly that if he had done his part—if he had tried to teach Sam instead of criticizing him—Sam could have learned many things. He was the one who had been a poor buddy, not Sam!

Sam yelled something then, but Bud couldn't hear. His heart sank when he saw Sam step back onto the bank and hurry toward Starface. Sam must have decided to ride for help. There was a hollow feeling in the pit of Bud's stomach. He tried to pull himself onto a higher root, then clung desperately as the tree swung slowly around. It swayed in the current. Bud couldn't see the bank at all now, but he could see upstream, and the tree had broken free of the boulders.

"Bud! Bud!" a voice sounded over Bud's head. Bud's eyes flew open and he saw Sam's frightened face peering down through the gnarled roots. He gave a cry of relief as Sam had an end of the rope knotted about his waist and dropped it down. Bud grabbed the rope: then Sam's hands were on his, hauling him up.

In a flash Bud saw how Sam had reached him. When the tree had swung around, the top branches had reached the bank and Sam had knotted the lasso about his waist and worked his way through the branches and down the trunk of the tree. Bud gave a sigh of relief when he saw that the other end of the rope was fastened to the pommel of Starface's saddle. Sam had thought of everything!

Miraculously, the tree held as the boys scrambled to the bank and sank gratefully to the ground, breathing deeply.

"The pinto's okay," Sam said finally. "He came out downstream and headed for home."

"Good!" Bud said, looking gratefully at Sam and searching for words. Many things were clear to him now. No wonder Sam had bragged about his family. He had been lonely and ill-at-ease in new surroundings, and nobody had made any effort to get to know him. But Sam was okay—he had proved that! Jake was also right about liking a fellow once you got to know him. Suddenly Bud felt shy.

"Sam," he said, "you're a real buddy, and if you'll give me a chance, I'd sure like to show you I can be a good one, too."

"You—you still want to be my buddy?" Sam asked, his eyes bright. "I—I can't even toss a rope."

"I'll probably have plenty of time to teach you," Bud said, smiling. "I'm going to tell Jake every single thing that's happened. He'll be proud of you and he'll be plenty mad at me. He'll say you also knew the rules and then confine you to the bunkhouse right along with me. I'm sorry."

"That's all right!" smiled Sam.

Children's Friend, August 1968.
