Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Thirsty Oxen

AMY BROWN LYMAN

The following is a true incident in the life of Alma Platte Spillsbury. It was early August, 1850. The weather was hot and dry. The Saints were traveling west from the Missouri River along the plains of Nebraska, and they had become short of water. They were being urged by the captain of the company to travel as fast as possible to get to the Platte River, and had stopped the caravan scarcely long enough for Fanny Smith Spillsbury to give birth to a child. A blanket stretched over the bows of the wagon shielded the mother and baby from the intense heat of the August sun, while the father walked along beside the wagon, prodding the lean, gaunt, thirsty oxen.

Suddenly the oxen raised their heads and began to sniff the air. They were nearing the Platte River and could smell the water. They needed no prodding now. Quickly they left the road and took a short cut to the river at quite a reckless speed. The young father tried desperately to get them back on the road but did not succeed, and he was scarcely able to keep up with the wagon and its precious cargo. Other men in the caravan, seeing his predicament, rushed to help him, but it was useless. They sped on till they reached the river, then dashed over the bank. The oxen went down sideways, and the wagon was overturned in the water.

The running men soon reached the spot and snatched the mother out of the stream. "Oh, where is my baby?" she cried.

"Right here," answered Bishop Edward Hunter, fishing the little bundle out of the water where it had been thrown. "But I'm afraid there is not much life left in him," he added.

"We must bless him and name him at once," said the father. He called the men around him and they took the child in their arms to give it a name before it breathed its last. "What shall we name him, Fanny?" asked the father.

"Alma, for the Book of Mormon prophet, and Platte for the great river from which we have been rescued," she answered.

By the time the prayer was finished, the baby was crying lustily, and they all knelt in prayer to thank their Heavenly Father that the life of this little child had been saved so miraculously.

"On the River Platte," Relief Society Magazine, February 1947.
