Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Judge Men and Women by the Spirit They Have

HEBER J. GRANT

There stand out in my life many incidents in my youth, of wonderful inspiration and power through men preaching the gospel in the spirit of testimony and prayer. I call to mind one such incident when I was a young man, probably seventeen or eighteen years of age. I heard the late Bishop Millen Atwood preach a sermon in the Thirteenth Ward. I was studying grammar at the time, and he made some grammatical errors in his talk.

I wrote down his first sentence, smiled to myself, and said, "I am going to get here tonight, during the thirty minutes that Brother Atwood speaks, enough material to last me for the entire winter in my night school grammar class." For each lesson we had to take to class two sentences, or four sentences a week, that were not grammatically correct, together with our corrections.

I contemplated making my corrections and listening to Bishop Atwood's sermon at the same time, but I did not write anything more after the first sentence—not a word; and when Millen Atwood stopped preaching, tears were rolling down my cheeks, tears of gratitude and thanksgiving that welled up in my eyes because of the marvelous testimony that he bore of the divine mission of Joseph Smith, the prophet of God, and of the wonderful inspiration that attended the Prophet in all his labors.

Although it is now more than sixty-five years since I listened to that sermon, it is just as vivid today, and the sensations and feelings that I had are just as fixed with me as they were the day I heard it. I would no more have thought of using those sentences in which he had made grammatical mistakes than I would think of standing up in a class and profaning the name of God. That testimony made the first profound impression that was ever made upon my heart and soul of the divine mission of the Prophet. I had heard many testimonies that had pleased me and made their impression, but this was the first testimony that had melted me to tears under the inspiration of the Spirit of God.

During all the years that have passed since then, I have never been shocked or annoyed by grammatical errors or mispronounced words on the part of those preaching the gospel. I have realized that to judge the spirit of a man by the clothing of his language was like judging him by the clothes he wore. From that day to this the one thing above all others that has impressed me has been the Spirit, the inspiration of the living God, that an individual had when proclaiming the gospel, and not the language; because after all is said and done there are a great many who have never had the opportunity to become educated so far as speaking correctly is concerned. Likewise there are many who have never had an opportunity in the financial battle of life to accumulate the means whereby they could be clothed in an attractive manner.

I have endeavored, from that day to this, and have been successful in my endeavor, to judge men and women by the spirit they have, for I have learned absolutely that it is the Spirit that giveth life and understanding, and not the letter. The letter killeth.

"The Spirit and the Letter," Improvement Era, April 1939.
