Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Roger's River Ride

LUCILE C. READING

Roger danced up and down in excitement. "Please come, Deanne," he begged, "so I can go, too."

An invitation for a boat ride had just been given to seven-year-old Roger and his sister by Mr. Honeycutt, who had a brand new outboard motorboat. Deanne had planned to go swimming, but Roger's enthusiasm changed her mind, and in a few minutes the trio boarded the little boat and started their ride on the Niagara River near Horseshoe Falls. It was a beautiful Saturday morning in 1960.

The children put on the bright orange life jackets Mr. Honeycutt gave them and settled down to a happy morning on the water. Soon the kind gentleman offered to let Roger handle the tiller, and Deanne, completely relaxed, gaily waved to the cars passing far overhead as the little boat passed under the Grand Island Bridge, gateway to the American side of the falls.

Gradually the broad, friendly river became an angry, whirling one, and the thundering sound of the falls pounded close. Roger gave the tiller back to Mr. Honeycutt and stumbled toward Deanne, sobbing, "I'm scared. We're going to drown."

"Hang on!" shouted Mr. Honeycutt. These were the last words anyone ever heard him say, for there was nothing to hang onto. With a lurch the boat tipped over and all were thrown into the churning water. The rapids wrenched Roger and spun him furiously around before lifting and tossing him over the edge of the falls. Just then some tourists spotted Deanne in her orange life jacket and pulled her out of the turbulent water before the fury of the current could carry her after Roger. As she lay on the ground she gasped, "My brother! Save my brother!" Those who had seen Roger's perilous ride had no hope of his survival. One of them softly said, "Say a prayer for your brother." And Deanne did!

A short time later a commercial boat that regularly cruises the river below Horseshoe Falls was almost to its turning-around point when its captain, drenched with spray, spotted a bobbing orange object. Up until this time, only four persons of the many who had tried to go over the falls had ever survived. All of them had been carefully protected in steel drums or padded barrels. Unbelievably, Roger, wholly unprotected, was alive!

A life preserver was thrown toward him again and again and yet again. On the third try, it came close enough for Roger to crawl up onto it.

"Your brother was saved, and he's going to be okay," Deanne was told just as she was wheeled into the hospital where, despite her terrifying experience, she was found to be unharmed.

Before the half-conscious girl closed her eyes in exhaustion, she whispered gratefully, "Thank you, God."

Children's Friend, January 1969.
