Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Winner

FRANK H. TOOKER

Charlie picked up his fountain pen from the kitchen table. He examined its clip, which, from day-to-day use, had become so badly bent it wouldn't hold the pen securely in his pocket anymore. He noticed that the gold letters of his name were about worn off.

"Oh, well," he said to himself as he slipped the pen into his shirt pocket, "I won't have to use this pen again if I win first prize in the composition contest today—and I will win if George Gregson has not written a composition better than mine. What a beauty that prize pen is! I can feel it in my hand right now."

Charlie took a moment to scan through the composition he had written in pencil the night before. All he had to do when he reached school this morning was copy it in ink in his composition book. Because the first prize was a pen, all entries had to be written in ink to be eligible.

"It's the best I've ever done," Charlie decided, tucking the papers into his pocket. He took his books from the table, nestled them under his arm, and darted out the door.

Charlie whistled a tune as he took his usual long strides down Monroe Avenue, then started across Chesnut toward the school. He was about to step onto the curb when something caught his eye. There, lying in the gutter, was a composition book, its pages flipping idly in the breeze.

"Oh-oh," Charlie said to himself. "That must have slipped from under someone's arm."

Then his eye caught a name on one of the fluttering pages—George Gregson!

Charlie whistled softly. He snatched up the book. His fingers couldn't move fast enough as he flicked over the pages. Yes, here it was—George's entry in the contest, neatly written in ink, all ready to be turned in.

Charlie's eye's raced over the lines, his hopes sinking lower and lower the further he read into George's composition. Then he snapped the cover closed. He tucked the book between those under his arm.

"Why should I just hand this over to George and let him walk away with the prize?" he asked himself. "If he had not been careless, he wouldn't have dropped it." That didn't sound very convincing. Charlie himself had dropped things more than once on his way to school. "Well, anyway," Charlie argued, "it serves him right if he doesn't have it to turn in. Besides, I'll give it back to him as soon as the contest is over."

The class was just coming to order as Charlie slipped into his seat. Glancing quickly around the room, he noticed that George Gregson's seat was empty.

"He's probably still searching for his composition," Charlie guessed, taking out his composition book and opening it to a blank page. Then he grinned. "Well, he won't find it! It serves him right for being so careless."

The class quieted down. Everyone was either busy writing in his composition book or getting ready to write. Charlie smoothed out the penciled version of his composition, then reached into his shirt pocket for his pen. His fingers closed on nothing but air. He darted his fingers down to the bottom of the pocket. It was empty. his pen wasn't there!

He searched frantically through his trousers pockets, then back to his shirt pocket. "I remember putting it right in this pocket," he insisted to himself. "There's no use looking anywhere else." Then a sudden thought surged into his brain. "That broken clip! It must have dropped out of my pocket when I bent over to pick up George's composition book!"

George! Charlie's eyes swept across the room. George's seat was still empty. Good old George! He wouldn't mind if Charlie borrowed his pen. But wait—George had copied his composition at home last night, so he must have taken his pen with him. Probably he had it in his pocket right now. There would be no sense in looking through his desk.

Desperately now, Charlie scanned one after another of his classmates. All were writing. Not one of them would be able to lend him a pen.

Hopeless! That's what it was. Hopeless! Even if the teacher were to give him permission to go to look for the pen, he couldn't possibly go all the way back to Monroe Avenue and Chestnut, then return to the school and copy his composition before the deadline. Frustrated, Charlie dropped his head into his hands.

Suddenly there was a clatter of running feet in the hall. Charlie raised his head just as the door burst open, and George Gregson, red-faced and breathing heavily, sailed into the room. Without slowing his pace, George headed toward Charlie's desk, his hand extended.

"Here, Charlie," he gasped. ". . . your pen . . . found it while looking for my book . . . knew you wouldn't have your composition ready . . . ran all the way back . . . at least, you will be in the contest . . . "

Charlie's mouth dropped open. For a moment he sat speechless. Then, as conflicting emotions billowed over him, he dug into his desk, pulled out George's composition book, and handed it to him. "I found it on my way to school—" Charlie began.

The teacher rapped for order. George scurried to his desk.

"What a good friend George is!" Charlie thought, over and over. "Imagine him running back with my pen! For all he knows, my composition might be better than his, but that didn't stop him. Well, from now on, that's the way I'm going to be. And who knows? Maybe—just maybe, I might win after all!"

Charlie uncapped his pen and began to write furiously.

Children's Friend, November 1955.
