Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

A Mountain Lion

MYRTLE S. NORDE

When the last bell rang, Phillip Fenner put his books away and walked slowly down the steps of the schoolhouse. "That trip to the Lakeheart Museum is practically in the bag," he thought to himself. "Nobody else knows about that cave with all the Indian pottery pieces in it. Why, I'll have the best collection in school." He started across the playground, pleased with himself. "Yes, sir, that first prize is practically mine."

Phil was in no hurry; he would only have to wait for his father at the library to get a ride home anyway. He wandered over to where some of his classmates were gathered.

Howard Cranny spoke first. "Hey, Phil, you haven't met the new boy we have in school. His name is Leo Balluster. This is Phil Fenner."

Phil smiled. "Hi, Leo. How do you like our school?"

The new boy looked Phil up and down. "Oh, it's all right," he said. "How come you were not here yesterday?"

"I had to stay at home. Dad is having trouble with mountain lions and I had to help take care of some of the sheep. Night before last the lions killed six and mauled twelve others. Somebody had to stay with them, so I did."

The new boy laughed. "So, you're the sheepherder's kid, huh?"

Phil felt his face growing hot. He gritted his teeth until he could control his voice. "My dad is a sheep rancher." Phil put the emphasis on the last word. "And that is nothing to be ashamed of."

"Well," Leo said, "you don't have to get huffy about it."

"I'm not huffy," Phil said stiffly. "But we make an honest living on the ranch, and if it weren't for people like us, you would not have such fancy wool pants to wear, either."

"Oh, pardon me!" Leo said scornfully, fluttering his eyelashes. "I didn't know you were so touchy!"

"If this weren't on the school grounds, I think I'd pop you!"

"Well," Leo shrugged, "go ahead. What's stopping you?"

"I don't want us to get suspended from school," Phil said. "That's one reason. Another reason is that I like to get along with other fellows if they will let me." Phil turned then, and walked away. He was almost to the sidewalk when the hated taunt reached his ears. It was the new boy, shouting over and over,

"The sheepherder's kid is a sissy! The sheepherder's kid is a sissy!"

Phil swallowed the resentment that almost choked him, and quickened his pace toward the library. Dad would be waiting. Already he had fooled away too much time. He started running, biting back the bitter indignation that surged through him. "One of these days," Phil thought to himself, "Leo Balluster is going to get over being so smart!"

Riding home in the car next to his father, Phil talked about the free trip to Lakeheart Museum, and soon he had forgotten the incident with Leo Balluster. "Just imagine," he told his father, "all that for having the best collection of pottery specimens. And there are just loads of them up in the old Indian cave on the mountain ridge."

"May be somebody else knows about them, too," Mr. Fenner said as he turned through the gate to the big ranch.

"I don't think so, Dad," Phil told him. "Anyway, it is too far out from town for the kids to hike to."

"So you think you can win first prize in the contest."

"I'm sure I can. It's all broken, but we're studying about Indian arts, and the teacher said any kind would do. Just so it's real. I want to go up the first thing Saturday morning so I will have time to label each piece."

"Better put it off until afternoon, Phil," his father said. "In the morning I want you to help fix those feed stalls."

It was just after lunch that Phil left the ranch. He had saddled Charlie and hand-strapped on everything he would need—a gunny sack for specimens, a digging trowel, a torch and a flashlight. Carefully he checked his supplies. Then he set out for the cave.

The pony picked its way gingerly through the already browning sage and the pointed clusters of rocks that poked their way throught the earth. The trees were thin along the lower slope, but as the mountain began rising sharply to the summit, they became more dense, and Phil guided the pony along the edge of them, going up the easiest way.

It was always exciting to go up to the old cave, but this time there was real adventure. He hoped his memory had not fooled him about the specimens. He had set his heart on the first prize and the trip to the Lakeheart Museum. Phil had never been to a museum. He urged the pony faster, clicking his tongue. "Come on, Charlie, we haven't got all day."

But Charlie took his time, his ears pricked straight up, listening to the many sounds of the forest. Once he stopped short, his head turned into the wind, his nostrils flaring as if he sensed danger.

"Listen, Charlie," Phil tried to explain, "there isn't anything up here that will hurt you. Let's go!"

He kicked his heels lightly into the pony's flanks, and they moved off again.

At the mouth of the cave Phil reined up and tied Charlie to a large branch of a tree. He flung the gunnysack over his shoulder and checked the matches in his pocket. He was ready to start. His heart pounded under his shirt as he went into the mouth of the cave. The big black hole gaped in the mountainside, and the click of his boots on the rough gravel echoed back to him. He would wait until he could no longer see before flicking on the flashlight. It would save on batteries. He would not use the torch until he found the cache of Indian pottery specimens.

It was almost too dark to see when a shaft of light pierced the blackness far ahead, creeping along the walls of the cave. "Who's there?" Phil called.

The shaft of light leaped through the darkness and settled on his face. The voice at the other end of the cave reverberated back to him. "So it's the sheepherder's kid! Come to make a haul of pottery specimens and win the first prize, eh?"

The voice belonged to Leo Balluster.

Phil winced. It was like being robbed of his personal property. But he knew he had no right to claim the pottery specimens. Leo Balluster had come first. The collection was already his. The first prize was gone. Phil flicked on his light and hurried back to where Leo was squatting, disappointed because he had come too late. "How did you know about this cave?" Phil asked quietly.

"Huh!" Leo snorted. "I know about all the places like this around here. My dad is an archaeologist."

"What's an archaeologist?"

"Boy, are you dumb! That's somebody who searches old ruins to learn how early mankind lived. My dad knows all about this country. He told me about this cave."

Phil's heart sank. He had wanted so much to win that first prize, but now his hopes were shattered. The new boy had found the treasure first. He stared at the ground, wondering what to say next.

Leo smirked. "What's the matter? Can't you take it?"

Phil was trying hard to be a good sport. He wanted to congratulate Leo, but Leo was being rude, making sarcastic remarks, wearing Phil's patience thin. His pride had been insulted. He turned flashing eyes on Leo. "Why, I ought to—" He clenched his teeth. A pebble dropped from the roof of the cave and landed at his feet. Phil's breath caught in his throat. A sudden fear gripped him.

Leo had stood up. "Well?" he taunted.

Phil had instinctively focused the beam of his flashlight along the roof of the cave. There was a ledge along the ceiling. The shaft of light caught a glistening sheen in its path, then the frightening glare of yellow eyes. Horror crept up Phil's spine. The animal lay crouched on the ledge, its tail lashing, its muscles quivering in the pale light. It was a mountain lion, ready to spring. Fear gripped him. He felt the tightening in his throat, but he knew he would have to yell now or it would be too late. The lion was poised to strike.

He screamed. "Run, Leo, run! There's a lion!" It was a relief to shout. Phil leaped and was out of the way just in time, because the lion landed between them. Leo ran to the back of the cave.

Quickly the lion turned on Leo, its swishing tail snapping savagely. Phil collected his wits. There was no time to lose. He was sure of one thing, and that was what he had to do.

Leo was shrieking, "Help! Help me!"

Phil pulled the matches from his pocket, his fingers shaking. Already the lion was crouched to leap again, his glistening eyes narrowing on Leo. Phil lighted the torch he still held in his hand. The flame shot up and the cave was ablaze with light. Daringly he threw the match at the lion. The animal snarled deep in his throat as the lighted match hit the ground. He wheeled and slapped the match out.

Instantly Phil thrust the torch close to the lion's angry face, waving it back and forth. The lion swung, confronted with the burning thing, and roared. Phil's hair stood on end. Chills ran over his body. The piercing screech of the mountain lion resounded along the walls of the cave. Phil glanced ahead. Leo stood against one side as though he were petrified.

"Listen, Leo," Phil swallowed. His breath was quick. "Climb up on that ledge in the roof. I'll force the lion back into the cave. Then you can jump down."

There was no answer. Only the sharp sound of Leo's heels scraping on the rock could be heard, and the heavy breathing of the two boys. The mountain lion was warily moving to and fro across the cave, its lithe body rippling with every step.

Leo was on the ledge now; Phil was sure of that. "Now stay there, Leo, and don't fall off. Just don't fall off."

"Don't worry, I won't."

Phil began advancing. Slowly. One step at a time. Waving the torch before him, closer and closer to the lion. The lion snarled, snapped at the flaming torch, and began moving backward. Phil was close to him now, forcing him farther and farther back into the cave. He was under Leo now, then past him.

"Jump, now! Jump, Leo!" he called back.

There was a thud as Leo landed on the ground. "What shall we do now?" he asked.

Phil knew what they had to do. "We'll back out and build a fire in the mouth of the cave. One of us will keep the fire going and the other will go for help," Phil told him.

Slowly they began backing out of the cave, with the lion advancing with them. When they reached the opening, Phil sent Leo to gather wood for the fire. They piled wood across the entrance, and Phil lighted the half circle with his burning torch.

"Well," Phil asked, "who is going for help?"

"Can't we just leave him?"

"I should say not! This is the fellow that has been killing all my dad's sheep," Phil said sharply. "Do you want to stay or do you want to go?"

Terror leaped into Leo's eyes. "Where will I go?"

"After my dad."

"But I don't know how to get there."

Disgust burned in Phil. "Listen," he said. "You stay. And don't let that fire get too big and smoke too much or else that lion will leap over it. Then you will be in a spot. Just keep him inside that fire line, and he won't hurt you."

Leo swallowed hard. "All right. I'll try it."

Phil could hardly wait to get back with his father. He just hoped that Leo would still be there when they got back.

He was. He was faithfully tending the fire when Phil and Mr. Fenner rode up.

"Nice work, fellow," Mr. Fenner said as he dismounted. "Is the lion still in there?"

"You bet he is!" Leo told him.

Phil interrupted. "This is my father, Leo."

"I am glad to meet you, Mr. Fenner," Leo smiled.

"Same here!" Mr. Fenner said. "You boys can stay out here and hold the horses so they don't run away. I'm going in after the lion." He kicked some of the firewood to one side and disappeared into the cave, the lighted torch making a path through the darkness.

As soon as Mr. Fenner was out of sight Leo turned to Phil. "Phil," he said slowly, "I want to tell you how sorry I am for the way I acted and the things I said. I was just being smart, I guess. I had a lot of time to think it over and I am really sorry."

Phil fumbled with the reins. "I am sorry for the way I acted, too. I should not have been so ready to fight just because you teased me. I'm too quick tempered," he said. "And I do hope you win that trip to Lakeheart. That will be a swell trip."

Leo smiled then. He dug his hands into his pockets. "I don't think I will be winning that trip. They really are your specimens, Phil. You deserve the first prize."

"No," Phil said. "You found them first."

"Say, I wouldn't even be alive now if it had not been for you," Leo replied. "Anyway, I want you to come to see my father's collection of specimens. Not broken ones, either. We can help you label your collection with real scientific names and everything. Please, Phil, won't you?"

"Thanks, I'd like to."

Leo shoved his hand out. "Then shake, pal."

"Shake is right," Phil said, as he took his new friend's hand. A glow of satisfaction swept over him. You just have to get to know some people, he decided, before you can really like them.

"And, say," he added, "how about coming out tomorrow and helping me collect specimens. Then we can go over to our house and I'll show you a real sheep ranch."

Children's Friend, March 1946.
