Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

A Practical Joke

ORA PATE STEWART

It was during the war; tensions were running full blast. Noise was incessant. It was before the innovation of "the break," and the men at the Local Arms sometimes took out their mischief in what they thought was innocent horseplay—scuffling, jousting, practical jokes.

One man especially came in for a sizable share of jostling. He was just a little different. He dressed oddly. His clothes were ill-fitting. He was thinner than the rest, and too many of his teeth were missing. He was slow of speech and awkward of movement. We shall call him Andrews.

On this particular day, after a playful bout, Andrews came up with a torn sleeve. Not bad at first; but each man gave it another little tug, and soon a sizable strip, ribbonlike, trailed behind him. As he passed too near a moving belt, this strip was sucked into the machinery; and in a split second the sleeve, the shirt—Andrews was in trouble, dragged into a position of grave danger to life and limb.

Alarms were sounded, switches pulled, buttons pushed; and, because the foreman happened to be close at hand, he and the man managed to get the machinery stopped before he had lost more than his shirt. But the call had been so close that all the men were shaken and unnerved.

It was eleven-thirty, early for a noon recess, but the foreman did not restart the machines. In the deathly quiet he summoned the men of the division to come closer. He had a story to tell.

"In my younger days I worked in a small factory," he began. "I remember Mike Travis—he was big and witty, always making jokes, playing little pranks. Mike was a leader. Then there was Pete Lumas. He always went along with Mike. He was a follower. And then I remember Jake, who was a little older than the rest of us—quiet, harmless, apart. He ate his lunch by himself. He wore the same patched trousers for three years straight. He never entered into the games we played at noon, wrestling, horseshoes, and such. He was different.

"Jake was a natural target for practical jokes. He might find a live frog in his dinner pail or a dead rodent in his hat. But he always took it in good part.

"Then one fall when things were slack, Mike took a few days off to go deer hunting. Pete went along, of course, and they promised all of us that if they got anything they'd bring us each a piece. So we were all quite excited when we heard that they'd got back, and that Mike had got a really nice big buck.

"We heard more than that. Pete never could keep anything to himself, and it leaked out that they had a real whopper to play on Jake. Mike had cut up the critter and had made a nice package for each of us. And, for the laughs, for the joke of it, he had saved the ears, the tail, and the hoofs—it would be so funny when Jake unwrapped them.

"Mike distributed his packages during the noon hour. We each got a nice piece, opened it, and thanked him.

"The biggest package of all he saved until last. It was for Jake. Pete was all but bursting, and Mike looked very smug, deadpan. Like always, Jake sat by himself; he was on the far side of the big table. Mike pushed the package over to where he could reach it, and we all sat and waited.

"Jake was never one to say much. You might never know that he was around, for all the talking he did. In three years he'd never said a hundred words. So we were all quite hypnotized with what happened next.

"He took the package firmly in his grip and rose slowly to his feet. He smiled broadly at Mike—and it was then we noticed that his eyes were glistening. His Adam's apple bobbed up and down for a moment and then he got control of himself.

"`I know I haven't seemed too chummy with you men, but I never meant to be rude. You see, I've got nine kids at home—a wife that's been an invalid—bedfast now for four years. She ain't ever going to get any better. And sometimes when she's real bad off I have to sit up all night to take care of her. And most of my wages have had to go for doctors and medicine. The kids do all they can to help out, but at times it's been hard to keep food in their mouths.

"`Maybe you think it's funny that I go off by myself to eat my dinner. Well, I guess I've been a little bit ashamed, because I don't always have anything between my sandwich. Or like today—maybe there's only a raw turnip in my dinner bucket.

"`But I want you to know that this meat really means a lot to me. Maybe more than to anybody here, because tonight my kids'—he wiped the moisture from his eyes with the back of his hand—`tonight my kids will have a real—' He tugged at the string.

"We'd been watching Jake so intently we hadn't paid much notice to Mike and Pete. But we all noticed them now, because they both dove at once to try to grab the package. Nearly cracked their heads when they hit.

"But they were too late. Jake had broken the wrapper and was already surveying his present. He examined each hoof, each ear, and then he held up the tail. It wiggled limply.

"It should have been so funny. But nobody laughed. Nobody at all.

"But the hardest part was when Jake looked up. He tried to smile."

Ora Pate Stewart, From Where I Stood (Deseret Book Co., 1960).
