Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Prudence, the Pioneer

CLARENCE MANSFIELD LINDSAY

Prudence, we're going to ride over to Goodman Hale's and bring back the kettle he said he'd sell us. Do you think you can keep house till we get home again? We won't be very long."

Prudence Knight looked up into her father's face and nodded brightly. "Yes, indeed, Father! I can do it!"

"Since you're the eldest, you'll have to look after Thankful and Deziah," said Mistress Knight, smiling down at the three children. "Remember that, Prudence!"

"Yes, Mother! I'm sure everything will be all right—if no Indians come prowling around while you're gone."

"I don't think they will. It's been weeks now since we saw any of them about the settlement. But if they do, probably they'll be the friendly Sokokis."

The Knight cabin stood in the wilds of Maine near the New York border, and in those pioneer days of the early eighteenth century the Mohawks sometimes made trouble for the settlers.

Prudence watched as her parents started off along the trail, her father guiding the horse that bore them, with Mistress Knight mounted behind him on the pillion. Just before they disappeared from view, she waved a hand in farewell; then, turning, she went back into the cabin where Thankful and Deziah had already started building a little house with blocks from the woodbox.

"I'm going to build a barn, too!" said Deziah, happily.

"But we haven't any cow to put in it," laughed Thankful.

At that moment there came to the ears of all three the distant tinkle of the bell that was attached to Moo-Moo, one of the two cows owned by the family. The cows were allowed to browse in a small pasture some distance from the cabin. It was a friendly sort of sound, and Prudence always liked to listen to it.

Like all young folk of those early days, Prudence had plenty of work to do, and now she sat down at the spinning wheel and began to spin flax. Whir-whir went the wheel, the while Prudence sang a little song to herself:

"Spin, spin the spinning wheel! Around and around it goes! While I keep time with tapping heel A-thinking of the clothes Which I shall wear when—"

Suddenly she broke off singing and allowed the wheel to slow down to a dead stop. What had she heard?

A cowbell, once more; and if Prudence hadn't been a pioneer girl she would have paid no attention to it this time at all, but would have gone right ahead spinning and singing. But she had a very keen ear, and she didn't at all like the sound of the bell now! She knew that sometimes the crafty Indians would remove the bell, drive off the cows, and then ring the bell by hand so that the owners of the cows, hearing the continued sound, would not guess anything was wrong.

The bell tinkled again—and again. It seemed to be drawing nearer the cabin.

Jumping up, Prudence ran to the door, but she didn't open it. Peering out through the narrow opening at one side (called a "lookout") she saw two painted savages. Muskets in hand, they were creeping toward the cabin! That they were Mohawks, and not the friendly Sokokis, she was certain.

Thankful and Deziah were still at their play, building their little house on the floor and talking and laughing merrily. Prudence looked at them and wondered how she was to save them—and herself! It was too late to creep out at the back of the cabin and escape into the forest.

If only her parents hadn't gone after that kettle! Even as she thought of that, her anxious glance fell upon the two brass kettles over by the hearth. Why not hide beneath them? There wasn't a second to lose!

She told Thankful and Deziah that Indians were near the cabin, and that the only thing for them to do was to hide under the kettles. As she spoke, she lifted the edge of one, and the two little girls crept into their strange shelter. "Remember," Prudence warned them in a whisper as she let the edge down once more level with the floor, "you mustn't say a word, or even move!"

Next, she hastily tossed the blocks of the unfinished toy house back into the woodbox—something Thankful and Deziah wouldn't have liked. But the Indians must not know that anyone was in the cabin. Finally, she managed to creep under the remaining kettle. Mighty lucky for her that she was strong and sturdy!

Everything had been done as swiftly and silently as possible, and not a whit too soon; for no sooner was she safely curled up in her queer hiding place than the unwelcome visitors reached the door, which Prudence had purposely left unbarred but shut. They knocked sharply; then, hearing nothing, tried the door, pushed it open, and strode into the cabin.

"White man not here," grunted one. "Squaw gone, too."

"Never mind!" said the other. "We'll hide somewhere along the trail and get 'em on their way home."

Prudence couldn't help shuddering when she heard that; and she felt sure that the speaker was no Indian, but a renegade white, who had decked himself out as a Mohawk.

"Maybe someone here," said the Indian. "Me take look."

Prudence waited fearfully while the searcher poked about in both rooms of the cabin. Listening to every movement, she knew he had looked in the big cupboard and beneath the square bed and in every place where he thought one might hide, and every moment she expected him to overturn the kettles.

But neither the Mohawk nor the renegade seemed to think it worthwhile to do that. Finally they sat down—one on the kettle beneath which Prudence cowered, and the other on the kettle that sheltered her sisters!

While they rested they talked, and though their talk was brief, Prudence, listening to every word, learned that these two were merely scouts, and that a large band of armed Mohawks would soon follow, bent on destroying the entire settlement.

At last they rose and, after helping themselves to some food, went out of the cabin. Just as soon as she dared, Prudence pushed her way from under the kettle. Then, having satisfied herself that the intruders were well out of sight and hearing, she released Thankful and Deziah, who were both too frightened to even notice that their nearly finished house of blocks wasn't there anymore.

Prudence was very thankful that she had saved her little sisters and herself, but how could she save her dear parents?

Quickly she resolved she would take a shortcut through the forest and reach the trail in time to warn them of their danger. With a word to Thankful and Deziah, she hurried to the door at the back, swung it wide, and stepped out into the open. But she had not gone more than a few yards across the clearing before she met her parents returning. They had come by way of the woodland. She greeted them joyfully and briefly told them what had happened in their absence. They explained that they, too, had heard the mysterious cowbell and, suspecting it was a decoy, had left the trail and returned to the cabin through the woods.

When the horse had been stabled and the family was in the cabin, Prudence related all that she had overheard while hiding under the kettle. Her parents decided that the others in the settlement must be warned immediately. So Goodman Knight and his little family left the cabin and, making their way quietly through the forest, saw to it that every settler had the news.

Thus it was that when the Mohawks appeared, hoping for an easy victory, every man, woman, and child was safely sheltered in the big garrison-house; and under the heavy fire of the defenders' muskets, the chagrined savages finally gave up the fight and left the neighborhood. They had little time for pillaging and burning of cabins, since some of the bolder men pursued and harried them in their retreat.

Not a life was lost among the whites, and to this very day people in that part of Maine repeat to their children the story of the brave girl whose resourcefulness and pluck saved a whole settlement.

Children's Friend, November 1948.
