Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

"I Can Sleep in a Storm"

OSCAR A. KIRKHAM

This story is about a boy. It happened some years ago in a land far across the sea, where most of the people were farmers. And once a year the farmers and the young men and women who worked for them went to a fair—they called it a hiring fair—and struck a bargain for the next year, what work they would do and how much they would be paid. It was the only holiday away from home they had all year 'round—this hiring fair—so you can imagine how they looked forward to it.

Now it happened that Farmer White was very much dissatisfied with a man who worked for him on his farm, so he set out for the fair to hire another man. And when he came to the fair he saw the gay tents, booths, flags—and the strong young farm workers walking up and down, so he began to look around. As he walked about, he saw a young, awkward, gawky young man, and he stopped him.

"Well, young fellow," said Farmer White, "what is your name?"

"John, sir."

"And what do you do?"

"I work on a farm, sir."

"Do you know anything at all about farming?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you know?"

"If you please, sir, I know how to sleep on a windy night."

"You what?"

"I know how to sleep on a windy night, sir."

"Well, that's no great recommendation," said Farmer White. "Most of my men can do that only too well now."

So Farmer White walked around the fair and talked to this one and that, but he found no farm helper that suited him. Then he met John again, asked him the same question, and got the same strange answer. There was something in the boy's honest eyes he liked, something behind what he said that interested him. But he wasn't willing to hire a boy whose only boast was that he could sleep on a windy night, so he made the rounds of the fair again. Late in the afternoon he saw John still waiting to be hired. He quickly made up his mind, walked over to the youth, and said, "You are certainly a curious kind of farmhand, but come along to my farm, and we'll see what you can do."

John worked for several weeks, not much noticed—and that isn't a bad sign, either. When anything is working well, it isn't much noticed. And then one night the wind woke up Farmer White. It hammered against buildings, tore at the haystacks, and howled down the chimneys, and when Farmer White heard it, he sat straight up in bed. He knew that wind. Many a time it had wrenched doors off his barns, scattered his hay, and bowled over his chicken coops. So he jumped out of bed and shouted for John.

Now, John was sleeping in the attic. "John!" the farmer called, but he didn't receive an answer. "John!" he shouted louder than the wind, but no word came from John. So the farmer bounded up to the attic and shook John hard. "Now, John, my lad, get up; the wind's taking everything." But John lay like a log—he never moved.

Farmer White rushed out into the windy night, expecting to see everything tumbled about. But he found the stable doors safely fastened, the horses safely tethered, the windows firmly locked, and the cattle all snug in their stalls. He found the stackyard intact—the stacks well roped and the ropes well pegged. He found the pig-sty secure and the chicken coops firm—and the wind tearing fiercely around them all the time. Then Farmer White laughed out loud. Suddenly he realized what John had meant when he said, "I can sleep in a storm."

Oscar A. Kirkham, Say the Good Word (Deseret Book Co., 1958).
