Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

From Bones to Brawn

CLARE MISELES

Theodore Roosevelt sat back in bed and closed his eyes. It was better to keep his eyes shut than to look out of the window and see a pretty, sunny day. Not that he didn't like sunshine, but he was seldom outside to play in it. He was always in bed with a cold!

His father came into the room and sat down beside his bed. "It is a pretty day, isn't it!"

He pulled the curtain aside and saw two boys running down the street. Then he slowly let the curtain fall and turned to his son. "How would you like to play and run like those two young lads down there?"

Theodore winced. He wished his father wouldn't talk that way. It wasn't his fault if he caught colds all the time.

"Well, I think you can!"

"But—father—" Theodore began to explain how poorly he felt.

"But you must try to get strong and well. God has big plans for you, Theodore!" He patted the sneezing head and sat down to talk about those plans.

"I think that God expects you to try and get strong—"

"But—but how—" Theodore asked tentatively.

"And I'm going to help you, too!"

Theodore's head began to ache even more. Whatever did his father mean? He didn't understand; he wasn't sure he could understand.

But he soon learned. Shortly after this talk, his wealthy father brought men and strange-looking bars and equipment to the house. What for? To build a gymnasium!

"Here, in our house?" cried Theodore's mother.

"Why not?" exclaimed his father. "If our Theodore can't go to a gymnasium, then we'll bring one to him!"

So the construction of the gym began. In the meantime, Theodore was both excited and afraid. What—what if he couldn't exercise? Maybe he was too weak!

His father hurried the workmen. He was anxious for Theodore to get started on what he called a "physical fitness" program.

The first day he started, Theodore could barely lift a dumbbell; and when he tried to chin himself, he fell to the floor and hurt his ankle. But soon—and it didn't take long—he lifted the dumbbells with very little effort and chinned himself again and again.

The time even came when Theodore could turn one somersault after another—and found it fun! Cartwheels were also fun. And when it came to lifting weights, then his heart really swelled with pride and thanks.

That wasn't all. He began to eat as he had never eaten before. He was always hungry. Exercise and the good nourishing food he ate built him exactly as his father said they would—strong and well.

Then there were camp-outs. He and his father camped together. They had great fun and he learned to ride like a cowboy. He also liked to hike. What could be more satisfying than to walk through God's woodlands or climb his scalloping green hill? And the stars that covered the dark sky when they camped out at night! Wasn't it good to sit below and look up into God's sparkling wonders?

One night, just before he and his father called it a good camping day and turned in to sleep, Theodore flexed his arm and smiled.

"From bones to brawn." His father smiled, with thanks in his eyes.

Theodore felt his arm. His father was right; he did have muscle, good muscle. He smiled and repeated, "From bones to brawn." It was a phrase he could never forget. It set in his heart with thanks to God and his father. It set so well that in years to come when he fulfilled the great plans God had for him, he did everything in his power to help everyone become good and strong and well.

Children's Friend, September 1969.
