Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

"I Don't Want to Live With a Thief"

AUTHOR UNKNOWN

He was a bank errand boy, and in his home he had an invalid mother and a little sister who could not walk. The doctor had been to the home recently and had told John that unless the mother could get into the country where there was plenty of fresh air, she was going to grow worse and perhaps would be gone in the fall. So John had tried to find some way by which he could send the two away, but there seemed none at all, and his heart seemed almost ready to break as day after day his mother grew less and less strong.

One day when John was sweeping under the table in the bank, he found a roll of bills—a big roll with some treasury certificates in the pile. He picked them up and started to go to the office of the president, but he stopped. "Just think what those bills will do," he thought. "They will send mother and Millie away for the whole summer, and then they will be well. No one knows I have them, and they don't belong to the bank. They were in the waste paper. I'm going to keep them. Finding is keeping, and they are mine." So into his pocket they went, and he finished his sweeping and started for home. But somehow the roll did not feel good. He put it into his inner pocket, and then shifted it to his coat pocket. He felt sure that everyone must see it.

About an hour after John had gone home, he came back to the bank, knocked for admittance, and went to the office of the president. He threw the bills on the desk, saying, "I found them when I swept," and then with a cry of pain, he ran from the bank.

Next morning John was there at his work, and after the bank had opened he was called to the president's room. "John," said the president, "I wish you would tell me why you brought those bills back last night. I know why you wanted them, and what they would have done at home. We didn't know you had them. Why did you bring them back?" Away over the desk leaned John, and looking straight into the eyes of the man he said, "Sir, as long as I live, I have to live with myself, and I don't want to live with a thief." A few days later the mother and Millie went to the country. But they did not go alone; John went with them for the whole summer, as a gift of appreciation of the bank for his nobility.

A Story to Tell (Deseret Book Co., 1971).
