Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

"Throw It Here, Sissy"

HEBER J. GRANT

As I was an only child, my mother reared me very carefully. Indeed, I grew up more or less under the principles of a hothouse plant, a growth which is long and lengthy but not substantial. I learned to sweep and to wash and wipe dishes but did little stone throwing and little indulgence in works which are interesting to boys, which develop their physical frames.

Therefore, when I joined the baseball club, the boys of my own age and a little older played in the first nine, those younger than I played in the second, and those still younger, in the third, and I played with them. One of the reasons for this was that I could not throw the ball from one base to another, and another reason was that I lacked the strength to run or bat the ball. When I picked up the ball, the boys would generally shout, "Throw it here, sissy!"

So much fun was engendered on my account by my youthful companions that I solemnly vowed that I would play baseball in the nine that would win the championship in the territory of Utah. My mother was keeping boarders for a living at the time, and I shined their boots until I saved a dollar, which I invested in a baseball, and spent hours throwing the ball at Bishop Edwin D. Woolley's barn, which caused him to refer to me as the laziest boy in the Thirteenth Ward.

Often my arm would ache so that I could scarcely go to sleep at night, but I kept on practicing and finally succeeded in getting into the second nine of our club. Subsequently, I joined a better club and eventually played in the nine that won the championship in California, Colorado, and Wyoming, and thus made good my promise to myself and retired from the baseball arena.

(When Heber could not sleep because his arm ached as a result of throwing the ball, his mother would wrap it with bandages dipped in cold water to relieve the pain.)

Bryant S. Hinckley, Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader (Deseret Book Co., 1951).
