Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Present Mother Kept

RUTH F. CHANDLER

The day before Mother's Day, Susan found a quarter. She picked it up and wiped it with her handkerchief, then skipped through three puddles and on down the hill with her red raincape flying out behind.

To find a quarter any day was lucky. Of course it wasn't much money, but it would buy a little present for her mother. In school Susan had made a card with a verse and a pink carnation on it, but a card wasn't a real present. If she asked for money, it would not be a real surprise.

She ran lickety-clip to the shopping center.

In the florist's shop she saw some red roses, so she opened the door and went in.

"How much is that rose?" she asked, pointing to the smallest one.

"Fifty cents," said the man.

"I'm sorry. I only have a quarter," Susan told him.

She went to the drugstore and looked at the boxes of candy, bright with flowers and pretty ribbons.

"Have you any little boxes that cost a quarter?" she asked the clerk.

No, his candy cost much more than that. She looked at the cards. One had a carnation that opened like a real flower, but it was marked thirty-five cents. Susan shook her head and walked out.

The next store was the market where they sold frankfurters and rolls and boxes of cereal. On the candy counter she saw a sign "Special today only—giant size chocolate bars—25 cents."

Her mother liked chocolate bars, so Susan chose one with almonds in it. As she waited in line to pay for her things, she planned how she would wrap it in pretty paper, tie it with a red ribbon, and hide it until tomorrow.

She wished the woman in front of her would hurry, but she didn't. Instead, she took everything out of her pocketbook and began to feel around inside.

"That's funny," she said, "I know I had some change." Then she stuck two fingers through the bottom of the bag.

"Look at that," she said to the clerk. "The seam has ripped. I've been all over town this morning. I wonder how much money I have lost." Then she took a bill from another place, paid for her groceries, and left the store.

On her way home, Susan did some thinking. Maybe that woman lost her money on the hill. Susan walked along slowly, looking on the sidewalk, in the street, and even in the puddles.

She kicked at something in the mud. It was another quarter! Soon she found a penny, and another penny, a nickel, and two dimes. She was so excited she could hardly breathe. Now she could buy the rose or the card that was so much prettier than the one she had made in school. She turned back toward the stores.

But instead of feeling happy, with a pocketful of money, she felt kind of sick inside. Her mother would surely ask, "Where did you get the money for these nice presents?" And it wasn't honest "Finders Keepers" when you knew a lady had lost it.

Slowly she walked back, past the florist's shop and past the drugstore. She pushed open the door of the market and went to the clerk.

"I found the money that woman lost," she said, laying it on the counter. Then, with a sigh, she took the chocolate bar from the paper bag.

"Can I have my quarter?" she asked.

The clerk looked at her. "What goes on here?" he asked.

"You know the lady. Her pocketbook was ripped," Susan explained.

"Yes. But what's the matter with the candy?"

"Nothing. I bought it with a quarter I found, before I knew the money was hers."

"Oh." He took a quarter from the cash register and laid it with the other money. "It's a wonder you didn't eat the candy."

"It wasn't for me. It was for tomorrow, a present for my mother."

The clerk made a clicking noise with his tongue. "What's your name?" he asked.

"Susan Bradley."

Customers were waiting in line, so Susan hurried out. She walked slowly past the money place and on up the hill. Her mother met her at the door.

"You were gone so long I was worried," she said, "then that nice Mrs. Swanson telephoned." She put the groceries away while Susan took off her raincape and boots.

"Who is Mrs. Swanson?" she asked.

"Darling, she's the woman who lost the money." Mother put her arms around Susan. "And you found it and gave it to the clerk. Oh, Susan, I'm so proud of my little girl."

"She telephoned?" Susan asked.

"Yes. The clerk saw her in the parking lot and gave her the money. Then she found Bradley in the telephone book and called to thank you."

Susan told her mother the whole story. "I didn't want to give back the candy bar. It had lots of nuts in it."

"I know, dear, but it's all right. I don't want any present."

Susan remembered the card she had made in school and ran to get it. It was better than nothing.

Her mother looked at the carnation Susan had colored so carefully and the words she had printed neatly inside.

"I will try in all I do to show how much I love you."

"Susan," she said, "you couldn't have bought anything in a store so precious as this. Flowers die, and we'd soon eat the candy. But this card I shall keep forever and ever."

Children's Friend, May 1963.
