Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Remember the Bee

ELIZABETH J. BUCKISCH

In a sunny kitchen of the parsonage in Alsace, four-year-old Albert looked up from play as his minister-father came in from the garden.

"Papa, could I go with you today?" he begged as he noticed his father getting ready to go out to his beehives. "I have never seen you take the honey from the bees."

Albert knew quite well what this trip meant. For supper the family would have good fresh honey on delicious homemade bread.

"You're too young, Albert. If you move around or make a sound I cannot take the honey from the bees."

"But I'll sit very, very still. I promise, Papa. You will see."

"Very well then, little son, you may come. But remember, you must not get near the bees."

Picking up a dishpan, heavy gloves, and a helmet-type hat with a mosquito-net veil to protect his face, the tall young minister and his eager son set out.

While his father put on the gloves and helmet and moved cautiously over to the beehives, Albert sat on an old stool some distance away and watched with interest. He would sit, oh! so still, just as he had promised.

In a few minutes a long procession of bees swarmed out of the hive, evidently furious that anyone should dare disturb them and their honey. Working gently and speaking softly to the bees, his father loosened a square filled with honey and placed it in the dishpan. After a while, tired of watching. Albert laughed gleefully as he admired a little creature that had lighted on his own small fist.

Suddenly he felt a short, sharp, stabbing pain in his hand and let out a shriek. "Papa! Papa!" he screamed. His father dropped everything and ran over to the boy. The household, hearing the loud screams from the far end of the garden, came running out also. His mother, Maria the maid, his older sister, and a younger brother all stood or knelt around him, trying to comfort him. Maria kissed the bee-stung hand, his father and mother petted him, and Albert felt a great wave of satisfaction come over him.

As suddenly as it had come, the pain stopped. Albert's conscience began to give him little twinges. "That's enough attention now," it seemed to say. "You are not in pain any more." But this was too good an opportunity to waste, so Albert howled right on and got some more petting. But for the rest of the day he felt uncomfortable and couldn't enjoy his play—not from the bee-sting, for that had long since stopped hurting, but from that still small voice inside him. He felt he was a fraud. He had done something dishonorable. The day that had started so happily was ruined.

This little boy grew up to become one of the most famous medical missionaries in the world, Dr. Albert Schweitzer, who devoted his life to a jungle hospital deep in the African Congo. He won great renown for his work with the natives, and he was honored at royal courts by kings and queens and by many other heads of government.

But whenever Dr. Schweitzer felt he was trading on people's sympathies, whenever he was tempted to exaggerate or to get undeserved praise, he said to himself, "Remember the bee!"

Children's Friend, August 1963.
