Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Dutchman's Magic Eye

MURRAY T. PRINGLE

One evening back in 1674 a group of townsfolk gathered in the town square of Delft, Holland. "What shall we do," said one, "that we may amuse ourselves?"

"I know," answered another. "Let us go to the city hall and watch the madman who looks at nothing and pretends to see something. Let us go to see Anton Leeuwenhoek."

"Of course!" said the others. "A great idea. Let's go!"

In the basement of the city hall, they gathered around a serious young man, who sat at a rough wooden table peering through a strange device.

"Look you, my friends," laughed a fat merchant. "All night Herr Leeuwenhoek sits and stares at nothing. Here, my foolish fellow, here is a hair from my moustache. Add it to your collection of fly brains and fish scales."

Anton Leeuwenhoek looked up angrily. "Laugh!" he said. "Fools always laugh at that which they do not understand. I have here a glass like no other in the world. With it I can see animals which are invisible to your eyes."

"Then why do you not let us see for ourselves?" demanded the fat merchant. "Why do you always refuse?"

"Because you come only to scoff," replied the young man, "but perhaps it is what you need to be convinced. Very well, you shall see. I shall put this drop of water for you to examine. Now look, and then scoff!"

The fat shopkeeper smiled triumphantly as he sat down and peered into the instrument. "He is right! I see many little animals in that drop of water. They swim! They dance!"

One by one everyone else in the room sat down and looked at the strange sight. Each one got up and apologized to the "madman" for having laughed. Leeuwenhoek then showed them that there were horrid little creatures living on their teeth.

The people were so amazed that they spread the miracle of Anton Leeuwenhoek's "magic eye" far and wide. Finally, it came to the attention of scientists in London, England.

"Your instruments are marvelous, Herr Leeuwenhoek," the scientists told him. "We have none so fine as these in all England. Can you make some for us?"

The Dutchman generously agreed to their request, and the British scientists went away happy. Anton Leeuwenhoek, meanwhile, returned to his study of the strange creatures he had discovered with his microscope.

He spent every moment he could spare from his janitorial duties peering through his glass, seeking answers. And he found them. He discovered, for example, that rainwater was clean and free of the horrid creatures.

"Aha," reasoned the amateur scientist, "then that must mean that they come from dirty pots and unclean fingers."

He conducted further studies and experiments, and then one day he announced his finding to a group of scientists.

"When you boil water, gentlemen," he told them, "the little animals disappear or die. That is strange, is it not?"

It was, indeed! Even Anton Leeuwenhoek did not fully realize the truly great discovery he had made. The little beasts he had discovered were microbes.

Today we realize what a truly tremendous debt we owe to that humble Dutchman of long ago and his "magic eye."

Children's Friend, March 1965.
