Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Black Polish Shoes

LUCILE C. READING

It was nearly sundown, and the boys and men of Willard, Utah, had been busy since early morning clearing the road that Brigham Young's carriage would take to reach the bowery. All day as Evan threw rocks out of the rutted road, he tried to think of something he could do about a coat and some shoes to wear at the choir program which was to be held before the banquet in the bowery.

Evan was only twelve and every other member of the choir was many years older than he. They all called him their "Boy Alto."

Evan's family lived more than sixty miles away. He earned his board and room doing farm work. There was no one he felt he could talk to about his problem, and so as he walked to his room through the early dusk he was deep in thought.

As Evan passed the general store he saw a can of shoe polish in the window and suddenly decided what to do for shoes. After he put on his best pants that evening he turned up the cuffs, then took a can of shoe polish and carefully painted some make-believe shoes on his feet. He couldn't think of anything he could do about a coat, so he started toward the bowery in his shirt sleeves. As he hurried along the road he wiped away the tears that kept filling his eyes. He hoped no one would see them, but a choir member stopped him and asked why he was crying.

"I'm crying because I haven't any shoes and I'm ashamed for Brigham Young to see me barefooted with all the big folks," Evan said simply.

"President Young won't think any the less of you for not having shoes," the lady assured him. "Come, Boy Alto, and sing with us." Evan walked as far as the bowery entrance with her but wouldn't go on.

Just then Brigham Young and his party arrived. Evan wanted to run and hide but as he turned to do so, President Young held out a hand to stop him and asked, "Why are you running away? Why don't you go inside?"

"I-I sing in the choir," Evan stammered, "but I'm not dressed well enough to sing with them tonight." He looked down at his bare feet covered with shoe polish. Brigham Young glanced down; then with understanding he looked deep into Evan's eyes. "Don't feel bad," he said as he patted Evan's shoulder. "We're all friends."

More than sixty years later, after Evan Stephens had become a great musician, the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir leader, and the composer of 86 LDS hymns, he recalled this shining moment in his life and said, "And ever after that I felt that there was an acquaintance between me and the President."

Children's Friend, January 1967.
