Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

"If We Had Skated"

CLARENCE HUFFMAN

Tom Carr walked briskly down a woodland road one Saturday afternoon. A pair of skates swung at one side, while a knapsack was fastened to his back. Two boys, with similar loads, accompanied him, their bright colored sweaters and caps in strong contrast to the black tree trunks and the gray sky.

Tom turned to his companions. "I say," he began, "I believe it's going to snow. It's getting warmer and that sky—"

"Don't look at it," answered Jack Reed, a short, chubby boy who panted as he tried to keep with Tom's sturdy strides. "We didn't come out into the country to look at snow, but to skate on the river."

"Yes," broke in Ralph Bronson, a tall, thin boy, "I hope we do get to skate. You have plenty of chances, Tom, since you live in the country, but it's a treat to us city boys."

"Well," laughed Tom, "I didn't say I was going to make it snow, did I? I only said it might. We're down in the river valley now. There's old Mr. Blake's shack."

Jack and Ralph gave a shout. They ran ahead of Tom in their haste to get to the frozen river.

Tom called to them. "Hold it a minute. I don't see any smoke coming from the cabin."

Tom knocked loudly on the door of the small dwelling. A weak voice invited him to enter. Tom pushed open the door and was followed by his friends.

Over in a corner of the one room stood a crude bed, covered with well-worn but clean covers. The face of an old man peered out from the blankets.

"Why, Mr. Blake," Tom cried, "you're not sick?"

"No, not exactly," quavered the old man, "but I don't feel very well. Been spending most of my time in bed because—" He stopped and looked at the fireplace.

Tom's eyes followed his and saw that no flames danced there.

"No fire!" he exclaimed.

"Yes," replied the old man. "I got too weak to chop any wood, and no one had come this way for many days. All I could do during this cold spell was to stay in bed all the time, eating just a snack. I even ran out of kerosene for my lamp."

Tom turned around to Jack and Ralph. His eyes were sparkling. "Suppose we take time to cut up some wood for Mr. Blake!"

"But what about the skating?" asked Jack.

"Yes," chimed in Ralph. "We can't do both. Can't you send a neighbor out when we get back?"

"Mr. Blake needs a warm fire." replied Tom firmly, looking at the feeble old man. "Besides, it may snow, and then it's not easy to get back here. The pile of poles would be covered then and it would be hard to chop them."

Tom threw off his skates and knapsack. "I'm staying," he announced. "I know where you keep the ax, Mr. Blake."

Jack and Ralph were throwing down their loads by this time. "We'll have a good time after all," said Jack. "Going to cook supper in the cave—"

"And we can come back another Saturday this winter to skate," added Ralph.

Soon the three boys were busy at the pile of poles that the old man had cut down in the fall for his winter fuel. While Tom cut the young trees, Jack placed them in a small shed that adjoined the cabin. Ralph took some pieces into the room where the old man lay, and soon a bright fire was dancing in the fireplace. He placed a small pile of wood in one corner of the room for immediate use and broke up some fallen limbs and dead bushes for kindling.

It was mid-afternoon when the work was done. Mr. Blake thanked the boys but they scarcely waited to hear him, as they were in a hurry to get to the cave. Only Tom lingered for a moment. "Make out an order for any groceries you want to buy, Mr. Blake," he said, "and I'll ask dad to bring them to you the first of the week. Wish I'd known sooner, for he and my mother drove to town this morning."

By this time the sky was getting grayer and a few flakes were sailing lazily to the ground. "Dad may have to take you two back to town in a bob-sled tomorrow morning," said Tom. "Hey! here's the cave."

The three had reached a dark hole at the base of a sandstone cliff. Laying down their skates and knapsacks again, the boys collected a supply of fallen wood, which they dragged into the cave. As they crawled inside with their last load, they noticed that a wind was rising.

"Just in time!" cried Jack. "It's getting colder outside."

The boys built a fire in one corner of the cave. A small hold had been chipped above and a piece of stove-pipe inserted in the opening to let out the smoke.

"It's a dandy place!" exclaimed Jack, looking around at the sandstone walls over which the red light was flickering.

"I thought you two would like it," said Tom. "Now let's eat."

The contents of their knapsacks were spread out upon the sand floor, and soon the smell of frying bacon and eggs filled the air. There were sandwiches, oranges, and roasted potatoes.

Two hours flew by before the boys were ready to leave. By that time the last mouthful of food had been consumed, the last piece of wood had burned to coals.

Ralph gave a shiver. "Seems to me it's getting colder," he said.

"We'll get warm as soon as we begin to walk," Tom replied. "Let's start for home."

When the boys had crawled out, they could hardly believe their eyes. Twilight had come, and the world was full of whirling snow that almost blinded them. The air was freezing. For a moment Tom's heart sank; then he called, "Bad night, fellows, but we'll soon hit the road. Just keep close to me, that's all."

There was no chance to climb up the opposite hill for a shortcut through the woods. The hill was already a deep mass of white.

The boys crept along the base of the cliff. They could hardly see the river below. It was also a flat white expanse.

On they trudged until they came to a pile of fallen trees. Tom stopped short. "We're going the wrong way," he said, trying to speak cheerily. "Right-about face."

They ended at the river. Once more the three turned. "We've got to keep moving," advised Tom.

Up and down through the blinding white they tramped. It was getting colder and colder and darkness had deepened.

Then a light, a little light, was seen shining through the blizzard!

"I know where we are now!" cried Tom joyfully. "There's Mr. Blake's cabin."

"If we had skated—" Jack began.

Tom did not seem to understand. "I'm glad Mr. Blake will be warm tonight," was all he said.

Children's Friend, January 1965.
