Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

The Sheaf of Grain

BERNADINE BEATIE

It was Christmas Eve. Young Mike sat at the window of his home, looking down the highway to the west. He could just see the lights of Old Mike's filling station, glimmering through the swirling snow. In front of every house, on each side of the highway, stood a tall pole to which a sheaf of grain had been attached.

"Ma," young Mike called. "May I go stay with Grandpa?"

"You just want to hear your grandpa's Christmas story again." His mother came and stood beside Mike. "Sometimes I think we all hang up those sheaves of grain more to please your grandpa than for any other reason."

"No," said Mike, "for the birds and for Olaf."

"Humph!" she said. "Everybody but your grandpa knows Olaf's been dead these many years. Nobody could have lived through that storm."

Mike supposed his mother was right, but it was too bad. Grandpa wanted a better ending for his Christmas story—a happy one—and so did Mike.

"Well, run along," his mother said. "But you and your grandpa close up and be home by ten."

Mike reached the filling station just as a large car pulled up. A tall man slid from beneath the wheel. He wore a trim-looking dark blue uniform and a cap with a visor that was covered with gold braid. He looked larger than life, somehow, outlined against the dark, snow-swept prairie. Mike's eyes bulged when he heard his grandpa call the man "Captain." Mike had never seen a sea captain before.

"Tell me," the stranger asked, "why are sheaves of grain hanging before the houses?"

Mike's grandfather perked up. "Do you have time to hear a story?"

"There is always time for a story," said the man from the sea.

"Then come inside, where it is warm."

The stranger shook his head when Mike's grandpa offered him a chair near the small hissing stove. Instead, he pulled his cap low over his eyes and sat in a shadowy corner of the small room. The grandfather took his regular place beside the stove, and Mike sat beside him, hoping no customers would come and disturb the telling of the story.

"Once, many years ago," his grandpa started, "there lived a kind of rancher and his wife who loved children. Years passed, and when no children came to bless their home, they started caring for homeless boys who came their way. And there were many of them, for those were the days of the great depression, when hunger stalked the land. First one boy drifted in, then another, until every room of the rancher's home was filled with homeless boys. They were a rough lot, those lads, rough and wild. The rancher was always getting them out of scrapes at school or in town. Many of the folks around said he was just raising the boys for the jail house. Maybe he was—they were a wild bunch all right!

"Then one spring day, a different kind of lad drifted in. He was tall, with hair the color of sun-ripened wheat, and he gave his name as Olaf Jensen. He came from a land far across the sea, and he was as strong as a winter storm. Yet, there was something strangely gentle and kind about him. Flowers that he planted bloomed more quickly than others, birds sang when he was near, and the orneriest critter on the ranch would settle down at the sound of Olaf's voice."

Young Mike looked up, knowing his grandpa would pause at this point—he always did. Knowing, too, that there would be a far-away look in the old man's eyes, almost as though he were hearing Olaf's voice.

"Yes," the tall stranger prompted softly.

"The boys did not like Olaf," Grandpa continued. "He was different from them. `Yah,' he said, instead of `yes,' and sometimes he spoke in a strange foreign tongue. They felt too that the old rancher and his wife had a feeling for Olaf that they did not have for them, and they grew jealous. When the rancher and his wife were not around, the boys would torment Olaf with every meanness they could think of. The ringleader was a lad named Mike. This grieved Olaf, who looked on every living thing with love."

Young Mike hitched his chair a little closer to the stove, struck with wonder that Grandpa had once been that young Mike of the story—wild and rough.

"Why didn't this Olaf fight back?" the stranger spoke from the shadows.

"One day he did. One Christmas Eve—snowy and cold—very much like today. Olaf had attached a sheaf of grain to a pole and stuck it in the ground fifty yards from the house.

"`For the birds,' he said. `It is a custom in the country of my people.'

"The boys laughed at him, pulled down the pole and scattered the grain. Olaf replaced the grain and the pole time after time. Finally the boys tired of the sport and left the pole standing. Later, however, Mike saw a bird fluttering around the grain, took a sling shot, and killed the bird. Olaf saw. He ran forward and touched the bird with gentle fingers; then he turned on Mike, his eyes flashing blue fire. He threw Mike to the ground and fell on him.

"The other boys, shocked by the fury of Olaf's rage, pulled at him.

"`Stop! You'll kill him!' One of the boys cried.

"The madness and anger went from Olaf's eyes. He stood, a deep sadness swept over his face. `I go now,' he said softly. `I bring only unhappiness to this place. My heart is sick. When it heals, perhaps I will return.' Olaf buttoned his jacket around his neck and disappeared into the swirling snow.

"The boys were frightened as the storm developed into a blizzard. It was twenty miles to the nearest town. Olaf would surely die! They went to the rancher and told him.

"The rancher stood very straight. `Where have I failed you, my sons?' And he saddled a horse and rode out into the storm, searching for Olaf.

"Darkness fell and he did not return. The boys saddled horses and formed a line to search, calling to each other so that none would be lost in the storm. After many hours they found the old rancher, fallen from his horse and half-buried in the snow. They wrapped him in their coats and carried him to a line shack that was used during roundup time. But the old man was burning up with fever; without medicine and warm food he would surely die.

"The boys drew lots to see who would go for help. The lot fell to Mike. He rode out, pulling his cap down against the blinding snow. Soon he was lost in a white world of darkness. But he rode on, hoping his horse would take him home. Then his horse shied at an unknown sound and he fell to the ground. He grabbed at his horse's reins, but his horse was gone. Mike stood and stumbled on. He prayed—this Mike who had never prayed before—prayed for strength to find help for his friends, and for the old rancher who had befriended them all. But after a long time, he knew his strength was gone. He stumbled and fell. Then his hands closed upon something—upon a pole standing above the snow. Attached to the top was a sheaf of grain. Olaf's pole! And Olaf's pole saved the life of the old rancher, for Mike found the ranch house and help was sent."

"What happened to those other boys?" the stranger asked.

Grandpa seemed lost in dreams so young Mike took up the story. "They changed after that. They settled down and tried to be good sons to the old rancher. Most of them are still living close by, and many of their children, too."

"That's the reason," Grandfather finished up, "for the sheaves of grain."

"So no trace was ever found of Olaf?" the stranger asked.

"No," young Mike said. "That's the part of the story I don't like—the ending."

The stranger chuckled softly. "How should it end?"

"Olaf should come back!" young Mike said. "He should come back and learn that he did not bring unhappiness, that because of him the boys gave up their wild ways!" Mike sighed. "Christmas stories should have happy endings!"

The stranger stood. He seemed to fill the room as he swept his cap from his head. His hair was snow white, but the unshaded light, hanging from the ceiling, turned it the color of sun-ripened wheat.

Young Mike's eyes were as wide as saucers and the only sound in the room was the soft hissing of the gas stove. Then Grandpa moved forward. His face was like an answered dream as he grasped the sea captain's extended hand.

"Olaf—Olaf!" Grandpa whispered.

Very softly, young Mike crept from the room. It seemed fitting, somehow, that the two old men should finish the telling of the story alone. But he smiled and hugged the happy ending to his heart.

Children's Friend, December 1966.
