Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

A Dog's Best Friend

LUCILE C. READING

A little boy sat on a New York subway one day. In his arms he held a miserable-looking Boston terrier. The dog had been hurt. Clumsy bandages tied around its leg showed that the boy had tried to doctor his pet. It was hard to tell which was the saddest-looking, the boy or the dog.

Across from them sat a big, rough-looking truck driver. He watched the boy and the dog for a few minutes, then turned to a man sitting next to him and asked, "Did you ever see such a sorry sight in your life?"

The man looked across the aisle and shook his head.

The little dog whined in pain, and the boy hugged the animal closer to him while a solitary tear slid down his cheek. This was too much for the truck driver. He leaned across the aisle. "What's the matter, sonny?" he questioned.

"My dog's been hurt," the boy answered. "Pop says I have to take him to the Humane Society because we haven't any money for a vet. And you know what I've heard? If he's hurt too bad, they'll gas him. Boy, have I been praying that he'll be all right."

The truck driver looked again at the dog, then at the people in the subway car. Finally he stood up. "Folks," he called in a loud voice. The noise in the car stopped. The truck driver went on. "This boy has trouble. We're spending billions of dollars to help people all over the world. Let's spend a little to help a boy right here at home take care of his dog." He dropped something in his hat and handed it to the man next to him, who also dropped something into the hat and passed it on.

A few minutes later the hat returned to the truck driver, who squeezed it tight and then put it into the boy's hand. The boy looked at the people in amazement. He could hardly believe the money was all for him. Then be breathed a fervent, "Thank you, mister, and thanks to everybody, too."

The dog whimpered. He almost seemed to understand that now he would have a chance to live.

Children's Friend, May 1964.
