Leon R. Hartshorn, Inspiring Stories for Young Latter-day Saints ( 1975)

Christmas in Pioneer Times

AUTHOR UNKNOWN

I remember our first Christmas in the Valley. We all worked as usual. The men gathered sagebrush and some even plowed, for though it had snowed, the ground was still soft, and the plows were used the entire day. Christmas came on Saturday. We celebrated the day on the Sabbath, when all gathered around the flagpole in the center of the fort, and there we held a meeting. And what a meeting it was. We sang praise to God, we all joined in the opening prayer, and the speaking that day has always been remembered. There were words of thanksgiving and cheer. Not a pessimistic word was uttered. The people were hopeful and buoyant, because of their faith in the great undertaking. After the meeting, there was handshaking all around. Some wept with joy. The children played in the enclosure, and around the sagebrush fire that night we gathered and sang:

"Come, come, ye saints, No toil nor labor fear, But with joy wend your way."

That day we had boiled rabbit and a little bread for our dinner. Father had shot some rabbits, and it was a feast we had. All had enough to eat. In a sense of perfect peace and good will toward all men, I never had a happier Christmas in my life.

The principal thing was to get together enough food for a dinner, for it was very scarce that winter. I think the people met as families and friends in the fort. I went to my mother's house. She lived in a little log room behind where the Bee Hive House now stands. To me that one log room looked like a palace. It was so grand to have a home with a roof over our heads. I remember that we gathered all of the good things we could to make a dinner. Mother made a cake, which was a very unusual thing to have. Little Isaac Perry Decker, about seven years old, ate so much dinner before the cake was cut and served that he looked at it almost crying and said, "Mother, what shall I do? I can't eat it!" His voice was full of regret, for he loved cake and had not had a piece for a long time. Mother said, "Well, you can save it until tomorrow." Little Perry's face brightened up with the thought that he could really eat the cake another time.

The Christmas of 1848 found the Saints with much more of a variety of things for their Christmas dinner. Some had wild duck or prairie chicken and a little cake. Although sugar was scarce, some molasses had been made by squeezing cornstalks and making what they called "cornstalk molasses." Serviceberries and chokecherries had been gathered from the canyons, and pies were made of these. Some gingerbread was mixed and made into various shapes to please the children. They were indeed happy with this cake, and they did not even think of looking for more. The families in the fort generally organized themselves into groups for dinner so that all might have share of the good things.

My first Christmas dinner in Utah was partaken of in 1848 in the old fort, at my Uncle Daniel's table. It was customary for everybody to cook the best they had on such occasions.

Plenty of vegetables had been raised and corn dried in the fall, and I am sure there must have been some kind of dessert. Our fruit consisted of serviceberries and chokecherries, which we gathered in the canyons.

In the early days sugar was scarce, and molasses was made from sugarcane, watermelons, and frozen squashes, the juices having been boiled down into a syrup.

Our amusements consisted mostly of dancing and having concerts. These exercises were always opened and closed with prayer. We never lacked for music or musicians, for we had both brass and martial bands.

As there was not money to buy presents, suitable mottoes were worked out on cardboard; gloves and mittens were knitted; and crochet work done. Rag dolls were made and dressed for the little girls, and sleds and wagons were made for the boys. The stockings were generally filled with homemade molasses candy, popcorn, sometimes a popcorn ball, a fried cake. These made the children very happy.

Our neighbors were remembered on that day by sending them some of our fare, or inviting them to eat with us. The poor were always remembered in a substantial way. The people raised their own beef and pork, and I think there was never a pig or a beef killed without a piece being sent to the nearest neighbors.

As the years went by, food and money were more easily obtained, and as a result the Christmas celebrations were a little more elaborate. As the menu for Christmas dinner in the various homes differs at the present time, so did it in the early days. Some had chicken or duck, others had pork or rabbit pie. Some had pumpkin pie or squash pie for dessert, others had currant or vinegar pie, while others had plum pudding made with spices, dried currants, and serviceberries.

For years, however, there were many families that did not have stockings to hang up on Christmas Eve, and the presents they received were laid on the mantel or by the plates at the breakfast table. In the families where the children did have stockings, they were hung on the mantel or on a string extending from the mantel to some article of furniture. The presents consisted of dried serviceberries and a little molasses candy, popcorn, etc. In later years the children found a few dried peaches, or apples, or a bow of ribbon. Sometimes the girls received hair ornaments made of velvet ribbon trimmed with beads. Hats made of braided wheat straw, and toys carved out of wood were also among the presents.

The fried cakes that were also important at Christmas time were made of saleratus, sour milk, and flour. The saleratus was obtained by the fathers and brothers from the shores of the Great Salt Lake. This was placed in water so that the sand which was scraped up with it would settle to the bottom. A certain quantity of this water was poured with sour milk and mixed with the flour, and rolled out on a board. The dough was cut in long strips, twisted, the ends fastened together and put in the hot fat to brown. The fat used was carefully saved bit by bit for days and days before Christmas. While the most fortunate Saints were enjoying the Christmas day with their families, they were not forgetting those in poverty or sickness. A bag of flour, a piece of pork, or a bit of cake was sent to the poor. The sick were given extra good food and special attention. The children ran from house to house shouting, `Christmas gift! Christmas gift!' although they did not expect a single gift to be given. They loved the joy that comes from mingling with each other.

A Story to Tell (Deseret Book Co., 1971).
