Ezra Taft Benson, Labor of Love: The 1946 European Mission of Ezra Taft Benson ( 1989)

FOREWORD

This is a story about love-the love of a man for the Lord; the love between a man and a woman and the support they give each other; the compassion of human beings one for another; the caring of the Brethren for a colleague an ocean away performing a mission of mercy; and God's overarching love above all.

In December 1945, Elder Ezra Taft Benson was called to serve as president of the European Mission. But this was no ordinary mission call. World War II had left the Church's organizational structure crippled, and almost all contact between Church headquarters and the European Saints had been severed during the long years of war. Many Saints had been driven from their homes, lost loved ones, and owned nothing more than what they wore on their backs. Some were in advanced stages of starvation.

Elder Benson's assignment was to travel throughout Europe, locate the Saints, direct the distribution of welfare supplies where needed, arrange for missionary work to commence again on the continent, and essentially try to repair the extensive spiritual, temporal, and emotional damage the war had caused the Saints there. This book tells the story of how it all unfolded.

Why focus a book on just one year?

Because the year selected is of such an unusual nature, and was so demanding for both President Benson and his wife, who was called on to support her husband and keep things running smoothly at home with their six children while he was in Europe, that their priorities and depth of testimonies come into clear focus. And because the essence of the gospel of Jesus Christ is poignantly displayed in one circumstance after another.

This book is an account of President Benson's mission of mercy to the European Saints. It tells the story of what he found there, of those he blessed and comforted, of Saints throughout the world who joined together to help each other in tragic circumstances, of those who offered invaluable support at home and abroad, and of a kind Providence who oversaw it all and poured out miracles.

After nearly eleven months in Europe, Elder Benson returned home. He summarized the remarkable experience he'd had: "Our great desire was to live so that the Lord would bless us in carrying out those directions, and I testify that the Lord has in very deed blessed us on every turn. He has gone before us. Barriers have melted away. Problems that seemed impossible to solve have been solved, and the work in large measure has been accomplished through the blessings of the Lord."

This book demonstrates that a testimony of Jesus Christ will prevail over something as terrible as war and bring the Saints through triumphant. It shows what happens when loving individuals in trying circumstances devote themselves to the Lord and to each other.
