Ezra Taft Benson, Labor of Love: The 1946 European Mission of Ezra Taft Benson ( 1989)

PROLOGUE: END OF WAR AND PREPARATION FOR MISSION

Tuesday, May 8, 1945: President Harry S Truman announced this morning at seven the official unconditional surrender of all German forces. (ETB Journal.)

President Heber J. Grant had the floodlights of the exterior of the Salt Lake Temple, darkened during the war, turned on. (Improvement Era, January 1946, page 10.)

Shortly after the close of World War II, President George Albert Smith was the President of the Church. The reports from Europe indicated great suffering among our people and the people generally. There was a shortage of food, clothing, fuel, transportation-a shortage of almost everything required for civilized living. (ETB Reminiscences.)

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Elder John A. Widtsoe reported that he had received a letter from the president of the northernmost branch of the Church in Narvik, Norway, who reported the destruction of his home and the death of his wife as a result of the bombing.

Near the close of his letter, this man said that if any of the Brethren had a pair of shoes or two of his size, he could use them very well. He said further that his children had no clothing. (ETB Reminiscences.)

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 18, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Most important of the steps being taken to lend spiritual and temporal succor to the Saints in the war-ravished countries was the appointment of two of the General Authorities to go immediately to Europe. Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Council of the Twelve and Elder Thomas E. McKay, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, both of whom have had wide experience in Europe, received this assignment from the First Presidency.

They expect to make contact with all European missions and to direct aid to individual Saints who are reported to be suffering from lack of food and clothing. Elders Widtsoe and McKay expect to be gone for several months, possibly a full year, on this assignment. They are to go alone as soon as the transportation can be arranged.

Other action to assure relief from suffering of members of the Church in Europe was taken this week by a committee of Church leaders assigned the task of finding ways and means to send food and clothing to those in need.

Already this week hundreds of packages containing needed food and clothing are being sent by mail to Europe. The full facilities of the Church welfare program, including its stocks of food, clothing, and bedding, are at the disposal of this committee to give aid to European Saints. The committee is also exhausting all possibilities of finding shipping space for large quantities of such items for the Saints of Europe. At present the packages, limited in weight by postal regulations, are being directed to branch presidents and some individuals in several European countries.

When larger stores are sent to Europe by the Church, it will be one of the tasks of Elders Widtsoe and McKay to direct distribution and facilitate the movement of the clothing and foodstuffs sent through the Church welfare program.

It is expected that the next few weeks will see several appointments of mission presidents to European countries for a full opening up of the missions there. The two General Authorities will assist these new presidents in the reorganization of their missions, help make contact with the Saints, and assist in the spiritual and temporal rehabilitation of 30,000 members of the Church in Europe. (Church News.)

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 27, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Hundreds of cartons are being rapidly filled with articles of clothing at Salt Lake Regional Bishops' Storehouse on Welfare Square for immediate shipment to Europe to fill a pressing need and alleviate the suffering of Saints in the war-torn countries.

This is an emergency step taken by Church leaders who were assigned by the First Presidency of the Church the task of finding ways and means to send food and clothing to those in need.

It was discovered upon investigation of the committee that one carton of commodities, not to exceed eleven pounds in weight, might be sent per week per person in certain areas in Europe, and immediate steps were taken to use this method to relieve suffering Saints until arrangements can be completed to transport food and clothing in shipload lots.

Facilities of the welfare program are functioning to supply items needed, and thousands of articles of made-over clothing and reclaimed shoes are being collected from storehouses from about the Church and from the Deseret Industries to supply this demand.

Writing to district and branch presidents in the stricken countries, the committee has now secured hundreds of names and addresses of Saints in the European missions, and the precious packages of clothing will be dispatched, one to each individual, later to be gathered by local Church officials and distributed to those who might make the best use of the contents of each carton.

Packages may now be sent to Denmark, France, Belgium, Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden, but as yet none may be delivered in Germany, Austria, or Czechoslovakia. No effort will be spared, however, by the committee to secure entry to these countries as well.

Letters continue to arrive daily telling of the dire straits in which Saints in Germany, particularly, are found, which lend urgency to the need for a smooth and complete functioning of the Church welfare program. (Church News.)

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 30-TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 1945:

WASHINGTON, D.C.

President George Albert Smith and a delegation of the Brethren traveled to Washington, D.C., to inquire firsthand about conditions in the various countries of Europe and how best to proceed in arranging for distribution of Church relief supplies.

They visited with Cabinet members and other national and international dignitaries, including Harry S Truman, President of the United States. President Truman was congenial and helpful; however, he was surprised at the response of the President of the Church when asked how much time would be required for the Church to collect items for distribution.

President Smith quickly replied, "We have already collected clothing and food and are ready at once to begin shipping supplies." He then explained the details of the Church welfare program. (ETB Reminiscences.)

SATURDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Perhaps the most critical need facing Europe is fuel. It is necessary that the little available be used for the running of the trains and the factories. Homes and dwelling places are not heated or heated poorly, and the slightest use of hot water is a luxury. There is little fuel even for cooking. In many of the overrun countries the stoves, pots, and pans, were taken by the Nazis for the making of munitions. Unless the people are immediately clothed against the cold winter, suffering will be intense.

Realizing that this is a real opportunity to help our brothers and sisters, the directing heads of the program are anxious that the best of clothing and shoes be donated. How bitter their disappointment will be, and how imprudent to waste time and money, if articles are sent that are not serviceable.

While the dire need for clothing and bedding is being met, food is also being shipped in increasing amounts during the winter. The harvest in Europe has been poor and small this fall. The diets of all have been meager and insufficient for adequate nutrition. The greatest need is for fats. Most of the fats available during the past war years have been used in the making of ammunition. The welfare program will endeavor to supply this lack through the various meat-producing projects. The second need is for vitamins. For some years at least two stakes have produced vitamins as their part of the budget assignment. In addition to their production, it will be necessary to make commercial purchases to supply the demand.

Little did the Prophet Joseph Smith realize when the Lord revealed to him the storehouse program for taking care of those in need that a hundred and fourteen years later it would mean the temporal salvation for his people in Europe. And little, too, did the members of the Church realize when the First Presidency announced in 1936the organization of the welfare program to assist the bishops and the branch presidents in the discharge of their duties "in searching after the poor to administer to their wants" that their work on welfare projects, in the production and storage of the necessities of life, would, in less than a decade, help to bring relief to a war-torn world. (Improvement Era, December 1945, page 747.)

SATURDAY, DECEMBER 22, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

President Smith called a special meeting of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve in their office. The Twelve were seated around the table with the First Presidency at the head at a cross table.

After the prayer President Smith referred to the fact that announcement had been made that Brothers Widtsoe and McKay would go to Europe, but he said that on further investigation they found conditions so bad in Europe that it would not be wise to send these two brethren, but to select a younger man.

Elder Harold B. Lee tells the story: "I began quickly to look around the table, speculating as to who would be called. One of the first men I eliminated was Elder Benson, who had the largest family as well as the youngest. I'd not quite made my survey around the table when President Smith announced that they had decided to call Elder Benson to go to Europe." (ETB Reminiscences.)

After outlining the magnitude of the job, President Smith announced that I had been chosen to go and preside over the European Mission and take charge also of the distribution of relief help for our people in those war-torn countries.

It came as a great shock, and I was asked what my wife would say to my leaving her with a young family. I assured the Brethren that I could always count on my wife's full support in any call from the Church.

The meeting then ratified unanimously President Smith's nomination. Now I am to put my affairs in order promptly and go to Washington, D.C., to try and get the necessary permit and transportation to England. (ETB Journal.)

President Smith said: "I am not at all concerned about you. You will be just as safe there as anywhere else in the world if you take care of yourself, and you will be able to accomplish a great work." (ETB Reminiscences.)

Later in a sweet and impressive talk with my wife, sanctified by tears, Flora expressed loving gratitude and assured me of her wholehearted support. At dinner I told the children, who were surprised, interested, and fully loyal. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

First notices that the welfare packages being sent to Europe by the Church for the relief of destitute members of the Church are being received in good condition-and are bringing happiness to many people-have been received this week at the Church Offices.

The first words of thanks received have come from Holland. This country was the first to which the packages of bedding, clothing, and foodstuffs were sent. All of the letters express thanks for the needed items, but also contain expressions of faith and thankfulness for the peace that has come.

Some interesting excerpts from the letters are printed herewith: "Utrecht, Holland-Thank you very much for all you have sent to help us. We have received your parcel (and also other members in our town) in good condition, and we are very thankful for all that you have sent-especially for the shoes, the soap, and the clothes for the children. We had shoes no more, but now we can go to our work and to church. Now we need not wash us with sand-soap, but with good American soap. We are also thankful to our Lord for what He has given us by your welfare committee. This year we have the best Christmas of the last six years."

It is estimated that a total of over 7,000 of these packages of clothing, bedding, and much needed articles have been sent from the Church welfare centers in America to the Latter-day Saint families in Europe. (Church News.)

SUNDAY, DECEMBER 30, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

I was told by the President that I could select my own secretary to go with me. I went through the list of returned missionaries of the past five years from Germany because I wanted someone who could speak German. Based on the records, I selected Frederick W. Babbel.

I did not know Brother Babbel-I'd never heard of him, but on inquiry found that he was in the military at the Presidio in San Francisco, California.

I got him on the telephone and asked him how he would like to go with me as my secretary and companion to Europe, without our wives, on an emergency mission of indefinite duration.

He immediately said, "I would be glad to go with you anywhere, Brother Benson!"

In two weeks we had him cleared for service in the Church. (ETB Reminiscences.)

MONDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1945:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

The next year will no doubt be spent in large measure, and possibly in its entirety, abroad. It will mean some sacrifice of material comforts. I will miss my wife and sweet children and the association of the Brethren and the visits to the stakes.

I go, however, with no fear whatsoever, knowing that this is the Lord's work and that He will sustain me. I am grateful for the opportunity, and deeply grateful my wife, who is always most loyal, feels the same way. God bless them while I am away. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, JANUARY 3-TUESDAY, JANUARY 8, 1946:

WASHINGTON, D.C.

Spent time in Washington, D.C., working on passports, transportation, etc., pertaining to my trip to Europe. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, JANUARY 4, 1946:

WASHINGTON, D.C.

The Lord has surely opened the way today. I've not only seen the officials at the Department of State, but got my passport, which usually takes thirty days, and visas for Great Britain, France, and Holland, which usually takes days. (ETB to FAB.)

TUESDAY, JANUARY 22, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Office. Evening attended a party of the General Authorities in the Lion House, where Elders Kimball, Petersen, Cowley, and myself rendered three quartet numbers. It was a lovely party, and kind reference was made in word, song, and prayer to my forthcoming trip. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, JANUARY 27, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

I shall never forget this Sabbath day. After the morning at the office and a dinner at home with just the family, we all gathered in the study for a little sacred period together.

After singing "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," Reed, my oldest son, led in prayer. I then gave a few words of counsel and commendation, and then I gave each child a blessing as the Spirit directed.

I invited Reed and Mark to lay on hands with me as we blessed little Beth, seventeen months. Then we put her in for her nap, after which I blessed each child starting with the oldest, and then blessed my devoted wife, Flora.

We shed many tears of gratitude, even to the youngest one present-Bonnie, age five. We all felt strongly the sweet influence of the Spirit of the Lord with us. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, JANUARY 28, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Office all day. Last-minute preparations for European trip. Some good-byes were said and much love expressed.

Had a sweet visit with President George F. Richards, and as we parted we kissed each other a fond good-bye. He is a great soul. God bless him forever. How I pray I may see him on my return and live worthy of his association in the eternal worlds.

The First Presidency, with President Smith as voice, set me apart. Flora was present. [See Appendix for text of blessing.] (ETB Journal.)

After the setting apart, the Presidency greeted us warmly, and President Clark spoke encouragingly and in praise of Flora. Among other things, he said, in response to her statement regarding devoted women of the past, "There is none better than you."

How true he spoke, for truly in all my acquaintances I have never met a more completely devoted woman with greater faith in the purposes of the Almighty or with a stronger testimony of the truth or a greater desire to do everything in her power to build up the kingdom of God on the earth. (ETB Journal.)

Spent a pleasant evening with the five junior members of the Twelve and their wives in the home of President J. Reuben Clark. Flora and I were shown much love and affection, and our hearts had much to be grateful for. (ETB Journal.)
