Ezra Taft Benson, Labor of Love: The 1946 European Mission of Ezra Taft Benson ( 1989)

PART 1:

DEPARTURE AND MISSION

TUESDAY, JANUARY 29, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Today will always be remembered with deep gratitude. I spent most of the day at the office. Many called to wish me Godspeed on my mission. Everyone is so kind—neighbors, friends, the Brethren, etc. Many have brought gifts.

I was in conferences with members of the First Presidency several times. How I love them and appreciate their love and confidence. May I ever be worthy of it.

Several of the Brethren have wanted to drive me to the airport, but I've accepted Brother Lee's invitation. I feel so close to him—a boyhood schoolmate and beloved associate. I had dinner and sweet devotion with the family at home and packed up my bags, received callers, completed details, and entertained many soul-satisfying thoughts.

At 9:40 P.M. good-byes were said to my three daughters—Barbara, Beverly, Bonnie—and son Mark. We were sobbing with sweet emotion. We also called Reed at Provo and talked until we both choked up. I had previously hugged little Beth good-bye as she put her sweet little arms around my neck. (ETB Journal.)

When our daddy kissed and said good-bye to five of his children, they all cried and clung to him because of the great love they have for him. Our son, Reed, is attending school at BYU in Provo. His daddy called him long distance, and they were both so happy to talk to each other and say good-bye with much love and appreciation for each other. (FAB Journal.)

Leaving my children in tears pulled at my heartstrings, but there was not a murmur nor complaint. They are surely true blue.

May the Lord keep and bless my loved ones forever. I leave them in His kind and loving care with gratitude and confidence that He will ever be near them. (ETB Journal.)

Just before my husband's departure President George Albert Smith came to our home to say good-bye to my husband. He kissed him in fond embrace. (FAB Journal.)

Brother and Sister Harold B. Lee called for us at 10:00 P.M. and drove us to the airport where, to our surprise, we found Brothers and Sisters Spencer W. Kimball, Mark E. Petersen, Matthew Cowley, and others.

I bade my dear wife and friends a fond adieu. It was most difficult to tell my sweet and ever-loyal wife good-bye. (ETB Journal.)

It was a peaceful feeling which came over me when I fondly kissed and said good-bye to my devoted and loving husband. (FAB Journal.)

On the plane, as I reflected on the scenes of the last few days, I quietly shed tears of gratitude as we soared eastward on the plane. (ETB Journal.)

Our beloved father and husband left by plane to take up his duties as president of the European Mission. This is an exceedingly great call, and we as a family feel that our devoted father and husband was rightly chosen by the Lord to be called to this great and important work.

He shall be able to do a great and mighty work with the Lord as his constant companion. I don't know of a man that lives closer to the Lord than does my good husband. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 30, 1946:

NORTH PLATTE, NEBRASKA

At 6:00 A.M. we were grounded in North Platte due to bad weather. After careful checking and prayerful consideration, we decided to seek train space to Chicago. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, JANUARY 31, 1946:

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, AND NEW YORK CITY

At Chicago the next morning, the president of the Chicago Stake met us with flight tickets on the plane to New York.

Upon arriving in New York, we learned that the flight from New York to London was being postponed from Friday until the following day. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 1946:

NEW YORK CITY

Our flight was postponed twice today because of bad weather. It now appears we'll not leave until Sunday morning.

Spent the day making preparations and contacting foreign consuls and departments of government. (ETB Journal.)

Arrangements have now been consummated whereby relief supplies may be sent in carload lots instead of individual gift packages as has been the practice. Several active relief agencies of other denominations and societies have pledged their full cooperation with the Church program and have expressed their admiration for the farsighted program that has been launched by the Church. (ETB to FAB.)

Today I had my first experience with a puncture on the car. I am beginning to realize that our daddy's absence is being greatly missed in so many ways, but we know it is the will of the Lord for him to go to the far countries of Europe to help those poor, suffering, worthy Saints, after such a terrible war, and to preach the glorious gospel to those who have not heard its truths. (FAB Journal.)

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1946:

NEW YORK CITY AND GANDER, NEWFOUNDLAND

We arrived at the airport, checked with baggage and express agencies and customs, and left in a four-motored Clipper.

Weather was quite calm, after two days of storm, as we skirted the coast of Maine and Massachusetts and on up the coast to Gander, Newfoundland.

Two motors had been running "rough," so we stopped for checking and replacing spark plugs before starting across the Atlantic.

The ride was rough in spots, and some little anxiety was felt as we watched the engineer flash lights onto the two rough motors throughout the night as though all was not right.

We traveled blind part of the way. Sometimes it would clear until we could see the stars above and the water waves below, and then we'd go into clouds and have it a bit rough for a spell. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 1946:

IRELAND AND LONDON, ENGLAND

We landed in Ireland on the banks of the River Shannon. After a breakfast of porridge, bacon, and eggs, we looked over the countryside while the mechanics took water from the magneto and then left for London.

Upon arrival in England, we checked regarding passports and with customs, had lunch (rather skimpy), and drove to the railway station, where we left by train for London. (ETB Journal.)

Along the way we observed many areas and buildings devastated by bombings, but the trip to the British Mission headquarters, which took us through one of the more severely bombed districts of London, forcibly arrested our attention to the destructiveness and futility of war.

It was indeed a happy moment to be greeted by President and Sister Hugh B. Brown and family, now supervising the activities of the British Mission, and to find them well and cheerful in spite of all of them having suffered somewhat as a result of the influenza epidemic that is becoming quite widespread.

In receiving a report of the British Mission, it was learned that most of the British Saints have weathered the terrific strain of war years and are still loyal and devoted to the Church.

People generally are quite downcast and apprehensive of the future. Many express fears of an even more terrible conflagration in the near future, but the Saints as a whole are quite optimistic and cheerful.

Although members are still in a scattered condition, the casualties of war among our members have been quite nominal. All are eagerly looking forward to the day when missionaries will again return to their midst.

Food and clothing are being severely rationed, and living conditions are much more critical than during the last year of the war. The many packages received by the Saints through the Church welfare program have filled a very great need and have given the Saints new hope and courage.

Much distress has been alleviated through the Church welfare program, and the packages which the Saints have received and are daily receiving have manifested in very deed the brotherly love and affection that binds the Church together. Grateful appreciation from Saints in all parts of the mission is being expressed daily.

It is difficult to understand the vast difference in conditions in America and in England without seeing and experiencing it. Food, clothing, and housing are desperately critical. Many people have become quite pessimistic and somewhat discouraged. Helpless indifference has replaced the usually cheerful disposition of some, but the Saints as a whole are quite outstanding for their resolute courage and faith in the future. (European Mission History.)

The contrast of conditions here with conditions in the States makes one feel that he is truly in another world. Everything seems short—including patience. England has truly felt the effects of this terrible war. (European Mission History.)

I received my first letter from my precious husband. It was a grand, spiritual, uplifting letter. I am so thankful to be blessed with such a righteous man whose life has been and is a perfect example of all that is virtuous, clean, honest, fine and manly—wanting always for his wife and children to be cared for in the best manner, wanting them to have the best he can provide. The most treasured possession which he leaves his family is a wonderful heritage. Above all, he wants his family to have a strong testimony of the gospel. He would and his wife would rather be penniless and be poor in this world's goods than to lose our faith and testimony in the gospel. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

First day in London. After a breakfast of thinned fruit juice and porridge, we left for the city. We first registered with the police, then called at the American Embassy.

We next visited the Commanding General of the United Kingdom Base Section regarding army vehicles and learned they are all "frozen." Visit was pleasant and profitable.

Spent evening dictating and writing letters. Received today the most soul-satisfying and inspiring letter from Flora. She is a great soul and as nearly perfect as I can imagine a companion to be. (ETB Journal.)

Brother Anderson from the Church offices (private secretary to President George Albert Smith) called and told me that the General Authorities had just received a telegram that our dear husband and daddy and his secretary arrived safely in London, England. Brother Anderson said it was impossible for them to telephone or cable to us in Salt Lake because of strikes. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

In view of the limitations on fuel, lights, food, all types of supplies, and in fact most everything, together with the fact that President Brown and family are already crowded, it seemed best not to try and squeeze in with them if we can get other quarters. Then, too, I believe we will operate most efficiently during the ensuing few months especially if we can be in the business section close to transportation concerns and government agencies with whom we will need to deal rather frequently. (European Mission History.)

Left early for the city, where we visited several prospective office and living quarters. The rents are exorbitantly high, and yet we must be in a respectable neighborhood near the agencies with which we will have to deal if we are to be most efficient.

We finally settled on a ground floor flat in the Mayfair section, only a block from Grosvenor Square where the American Embassy and other U.S. offices are located.

Visited officials at the embassy and made arrangements to use U.S. American Transport Command (ATC) planes for transportation to Continental countries, where they operate, and in other cases the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC). (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Moved into our flat. (ETB Journal.)

We are quite comfortably located. Our flat consists of two bedrooms, a bath, and a sitting room. We plan to use the facilities as a combination living quarters and offices. I believe they will serve very adequately for the immediate months ahead.

Although in our search for a place we received nothing but discouragement—and on our first day our efforts were entirely futile—yet the Lord blessed us, and on the second day we had a choice of four different flats which were available to us. Prices are exorbitant. To the average Britisher the word American is synonymous with wealth. We are, however, learning a few safeguards and ways to economize. (ETB to FAB.)

In the evening accepted invitation of President and Sister Brown and enjoyed a Tchaikovsky concert by the London Philharmonic Orchestra in the Royal Albert Hall. The place was practically filled. There are seven floor levels. It was a brilliant and inspiring performance. Thank the Lord for great music!

While at the musical, received one of Flora's encouraging and soul-satisfying letters. (ETB Journal.)

Today I missed three parties I was invited to. The children's health and keeping the home in order are far more important than parties.

President J. Reuben Clark talked to me over the phone and said to let him know if he could do anything for me at any time. He said I was the most independent woman he ever knew. He said, "It's the hardest thing to get the chance to do anything for you!" (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Conferences today with agricultural attache for the United Kingdom; also with European news manager of United Press. Conferred with several officials at American Embassy regarding transportation to continental Europe. Later I talked to Paris regarding purchase of autos for mission presidents and purchase of a French Mission headquarters, etc. Made plans for trip to the Continent next week. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

In cooperation with the priorities division of the American Embassy, I received priorities for airplane travel to Paris and return. Also obtained necessary British visas and tickets on ATC planes.

I obtained my food ration book. We had dinner in our rooms from food allowed from our rations consisting of bread, butter, cheese, jam, milk, and one-third of a candy bar. We enjoyed it much. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

In office in study. Talked on telephone with acting president of Danish Mission, Orson B. West. This was his first contact with anyone from Zion. His first words were, "God bless you. Welcome to Europe!" (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND PARIS, FRANCE

Reported at office of European Air Transport Service (EATS) and was driven to the airport. After clearing customs, passport section, etc., I boarded a C-54 ATC plane with eleven other passengers, all male, and left London for Paris. The plane was an army transport with a metal bench along each side and no conveniences except parachutes.

In one hour and forty-five minutes we arrived in Paris via Dieppe. (ETB Journal.)

The day was spent in trying to purchase surplus army cars for use of mission presidents, inspecting property for a possible mission home for the French Mission, and visiting Saints. (ETB Journal.)

The history and progress of the French Mission during the war years was given by Brother Jean Kleinert, who carried on in charge of the Church activities in Paris. It was learned that the Saints as a whole are quite well and anxiously looking forward to the return of missionaries to labor among them.

Many Church welfare packages have been received by the members and have filled a very great need for food and clothing, which is still very critical. Most of the members are now quite well provided with bedding and clothing, but the need for additional food is still quite apparent.

Missionary work has been carried on quite effectively during the course of the war, chiefly through the efforts of the splendid servicemen's group in Paris. Most of the servicemen have now left the Paris area. Those who remain, however, are continuing to do a splendid missionary work. (European Mission History.)

Today I received a lovely box of chocolates sent by my husband from New York just before he flew for London, England. The card said, "To the loveliest most loyal companion in all the world. Am thinking of you my last night in the good old USA. Lovingly. 'T'" (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE

Completed arrangements for the purchase of seven one-half-ton Dodge pick-up trucks and arranged to drive one to Holland tomorrow. (ETB Journal.)

Sister Spencer W. Kimball called to ask me to go to the show with her tonight. It was kind of her, but I felt I should stay home.

Sister Mark E. Petersen called and asked if I would go to a basketball game with her. I thanked her also for her thoughtfulness. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE

Arose early and worked in room for an hour. We checked on several matters incident to our trip to The Hague in Holland. Spent most of morning arranging with the military authorities for gas to drive the one car to Holland.

We planned to start on our journey, but a careful checking showed the front bearings of the car badly worn and unfit to drive. We made arrangements for train travel in the morning. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE, AND THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS

Left Paris and arrived in Brussels, Belgium, on a good train. Left Brussels on a modern Belgian train and arrived at Antwerp, where we changed to a local, old-fashioned German short-car train. (ETB Journal.)

Rail conditions are still very bad on the Continent. It was necessary to change trains several times and to take an army truck on one stretch where bridges had been blown up and on which repair had not yet been completed.

The train from Antwerp to The Hague was a small, rickety, flat-wheeled model that showed signs of having been reclaimed from the scrap heap. Fortunately it held together and brought us safely to our destination. (European Mission History.)

The visits today with men on the train and in buses revealed the terrible conditions through which Holland has passed during the past five years. Young men spoke freely of the underground army of which they were members and of the hard but willing toil of their wives, mothers, and sisters.

I am greatly impressed with the quality of character of the Netherlands people. They have suffered much but seem cheerful and determined to come back. Many of them speak English from contact with the Yanks, but more from study as the children who go on with their education beyond thirteen are required to learn English, French, and German.

Much damage has been wrought in Rotterdam and The Hague particularly, and in fields near the cities one can see shell craters. Some have been filled in already; others were being filled as we passed, but even where crops have been planted the outline is still to be seen. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1946:

THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS, AND COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

After early breakfast at the Officers' Club, went to American Embassy. The transportation priorities man went with me to the KLM office, where we secured tickets.

Later I met with the mission presidency of Holland for over an hour. (ETB Journal.)

In checking on the history of the mission during the war, it was learned that the Saints have been very loyal and cooperated very closely with their leaders even under the most adverse conditions. The chapel in Rotterdam was destroyed, but the former mission headquarters at The Hague can be quickly repaired as soon as glass is available.

Great ingenuity on the part of the local brethren appointed to take charge of the mission was necessary in order to protect most of the Church property and funds from being confiscated by the German government. Nearly everything retained had to be cleverly concealed, and President Schipaanboord related many instances where his own life and that of some of the members was placed in jeopardy through the actions they found necessary to take in order to protect the property.

Brother P. Vlan was a German prisoner of war for nearly two years, during which time he converted six of his fellow prisoners to the gospel—all of whom are taking an active part in the mission. (European Mission History.)

Much of the critical need for food, clothing, and bedding has been filled through the generous number of relief packages received by the Saints from the Church welfare project. Food is still severely rationed, and many items of clothing are still quite difficult to obtain. (European Mission History.)

The consular's driver drove us to the airport in Amsterdam, where we took a plane for Copenhagen.

We went to the mission home, where we were received warmly. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

This has been an interesting and profitable day. This morning we visited the famous Cathedral of Copenhagen (State Lutheran Church) or My Lady's Church, as it is also called. Here we saw the famous marble works by Thorvaldsen, Denmark's greatest sculptor, of Christ and the Twelve Apostles done in Rome 1820-40. We also saw in the two vestries "The Baptism of Christ" and "The Institution of the Last Supper."

I was interviewed by a man from the state-owned radio station who recorded our conversation which was broadcast to Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. (ETB Journal.)

Conditions generally in this mission are favorable. The most serious shortage is fuel. The welfare packages have been received and deeply appreciated. Food in Denmark is more plentiful now than probably any other war-torn country in Europe, and even during the war years our Saints did not go hungry. There seems now to be plenty of food, clothing, and bedding, except for linen, and of course this is scarce in most nations, including the United States.

None of the products received have entered the "black market," which is limited almost entirely to tobacco, liquors, and wines. During the war this mission fixed up many packages and sent them to the distressed Saints in Norway and Holland. This is but one indication of the close bond which exists between the Saints in the Scandinavian countries.

Membership has steadily increased, and the tithing of the Saints in the mission has more than doubled. (European Mission History.)

The Saints are in excellent physical and spiritual health. Everywhere we found an enthusiastic spirit of optimism. They are hopeful and are living the gospel more fully than ever before. During the occupation, only one of our members (inactive) was imprisoned; however, two of our Saints—a man and his wife without family—were shot as traitors by the underground movement in 1944 for, it is claimed, selling information to the enemy.

There are a few German refugee Saints still in Denmark. They are given sufficient freedom to permit them to attend our services regularly. (European Mission History.)

The outlook for missionary work in Denmark is good. During the war ten local missionaries were active throughout the mission, and their efforts were most successful. People are much more friendly toward the Church than ever before, and it appears that we are now becoming known for what we are and not for what our enemies have said about us. (European Mission History.)

At the bishops' storehouse on Welfare Square this week four carloads of food and clothing were loaded outbound for New York where it will be shipped—two carloads to Norway and two to Holland to alleviate in a measure the suffering in those countries. Subsequent shipments are planned for the needy in other areas.

Two cars were loaded with canned fruit, vegetables, and milk, and the other two with articles of clothing of all kinds necessary to the comfort of the recipients.

The canned food was packed in strong wooden boxes secured by the General Welfare Committee from the ordinance plant in Tooele. Originally used for the transportation of shell cases, they will now carry food to Europe, insuring its transportation and delivery in good shape. Such boxes may furnish a twofold purpose in that, having served the initial purpose, they may then be used for fuel in countries where that commodity is scarce indeed. (Church News.)

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

I shall always have sweet memories of this day with the Saints in Copenhagen. Never have I witnessed greater devotion to the work and deeper love for the leaders of the Church.

At Sunday School the entire congregation stood as I entered. Then the president of the Copenhagen Branch welcomed me in fine English. The president of the mission Relief Society then presented me with a large bouquet of red tulips and white lilacs. I could not hold back the tears.

I spoke briefly to the children through an interpreter and took most of the class period to speak to the adults. There were 158 present. I blessed five sisters during the day.

At the evening service there were 515 present—at least 200 of whom were nonmembers. They were most attentive as I spoke for forty minutes on the Restoration. The music was beautiful. (ETB Journal.)

Before leaving this city, we visited the archives and the nearby city of Koge, the birthplace of Sister Benson's father. As a result of these visits, new genealogical information was uncovered and arrangements made with one of the local Church researchers to carry on with the work. Permission has now been secured to photograph on microfilm all of the genealogical records in this nation, and the Genealogical Society of the Church is now preparing to accomplish this work. (European Mission History.)

President George Albert Smith called by phone this evening to see how we were getting along. He said my husband had written him from London a fine letter. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK, AND STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

We drove about the city of Copenhagen, saw the famous Mermaid and the residential areas. After a good dinner at the mission home, we boarded the train for Stockholm, Sweden. It was hard to leave the dear Saints who have been so very kind to me the last three days. It seems I've known them for years. I shall never forget their kindness. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

We arrived in snow-covered Stockholm. During the day I held three press conferences with representatives of local leading papers. We were received kindly, and most favorable stories appeared in each case.

We held a public meeting with 200 people present, about 50 of whom were nonmembers. I spoke for thirty-five minutes through an interpreter and after the meeting stood at the door at the request of the people and shook hands with each. (ETB Journal.)

The fuel shortage in Sweden has been the biggest single problem. It is still very acute. Many colds have resulted throughout the mission, but no serious epidemics have been encountered.

The day before our arrival was the first day people were allowed to heat water for bathing.

Food seems to be quite plentiful, and most of the Saints are now quite adequately supplied with most items of bedding and clothing. All express their appreciation for the assistance that has been rendered by the kindness of Saints at home.

It was learned that the Saints in Sweden had done much to help the Saints in Norway and Finland during the war by sending them items of food and clothing as often as was permissible.

The spiritual condition of our members is very fine. At the present time they have ten local members working as full-time missionaries, and the results have been most gratifying. Tithing has shown an increase of 300 percent during the war, of which amount a large portion has been paid by an increase of 50 percent in the number of Saints paying tithing. (European Mission History.)

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

This day we held a glorious meeting with the nine missionaries, branch presidents, and the mission president's family. I heard from each of those present.

The missionaries who have served full time for two years bore solemn testimony to the divinity of the work. All of us shed tears of gratitude as we were moved by the richness of the Spirit present.

We were especially touched by the opening remarks of President Fritz Johansson, who has served through the war years as acting mission president. He is small of stature but has a heart as big as the world. During last night and in the meeting, I felt impressed to call him to go on a mission to Finland as there were many people there who would accept the truth. (ETB Journal.)

The Church has one small branch in Finland. These Saints have been grievously impoverished by the war and are finding the welfare packages most helpful. C. Fritz Johansson was called to go as a missionary to Finland, to take a companion, and if possible to establish the work there so additional missionaries might be sent to this land to preach the gospel. It is hoped that this may lead to opening this land for increased missionary activities. (European Mission History.)

After taking some pictures and enjoying lunch, smorgasbord style, I spent two or three hours with the new and returning mission presidents and completed plans for the missionary work in Finland where we have a few members.

After dinner we walked to the railroad station with a large concourse of missionary Saints. They sang songs and bade us a fond farewell.

Never have I become more attached to any people in so short a time. May the Lord ever bless these faithful souls. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN, AND OSLO, NORWAY

Arose early as the train stopped at the Norway-Sweden border. Was checked by customs of both countries. Water on the train was frozen solid.

Arrived in Oslo, Norway, and was greeted by Brother A. Richard Peterson, newly appointed mission president, and members of his family and those associated with him.

Attended a public meeting of the Oslo Branch and spoke through an interpreter for forty minutes. The choir and orchestra were unusually fine. There were 358 present—about 200 nonmembers. I shook hands with everyone at the door as they left. (ETB Journal.)

Here, as in other missions, very effective proselyting work has been carried on during the war and at the present time through local missionaries. More people have become converted to the gospel during the war years than in any other similar period of time, and the opportunities for a rich harvest are very bright. (European Mission History.)

The food situation in this and in other countries will no doubt improve greatly by next fall, providing of course that we have a favorable growing season this summer and fall. Until that time the food situation will likely become more acute all over Europe.

The Saints would welcome some packaged starches for cooking and laundry use and also some Cream of Wheat cereals for use of the children. Fats and jams have been particularly appreciated and could be profitably used in larger quantities.

An amusing thing happened when some of the Saints commented, on seeing the dried corn, that the General Authorities were most thoughtful in sending grain for the birds. They have, however, learned how to use corn in the diet. We learned also that one parcel had a package of cigarettes enclosed, which caused some amusement. (European Mission History.)

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 1946:

OSLO, NORWAY, AND COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

After breakfast we went to the Royal Air Force (RAF) office and then drove up on the mountain to the ski jump and got a good view of the city. Left Oslo for Copenhagen.

Our ride was the coldest I ever expect to make. There was no heat in the plane, and at 6,000 feet with ice, snow, and water below, it was a cold ride. Some of the men took their shoes off and rubbed their feet to keep the blood circulating. I kept my feet moving constantly for two hours and fared fairly well. (ETB Journal.)

In all of the missions visited to date, it is impossible to move funds out of the country either to America or to any European country. Some of the missions, particularly in the case of Norway, have had considerable difficulty holding onto our funds during the war period. In some cases the funds had to be shifted from bank to bank many times.

Mission literature generally is very much depleted. In all of the Scandinavian missions, I found the leadership and the members very anxious to have the Doctrine and Covenants in complete form translated into their respective languages, or at least into one of the three languages which might be used by all three of the missions.

During the war period, local missionaries—called for a period of two or more years—have performed an outstanding service. It has seemed to me during our visit in Europe thus far that, with the world in such an unsettled condition, we should ever keep in mind the training of local leadership in preparation for any future emergency which may again leave our missions without leadership from Zion.

The general condition of the Saints is much improved each day. Spiritually it has been good throughout the war and was perhaps never better than it is now. Mission leaders everywhere report that in their experience the Saints have never so completely lived the law of tithing and kept the Word of Wisdom and otherwise maintained the standards of the Church. While the Saints have been called upon to endure hardships almost beyond description in many cases, yet they have remained hopeful and optimistic, even during occupation of their countries by a foreign enemy when at times they feared for their very lives. (European Mission History.)

Traveling in unheated planes registering temperatures as low as twenty degrees below zero and in unheated trains across the snow-covered landscape of the Scandinavian countries is all part of the day's work in our tour of the European missions. (European Mission History.)

But in every instance we were greeted upon arrival with such love and warmth of spirit that any hardships encountered in our travels were soon forgotten. Probably the gospel has never been so fully appreciated by the Saints in Europe as during the recent war period. Already we have come to love them deeply, and I am sure we cannot say enough in praise of their devotion to the truth and their love of the General Authorities of the Church. (European Mission History.)

Yale Ward reunion and dinner. It was very successful. I worked long and hard. (FAB Journal.)

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

We have been held in Copenhagen all day due to the storm. At the airport all morning expecting to leave any time. The Danish airport officials made a desk available, so we got some work done. The afternoon was spent in study and rest at the mission home. In the evening I spoke to the Saints here for an hour through an interpreter. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Left Copenhagen by plane and arrived in London. Stopped at British Mission office and picked up an armful of mail. Later spent the late afternoon and evening reading mail and dictating answers.

The sweet letters from my wife and children, all valentines from home, brought tears of joy and gratitude. (ETB Journal.)

Sent four packages to London to my husband. One was an eleven-pound box of soap, two boxes of candy, and one book. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

In London business district most of day working on passport, visas, transportation, customs, etc. Also made tentative arrangements to purchase an auto for use here and in the British Mission. Dictated and mailed twenty-five letters. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1946:

LONDON ENGLAND

London office dictating and working with customs, import licensing, and Fenton and Company regarding office supplies. Believe we have finally made our way through the tangle of red tape so our supplies, all of no commercial value and for relief and religious use, can be released. (European Mission History.)

The food situation in Europe is becoming more critical daily. The headlines this morning indicate that the rations in the British-occupied area have been ordered cut one-half—to 1,000 calories daily. Government officials here fear that riots and epidemics will follow.

My heart goes out to the Saints in the military areas. I am hopeful that before long the military authorities will amend their regulations to permit shipment of food and clothing into these areas. (ETB to FAB.)

FRIDAY, MARCH 1, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Transportation, welfare, and customs matters occupied most of the day. I talked with General McNarney's office in Frankfurt regarding possibility of getting relief into Germany to our Saints. Also conferred at length with two army and navy officers who have just returned from Bremen and Berlin.

It is difficult to realize that agencies are forbidden to ship food into the occupied areas when people there are starving. (ETB Journal.)

It now appears that we will be able to place several cars of food and clothing in one of our own buildings where we have a family of our own people living who can assure the safety of the commodities stored. We have to be continually on the alert because of the extensive pilfering and stealing in all parts of Europe. (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, MARCH 3, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND DIEPPE, ROUEN, AND PARIS, FRANCE

Left by boat-train for Paris after an unsuccessful attempt to take the plane earlier in the day. As we boarded the boat, we discovered that our first-class sleeping accommodations consisted of double-deck bunks placed end to end in groups of forty in what used to be lounging rooms.

The first-class passengers who followed us in the long line were either required to sleep in seats or required to stand all night after available seating space was used.

After all passengers were placed, we were able to secure very meager accommodations in a makeshift state room and crossed the Channel in comparative comfort. (ETB to FAB.)

Arrived at Dieppe, France. After a two-hour stop for customs, immigration, etc., we left for Paris.

As we went through Rouen, we saw on every side the ravages of war—bridges, highways, cathedrals, homes, etc., laid waste. We could see countless islands of black holes in the green pastures where bombs had missed their railway target.

Rebuilding has started, but years will be required to do the job. Dieppe Harbor was blown up by the retreating forces and is largely rubble. (ETB Journal.)

Dieppe, France, the scene of the European Theater's first commando raid, presented a desolate scene of bombing and destruction. Little reconstruction work has been undertaken thus far, and this scene was repeated in city after city as we rode on the train in Paris. The recent world conflict has left marks of devastation that may never be erased. Most of the passenger and railroad bridges have been destroyed, necessitating travel on hastily constructed wooden bridges. (European Mission History.)

We arrived at Paris and in an army truck were taken to the meeting of the Saints, where the meeting was already underway. I spoke to the thirty-five people assembled through an interpreter. (ETB Journal.)

Paris has recorded the heaviest snowfall since 1867, and many other areas in Europe find this sudden change in the weather very distressing because of the acute fuel shortage. (ETB to FAB.)

MONDAY, MARCH 4, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE

Conferred today with government and transportation officials regarding purchase of two autos and transportation to other European countries. Also saw properties being proposed as French Mission home and office.

The city of Paris is a mass of slush following the fourteen-inch snow which set a record of many decades. (ETB Journal.)

Sister Matthias Cowley called. She is a grand spiritual lady. She is a temple worker. She reminds me so much of my dear sweet mother. She is an inspiration, and we had a nice chat over the phone. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, MARCH 8, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE

Completed purchase of auto and took delivery of Citroen (four cylinders) at the Citroen Company. Drove car to various business conferences in Paris. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, MARCH 9, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE, AND BASEL, SWITZERLAND

Left Paris for Basel, Switzerland, by way of Verdun and Mannheim. At the latter place we stopped at the U.S. army base to have a tire fixed and eat lunch.

All along the way we saw heavy tanks and other equipment used in the Battle of the Bulge. Considerable bomb damage was in evidence in many of the cities, although the lovely fertile fields presented a most satisfying view. It was interesting to note the rural villages with home and barn in the same building and large well-built manure piles in each front yard. (ETB Journal.)

We arrived in Basel after passing French and Swiss customs and immigration officials and went to mission headquarters.

Switzerland, free from wars for 150 years, seems almost a different world. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, MARCH 10, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND, AND KARLSRUHE, GERMANY

This day will stand out in my memory for years to come. It is my first day in the occupied areas of Germany.

After having some minor repairs made on the car, we left Basel for Karlsruhe via Freiburg and Offenburg. It was a pleasant ride through the picturesque and fertile fields, but my heart was made heavy as we drove through towns and cities leveled to the ground as a result of war. Occupation troops were everywhere. (ETB Journal.)

Along the way were scenes of horrible destruction. Many cities stand in almost complete ruin. The city of Freiburg presents a vast amount of devastation, and this scene was multiplied many times along the way.

People were going in groups to church, and we noticed especially that many of the children fled in terror at the approach of a car or at the sound of the horn. There was much evidence, however, that these people are clearing the ruins and rebuilding their cities and homes as rapidly as their meager supplies will permit. Not months, but years and decades will be required to do the job. (ETB to FAB.)

As we neared Karlsruhe, we entered the American Zone of occupation. Near the city were large pill boxes in small artificially made mounds which had been blown up by Allied bombs. It was heartrending to see beautiful Karlsruhe in ruins.

As we turned in the street where the meeting was to be held, it looked as if there was no building available to hold a meeting in—all seemed a pile of rubble. But by going back some distance, we finally located the place—a large building somewhat damaged from the bombing.

As we walked into the meeting, which had been in session for over one-and-a-half hours, every eye turned to us. I shall never forget the look on their faces as they beheld, for the first time in years, a representative of the General Authorities. It was not me, but the fact that a representative from headquarters had arrived—a time they'd all looked forward anxiously for during the long years of terrible war. (ETB Journal.)

The hall was filled beyond capacity, there being about 260 friends and members present, most of whom clearly reflected the stark horror and destruction through which they have passed. Yet their upturned faces shone forth with a warmth and appreciation that brought tears to our eyes.

This meeting in the Karlsruhe District of the West German Mission is the first meeting in the mission at which a member of the General Authorities has been in attendance since war began nearly seven years ago.

After the meeting we went to the door and shook hands with every person in attendance, and it was gratifying to see the look of faith and devotion that lighted their faces as they felt our warmth and sincere love for this people.

During the conference it was learned that many of our Saints have sustained great losses. Many are without adequate shelter, clothing, or food.

One family with two adopted children is living together in an unheated single room without water or cooking facilities. Nearly ninety percent of the city of Pforzheim, in which they formerly lived, was completely destroyed. Many of our members there were killed, and those who survived the annihilation bombings found themselves homeless and destitute.

During one night's bombing at Hamburg, twenty-seven of our members were killed, and on successive nights of bombing many more were either killed or rendered homeless.

The terrific bombardment of this country has destroyed the meetinghouses in all but a very few branches. Where no meeting halls are available, the Saints are doing their best to hold services in the homes of those members who were not bombed out.

The strain of inadequate housing, heating, food, and clothing is beginning to tell on our people. One of the critical problems that is being considered is that of trying to arrange some place for the many Saints to stay who are fleeing from the Russian Zone as refugees to Berlin. Reports were given that many are coming without food, without adequate clothing, and some trudging through the wintry snows barefooted.

Some of these refugees are dying in spite of all efforts being made on the part of the American-occupied zone to arrange wherever possible to house and feed these people. Being refugees, they are not permitted entrance into the other areas, and no arrangement is made for them to secure either food or clothing. Two projects for the temporary relief of Church members are being supervised by the mission headquarters in Berlin, but the large number of such refugees is making these facilities woefully inadequate.

We were caused to marvel at the devotion and faith of these good people. More members than ever before are paying their tithes and offerings and taking advantage of every means of association that is afforded by the Church. All the branches and districts are doing their utmost to care not only for themselves but for their brethren as well.

Last Friday a baptism was held in Bielefeld at which eleven new members entered the waters of baptism. It was necessary to cut a large hole through the ice on the river to serve as a baptismal font. Eleven other members were baptized the following night in Karlsruhe. The work throughout the mission seems to be well organized in spite of the difficulties, and the spiritual and financial condition of the mission is very good. (European Mission History.)

As we discussed with their leaders the problems before them, we felt no spirit of bitterness whatever, only a spirit of love and the reference frequently to their fellow members in the Berlin area whom they reported to be in much worse condition than those in the district they represented. Everywhere there was a spirit of cooperation as we mingled with these hungry, poorly clothed, and cold people. (European Mission History.)

My apron and handkerchief are wet with tears of appreciation for you as I write this letter.

I am watching the finances extremely carefully, and everything is all right.

I have the car checked and have the man always check as to when I should lubricate the car. I have three hundred more miles to go before a lubrication.

You know we are always thinking and praying for you, dearest, and hundreds of your dear friends and loved ones are doing the same. Many call me and tell me they are praying for you personally, not just with the whole.

Wouldn't you like me to send you some tuna fish, sugar, etc.? I am sending you some candy and nuts, and I'll try and make you some better cookies than the ones I have already sent you and pack them better. Tell me what you would like sent.

I would be happy to receive the two recipes and give you my lemon pie recipe:

Lemon pie filling: Grate outside of the rind of two lemons. Add to it three cups white sugar, two real large tablespoons white flour, and two real large tablespoons cornstarch.

Mix this together and then add yolks of five eggs. Add the juice of the two lemons and four cups of water. Stir constantly the minute the mixture is put on the stove.

Stir until the mixture has thickened and remove from stove.

Use the five egg whites for top of pie. Beat the whites stiff and add two or three tablespoons of sugar.

T, I imagine she knows how to make pie crust. Shall I send you my pie crust recipe?

The Lord is constantly blessing our efforts. If we do our part, the Lord never fails us. I feel His constant care over me continually.

May you have peace of mind always, T, and know that things are going well with us—a don't worry about us. We miss you greatly, but it shall bring its blessings. (FAB to ETB.)

MONDAY, MARCH 11, 1946:

KARLSRUHE, GERMANY

We visited with the Saints, met with the leaders, and consulted regarding the purchase of a building. I heard not one word of criticism pertaining to anything relating to the present conditions under which they are trying their best.

One could ask for no greater evidence of the power and blessings of the gospel in the lives of men and women than that which was shown by these devoted, but destitute, members of the Church. I believe this was the first time in my life that I had ever seen any of our members truly hungry and poorly clothed and living in a cold area without any heat in the building. (ETB to FAB.)

Attended a party in honor of President and Sister James L. Barker, who will be presiding over the French Mission. They will see my husband soon, and I told them to tell him I love him more every day and am always praying for him. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, MARCH 12, 1946:

BASEL AND BERN, SWITZERLAND

We are doing everything in our power to get permission to send commodities into the occupied areas, even if we have to purchase some items here in Switzerland to take care of their immediate needs. To date this permission has not been granted. We are working with the International Red Cross today and also with officials of the Swiss government and the military authorities. (European Mission History.)

I sent three packages to London to my darling husband—candy, tuna fish, figs, cake, and pears. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 13, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND

I am most hopeful we can arrange to purchase immediately food and clothing in Switzerland to be trucked to the Berlin area to relieve the distress of our refugee Saints arriving in numbers from Poland and the Russian Zone. If this can be done, it will help to tide them over until we can arrange for shipments from home.

Food seems plentiful in Switzerland, but very few items are declared in surplus. It is not possible to buy rationed items, and most food items are rationed.

Received lovely and encouraging letters from my devoted and loyal wife and children. May the Lord bless them. (ETB Journal.)

I feel very keenly the great responsibility which is mine as we face the grave problems which confront our people in many of the European countries. I am not in the least discouraged. The Lord is blessing our efforts even beyond my fondest expectations. I know it is His purpose to take care of His Saints and have every confidence that He will open the way if we will do our part. We are striving to be worthy of His blessings.

May the Lord ever bless and comfort our Saints. My heart goes out to them. I love them dearly and would do anything within my power to relieve them. (ETB to FAB.)

THURSDAY, MARCH 14, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND

Am happy and grateful tonight because the Lord has opened the way for us to get relief to our suffering Saints in the military areas.

The International Red Cross at Geneva has agreed to supervise the movement of our supplies into the occupied areas. By special arrangement they have also agreed to buy 10,000 Swiss francs of food, clothing, and bedding for immediate delivery to our people in the Berlin area. We gave authorization for this purchase and shipment at once and cabled the First Presidency to rush shipments to the occupied areas through the port at Antwerp.

Have written many letters today in preparation for an extended trip into the occupied areas. Received letters today from four of my children. (ETB Journal.)

Beth started taking cold and coughed a great deal. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, MARCH 15, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND, AND FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Drove to Frankfurt, Germany, today from Basel. (ETB Journal.)

Along the way we went through several cities in which we have branches. As we were nearing Heidelberg, we passed a large number of men, women, and children at the city dumpgrounds frantically searching through refuse and garbage being unloaded from army trucks. We learned that this scavenger process is being repeated in all parts of the country due to the destitute condition of so many of the people.

Just a few miles farther on, we entered the beautiful city of Heidelberg, spared from bombing as an open hospital city. To see a large German city that looks livable and beautiful instead of presenting a depressing scene of ghastly ruins, twisted steel, and rubble was a most welcome sight. Here we met with some of the servicemen who are still stationed in this vicinity.

The remainder of our trip into Frankfurt took us through city after city that appeared to be sixty to eighty-five percent bombed out. The city of Darmstadt, in which we formerly had a thriving branch, is almost totally devastated. We learned later that with few exceptions our meeting halls have been completely destroyed and that between eighty and ninety percent of our members have been bombed out of their homes. Many valuable records, together with nearly every piece of branch and district furniture, have either been looted, confiscated, or destroyed through war damage. (European Mission History.)

We stopped at Freiburg to greet the Saints of that branch who were assembled in the small rented hall where they had been waiting for three hours in the hope they'd be able to see us as I had promised to stop at the home of a member long enough to bless their little baby.

We sang two hymns, had prayer, blessed the baby, and then I spoke to the eager Saints briefly.

Later I administered to a faithful brother in ill health who had been a French prisoner for three years and didn't know whether his wife and three daughters whom he left in eastern Germany were alive or dead.

We arrived at Frankfurt and were greeted warmly by LDS servicemen. (ETB Journal.)

Today I immediately put Beth to bed and plastered her, etc. I guess Beth caught the cold, and I have been overworking in trying to have people to the home too much. (FAB Journal.)

SATURDAY, MARCH 16, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Our first interview with General [Joseph T.] McNarney, the top general in the American forces, was in the I. G. Farben Building in Frankfurt, which had been spared by "pin bombing" because the Americans expected it would be their headquarters when the war was over, and it was.

We had driven our little jeep up to the building, parked it, and gone in to see if we could get an appointment with the general. We wanted to get permission from him to make distribution of our welfare supplies to our own people through our own channels. Everything was being distributed through the military.

We were told by the colonel at the desk that we couldn't get an appointment for three days. The general was very busy with important delegations coming to see him.

We returned to our car and had a prayer together, then we went back in.

In the meantime the secretary at the desk had been changed, and in less than fifteen minutes we were in the presence of General McNarney.

Then I saw the Spirit operate on that man. I heard him say, "Under no conditions can you have permission to distribute your own supplies to your own people. They must come through the military."

Of course we recognized immediately that if we had to go through the military, our Saints wouldn't get much of the supplies, and so we started telling him about the program of the Church.

When he saw we were somewhat determined, he said, "Well, you go ahead and collect your supplies, and probably by the time you get them collected the policy will be changed."

I said, "General, they are already collected; they are always collected. We have ninety warehouses full of supplies. Within twenty-four hours from the time I wire our First Presidency in Salt Lake City, carloads of food, bedding, clothing, and medical supplies will be moving toward Germany."

When I said this, he said, "I never heard of people with such vision."

And before we left him we had written authorization to make our own distribution to our own people through our own channels, and from that moment on we had wonderful cooperation. (ETB Reminiscences.)

Permission was given to utilize the Red Cross facilities for transporting relief supplies to our Saints.

In regard to a proposed program for sending starved and undernourished children from Germany to Switzerland for brief vacations and special care, we were informed that final permission of the Swiss government and the International Red Cross, together with full permission from General Clay in Berlin, would have to be secured.

Permission to continue our projected travels was granted and a letter of introduction to General Lucius Clay from General McNarney prepared. (European Mission History.)

My doctor was out of town, so I worked hard with Beth. When I did get the doctor, he said I had taken care of her very well and had done all I could have done. He found she had pneumonia. He had her take sulfa drug, and I've worked hard night and day. (FAB Journal.)

SUNDAY, MARCH 17, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

This has been a heavy but joyful day. We have held meetings all day with officers and Saints. We have also visited and eaten meager meals with them, partly provided by the servicemen. Two hundred thirty-seven poorly clothed, ill fed, but faithful Saints were at the service held in a partly bombed-out university auditorium. The Spirit of the Lord was present in power, and in the two-and-one-half-hour meeting we were all lifted far above the mundane things of the world. We took photos of the group of refugees and the entire meeting. (ETB Journal.)

Reports given revealed that eighty-two members were killed during the war while serving in the armed forces, seventy-one civilians were killed through bombings and shellfire, and approximately fifteen hundred have not yet been accounted for. Between eighty and eighty-five percent of the membership of the mission have been bombed out of their homes, necessitating their removal into the country area round about. This scattered condition of our people presents a great obstacle in attendance at meetings or participation in Church activities. Most branches are meeting in the homes of members until they can secure some type of quarters as a permanent meeting place.

Further, it was learned that the Saints in the French Zone have very great need for assistance. In this zone particularly nearly all animals have been confiscated by the French government. Potato peelings are selling for twenty-five dollars per hundred pounds, while on the "black market" people can buy one hundred pounds of potatoes for one package of American cigarettes. Cases were reported where an entire ton of potatoes was purchased for one carton of cigarettes and a few cents.

During and since the war the branch and district Relief Societies have cooperated with the presiding brethren in organizing welfare projects and caring for the homeless families and returning servicemen. As bombings became more intense and the number of homeless and destitute grew to mammoth proportions, the amount of assistance rendered was of necessity reduced; however, they have been able to assist greatly with the refugees and displaced persons arriving.

During the Relief Society centennial celebration in 1942, fifty branches had organized societies and a missionwide pageant, written by one of their number (a nationally known poetess), was presented with gratifying success. Since that time the blackout restrictions, intensified bombings, and subsequent loss of homes and meeting places have reduced the number of active units to half the original number. As rapidly as possible places to meet are being secured and they are organizing themselves to assist in the distribution of Church welfare supplies to the stricken families. (European Mission History.)

In spite of repeated bombings which destroyed buildings on all sides, the mission home has remained in livable condition. At one time three 1,000-pound bombs fell in front of the mission home. Their failure to explode saved the building from being totally destroyed. Most of the damage present resulted through the dynamiting of the bridges across the river by the retreating armies. The bridge in front of the mission home required eight charges of dynamite and bombs to render it impassable.

Sister Ilse Bruenger Foerster, who has served as mission secretary since the outbreak of war, had to undergo ruthless examinations by the Gestapo on the charge that she was sending mission funds to America. After two weeks of grueling examinations and constant surveillance, during which nearly all mission records were either burned or confiscated, she was released with the threat that not only her life but the life of all of her family and relatives would be blotted out if any result of the questioning were ever revealed.

During this critical time she was expecting her first child, but in spite of threats and the terrific strain exerted upon her, she denied every charge and refuted every accusation—so much so that they were caused to marvel at her intense faith and devotion to the Church.

Recently three German prisoners of war, who had just been released from a prisoner of war camp near Ogden, Utah, entered the local employment placement agency where Sister Foerster is employed as a translator. One of these men was a former doctor, another a former dentist, and the third a former architect. While filling out the questionnaires, they passed out tracts and books to the employees. Then they addressed the group, declaring they had received these while in the prison camp in America and that they felt they had at last found the truth and the only Church upon the face of the earth, for they had not only studied and learned of its teaching but they had seen the wonderful results in the lives of the members of said church. They felt an obligation to tell others of the great happiness that had come into their lives. The tracts they had passed out were Mormon tracts and the books were copies of the Book of Mormon. This is only one of many faith-promoting experiences that have been related to us. (European Mission History.)

I was so thrilled when President Clark called and said they had received a cable from you and that you were in Basel, Switzerland. He said you were doing a marvelous work. You certainly are accomplishing things in a hurry. I know you well enough that I could expect that from you. (FAB to ETB.)

One of Barbara's friends said, "Won't your daddy be home for Christmas?" Barbara said, "I don't know. We just hope so." And her little friend said, "If he can work both day and night, maybe he will be able to come home sooner." (FAB to ETB.)

I sent you three boxes of things last week—first, a box of tuna fish, pears, and nuts; second, fruit cake, nuts, and figs (I am sorry the fruit cake isn't homemade. I was able to buy some gum drops yesterday, so the next one will be homemade—gum drop fruit cake.); third, twenty-four Hershey chocolate bars. Yesterday I sent you another two-pound box of Cummings chocolates. Do you need sugar or anything in particular? Please let me know, and I'll send what you need. I am never too busy to do it. (FAB to ETB.)

I am quite tired but blessed and happy for what the Lord does for me. I am greatly blessed—I have every blessing one could ask for, but I feel a little tired tonight because the past three nights the baby has been sick with a bad temperature and cold. But I know she will be all right. (FAB to ETB.)

MONDAY, MARCH 18, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Have spent the day in a continuation of our work contacting military and civil authorities regarding our work and people in the American Zone. Secured permission from civil authorities to bring in some thirty families from eastern Germany and Poland from among our refugees. (ETB Journal.)

I have stayed close to the baby. Had Elder Spencer W. Kimball administer to the baby. The Lord blessed her. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, MARCH 19, 1946:

FRANKFURT AND HANOVER, GERMANY

Bade our LDS servicemen, who have been so kind to us here, good-bye and left for Hanover in the British Zone. Our servicemen escorted us to the outskirts of the city.

We drove hard to try and make a meeting scheduled with five district presidents from the northern part of the West German Mission.

All along the way we noted the terrifying effects of the war, especially in cities with factories and railway yards. Most of the way we traveled on the famous autobahn and witnessed, to our sorrow, beautiful and costly bridges blown up by the retreating forces requiring often miles of detour.

The farming areas were lovely to behold, although most are short of manpower. We saw no tractors as these were destroyed by the retreating forces. Production, so desperately needed, will be reduced because of the shortages. However, these industrious rural people—old men and women mostly—seem to be doing their best with cows and steers used to supplement the few poor horses left.

In Hanover we saw a city in ruins. This, I believe, is the worst we have seen. It appears that not one building in the city proper is undamaged, and most buildings are leveled to the ground. To look up some of the streets with every building laid waste fills one's heart with a weird and sad feeling. People walking about in the ruins seem almost as though they were from another world.

My heart grows heavy and my eyes fill with tears as I picture in my mind's eyes these scenes of horror and destruction.

We met with the district presidents in a small half-bombed-out room on a second floor amid the ruins as we listened to their reports on conditions of the past war years. Our faith was strengthened as we listened to their reports of courageous activities. Although touched deeply, we were moved to thank the Lord for the gospel as it has been demonstrated in the lives of these faithful Saints. (ETB Journal.)

Reports indicated that Hamburg was almost completely destroyed. Where there were six branches, they now have only one, but are meeting together and have twenty-five local part-time missionaries and five full-time missionaries preaching the gospel.

All branch and district properties have been lost, including all books (personal as well as mission), all tracts, many of the records, reports, etc. Few sacrament dishes or glasses are available. This report was multiplied many-fold as each district reported. Every city in this part of the mission in which we had a branch has been seventy to ninety percent destroyed.

Only two families in Bremen retained their homes and both of these severely damaged. In other branches every member has lost his home. Some branches were deprived of all their priesthood members, resulting in some branches not having had the sacrament for over a year. In one case an entire funeral service was conducted by members of the Relief Society. (European Mission History.)

With only two hours' notice, we held a public meeting with about 175 Saints in a heatless, partially bombed-out schoolhouse still partly usable. The spirit of the meeting was marvelous to feel and behold.

How I longed for power to lift these good people from their heartrending state. We did all in our power to help them and offered such assistance as we could and promised them we'd see them again soon.

I retired tonight with a sad but thankful heart on a straw tick in three pieces with no linen of any sort and blankets and quarters filthy because of the lack of soap and water. (ETB Journal.)

President George Albert Smith, with his son-in-law, administered and blessed the baby. She has been real sick. He gave her a beautiful blessing.

I know the Lord blessed her because we were almost forced to take her to the hospital. But I know it was the administration that made her keep a lower temperature. She is still very sick but is making progress.

Everyone has been kind. President Smith called. President Smith kissed all the girls on their foreheads and said that was in place of their daddy. President Smith placed Beth's name in the temple.

I received grand and beautiful letters from my devoted and loving husband from Basel, Switzerland, and Paris. (FAB Journal.)

Please don't worry about Beth, dear. I know the Lord will bless her to be well and strong again.

I have been trying to do too much, I guess, but I am very blessed and thankful I have you, the gospel, and the children. That means everything.

The baby has pneumonia, and we may have to take her to the hospital tonight. Pray for her, dear. (FAB to ETB.)

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 20, 1946:

HANOVER AND BERLIN, GERMANY

At daylight we left Hanover for Berlin, traveling along the autobahn through the Russian Zone, the only corridor upon which Americans are permitted to enter Berlin. The Lord opened the way, however, and although we were checked by British, Russian, and American military authorities, we were in each case permitted to proceed.

Guards, armed with bayonets, were stationed along the route about every five miles. We were permitted to pass safely through unmolested in spite of the many warnings and stories of danger passed on to us by the various military units.

We reached the American sector of the Berlin area safely after witnessing the results of war on every hand and were, after several hours' wait, finally taken to our quarters. (ETB Journal.)

The sight of Berlin is indescribable. Not a building has escaped damage, and miles of the city are laid in utter waste. It is a scene of shocking desolation. (European Mission History.)

It is impossible for one to describe adequately the tremendous changes that have taken place in this great land. The extent of bombing damage varies of course between cities; however, in many of the cities practically every building is damaged.

The job of taking care of our Saints, even as to their most meager needs, is overwhelming, and as we contemplate their rehabilitation, it becomes staggering. The Lord is blessing our efforts, and we feel sure His blessings will continue with us if we do our best. (European Mission History.)

Elder Harold B. Lee and Brother Alma Sonne called to see how the baby was. They administered to the baby. Brother Lee gave a beautiful prayer.

Our baby is being greatly blessed and is doing much better but still has to be watched carefully.

President J. Reuben Clark called.

Dozens and dozens are calling by phone and at home and bringing nice things to eat. We are very blessed to have such grand and devoted friends.

Apostle Lee read us a letter from our wonderful husband and father. (FAB Journal.)

Yesterday I told you our baby had pneumonia and would probably have to go to the hospital. I am happy to tell you today that she has made satisfactory improvement and it wasn't necessary to take her.

The Lord has surely blessed her. Everyone has just been marvelous. I didn't realize that we had so many kind and loving friends. (FAB to ETB.)

The Lord has surely given me added strength to carry on too. I have been up with her constantly for nights giving her sulfa drug and mustard plasters. I don't like anyone else to do it, and many a night I've held her in my arms all night. It doesn't seem I feel so tired either when morning comes, and many times I have felt the Lord, you, and Mother have been very close to me in helping me carry on. (FAB to ETB.)

When I get to bed at midnight, then I am praying for you, and I think you're just getting up in Europe and you're praying for me. The only difference is that I am going to bed and you're getting up, but we're both praying and thinking of each other at the same time.

I will still have to continue regularly the sulfa and plasters night and day for a while, but the doctor says she's over the danger line and with good care she'll be well.

I know that all will be well with her, and whatever comes or goes I feel will be right. If I am always living my religion and doing my part, the Lord will certainly do His.

The Lord is taking grand care of me, and there is no person more abundantly blessed and happier than I. (FAB to ETB.)

I have been given an abundance of added strength during Beth's sickness. I have felt His Spirit so close to me at times in protecting, directing, guiding, and comforting me that I have marveled at it. (FAB to ETB.)

There have been profiting experiences come from Beth's illness, such as the family following instructions better—working closer and more unitedly together—and I suppose it's taught me not to invite and have guests and folks out so much at the home. But I enjoy doing and helping others what little I can, and it's grand to be working and enjoying the results of the same. (FAB to ETB.)

President Clark has been grand to want to help, but I tell him I don't need anyone in to help me—that I'll get along all right. (FAB to ETB.)

You told of the little children you gave gum to, and how thrilled they were. I am sending you a box of gum and fruit candy drops. I think it would be so nice (as you have already discovered) to carry some of this gum and candy around with you and give to the dear little Mormon children and others. (FAB to ETB.)

The baby is feeling so very much better. It's midnight and I must give her a mustard plaster. She is the sweetest little soul. (FAB to ETB.)

THURSDAY, MARCH 21, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Made two visits to the army dispensary in an effort to get relief from a sinus infection and some pain from neuralgia. Some relief resulted.

Drove through once beautiful Berlin. The wreckage to lovely government buildings, universities, monuments, museums, parks, and business blocks cannot possibly be understood unless seen. My soul rebels as I attempt to describe it.

My heart is heavy as I reflect on these awful, never-to-be-forgotten scenes. Truly war is hell in all its fury. (ETB Journal.)

One sister came to the house with her apron and wanted to spend the day helping me in the home, and another sister also came to the home and wanted to help me. But I told them I wouldn't need them—all I wanted was their faith and prayers to bless our baby so she would get well.

The baby is doing very nicely. She is making a speedy recovery.

The General Authorities and Quorum of Twelve have been very kind to remember the baby with their faith and prayers. I know that it was the prayers that were raised up in the baby's behalf and the power of the priesthood that have made her get well again so speedy. We have also had a very kind and good doctor. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, MARCH 22, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Continued conferences with military government officials most of the day and held long meeting with the acting mission presidency.

Had a most satisfactory conference with General Lucius D. Clay, U.S. Deputy Governor for Germany. Our group was assured of his full cooperation, and we received his appreciation that the Church was on the job in the occupied areas ready to help in the mammoth work of rehabilitation.

The general approved the resumption of our pre-war Church program, including MIA activities and the organization of Boy Scout work.

We also discussed with the general the question of transportation of Church literature, purchase of automobiles, unfreezing of Church funds, and the resumption of normal missionary activities. In all of these matters, he expressed sympathy and assured us of his support, but urged that we be patient and not expect too much during the next two months. (European Mission History.)

In 1938 and 1939 the Genealogical Society of Utah tried to make arrangements for buying microfilms of genealogical records from the German government without success. After the missionaries were evacuated, Brother Paul Langheinrich, first counselor to the acting mission president and mission genealogical leader, made arrangements for the German government to construct a microfilming machine for use of the Church. The machine was finished, but war between Germany and the USA began, terminating further work.

Brother Langheinrich watched developments closely, and after war had ceased he wrote a letter to the commander-in-chief of the Russian occupation forces, asking for permission to provide foodstuffs for our suffering refugee Saints and also for permission to search for and receive title to all genealogical records and film in this territory to become property of the Genealogical Society and the Church.

Full permission was granted in both cases and, after long searching for these hidden records, a large group was found in an old mineshaft hidden in the mountains of Thuringer Forest.

The first discovery netted six to seven thousand church books, photo copies of most of these books, and some 5,000 films. This carload of records is now in the mission office.

Two days ago a much larger store was found in another mine—nearly three carloads—among which are over 140 boxes of microfilms from church books, 15,000 photo copies of books, etc., which will contain possibly more than 100,000,000 names. They will weigh about twenty-five tons. These materials, on the basis of the permission granted by the Russian government, became property of our Church with certain reservations. Permission is now being secured to move these to the Church offices.

A very vigorous missionary program has been undertaken by this mission. They now have twenty-one full-time missionaries working in all parts of the Russian military zone, four lady missionaries working full-time in the mission office, and six more brethren being called to also work as full-time missionaries.

Present conditions in this mission make it impossible to send missionaries from Zion inasmuch as the entire mission is in the Russian Zone of occupation. Local missionaries, however, have been well received and are able to pursue their missionary activities almost unhindered.

All of our branches and districts in the areas now occupied by Poland are closed to any missionary work, and all Germans in these areas are being deported as refugees primarily to the British Zone of occupation. The Germans in Czechoslovakia likewise are being deported to the American Zone. Most of our Saints in this area have either fled, died, or are living under most shocking discomforting conditions.

In spite of receiving no rations as refugees for nearly five months and arriving without bedding or clothing beyond that which they were wearing, the Saints organized local welfare groups and were not only successful in caring for their immediate clothing and subsistence needs, but were also able to work cooperatively together in securing work and homes for the able-bodied families so they might move out and become self-supporting. Those remaining in the temporary refugee quarters were required to work in the branches and districts among the members and received work receipts which served as a basis for their receiving needed assistance. The future is very critical, however, inasmuch as all the members have shared every available item, and they now are faced with very urgent needs.

As nearly as can be determined, 184 Church members were killed in the war and an additional 120 died of bombings, disease, and starvation—making a total of 304. Starvation is very near to many of our people, and all the help we can give them will not come too soon. In the mission 1,728 members are still unaccounted for. What has happened to them is still unknown. (European Mission History.)

Brother and Sister Marion Romney called and brought me a lovely cake. (FAB Journal.)

SATURDAY, MARCH 23, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

The testimonies of the Lord's guidance and protection during the war years were as great [in Berlin] as any in the Church. Many instances were related in which the inspiration and direction of our Heavenly Father enabled the mission leaders to inspire their associates to greater faith and activity. Never have greater faith and activity been known in this mission. Financially as well as spiritually the mission is in very fine condition.

Many new friends who are genuinely interested in the gospel are meeting in homes or bombed-out buildings to hear the message of the gospel.

Almost without exception the branches have all been bombed out and have lost their entire possessions. Every effort is being made to rent, rebuild, or buy suitable buildings or halls in which the members and their friends may meet and in which the entire program of the Church may be carried out. (European Mission History.)

We visited the completely demolished building where our mission headquarters used to be. The office force and missionaries went over to the rented home of Brother Langheinrich the night before the bombing on his recommendation, otherwise they would all have been killed as the building was completely ruined. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, MARCH 24, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

This has been a glorious day with much joy and a few periods of deep sadness. As we rode to visit our five Sunday Schools and to attend the meeting, I witnessed scenes that seemed almost outside this world.

The worst destruction I have witnessed was seen today. I stood in the wreckage that once was the proud headquarters of the Hitler government, including Hitler's office, private living quarters, ball and reception rooms, and finally the underground fortress where he spent his last hours during the terrible siege of Berlin.

I saw the pomp and beauty of once proud Berlin, at one time heralded by godless leaders as the product of the "master race" that would throw the principles of Christianity out the window and conquer the world by force, now a mass of sad wreckage—that which had taken 1,000 years to build completely destroyed, as it were, in a day.

As I rode through the streets and walked through some impassable by auto, I smelled the odor of decaying human bodies, saw half-starved women paying exorbitant prices anxiously for potato peelings.

I saw soldiers forcefully breaking up a flourishing black market where cigarettes were the principal medium of exchange.

I saw old men and women with small hatchets eagerly digging at tree stumps and roots in an effort to get scraps of fuel and then pulling those home for miles on anything that would roll—from two little wheels of a once baby carriage to small wagons—as beasts of burden.

Later I faced in a cold half-wrecked third floor auditorium off a bombed street 480 cold half-starved but faithful Latter-day Saints in a conference meeting. It was an inspiration to see the light of faith and hear their harrowing experiences, including murder, rape, and starvation of their loved ones. Yet there was no bitterness or anger but a sweet reciprocation and expression of faith in the gospel. We were together in a partly bombed building for three-and-a-half hours. (ETB Journal.)

Not a single member registered any complaint about their circumstances in spite of the fact that some were in the last stages of starvation right before our very eyes.

In Berlin alone we were told that there are well over one hundred suicides daily due to the mental attitude of the people who have no hope in view of the ravages of war. Our Saints, on the other hand, are full of hope, courage, and faith, and everywhere they look cheerfully forward with expressions of deepest faith for the gospel and for their membership in the Church. It was one of the greatest demonstrations we have ever seen of the real fruits of the gospel in the lives of men and women.

Our travels during the day to the various meetings took us through mile after mile of unspeakable destruction and desolation. Words cannot begin to describe the ruin that has been heaped upon this city. Only one small portion of the front wall of the former East German Mission home remains standing. Across the street where the once beautiful Tiergarten stood is nothing but a yawning wilderness of splintered tree stumps and an occasional badly shattered lifeless tree. Many streets are still impassable, piled high with rubble.

Hardly a day passes that skeletonized buildings do not crash into the street below, often burying passersby. Most bridges are entirely blown up, and the large mass of unsupported, shell-ridden walls presents a constant menace as they continue to crumble and cave in. Traveling amid such surroundings leaves one with a feeling so appalling that it must be experienced to be understood. (European Mission History.)

Elder and Sister Harold B. Lee brought a real large beautiful bunch of daffodil flowers to the family. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, MARCH 25, 1946:

BERLIN AND NUREMBERG, GERMANY

Left Berlin for Nuremberg. There was no place to get meals enroute as no restaurants or cafes are operating. We were able to get some K-rations, which we ate for lunch and dinner as we rode, having missed breakfast.

We drove by way of Helmstedt, Kassel, and Bamberg in order to avoid the regular Russian area. For fourteen hours we drove, detouring for bombed-out bridges, and reached Nuremberg, the scene of the present trials of German war criminals. (ETB Journal.)

What a sight it was to see nearly 200 shivering Saints assembled in a badly damaged classroom of a former schoolhouse. They had begun meeting at 7:30 P.M. and continued to remain waiting our arrival in spite of the fact that the military curfew necessitated their remaining in the room overnight instead of returning to their homes. After the meeting they stretched out on the cold floor, huddled together in groups, to rest for the night. We were caused to marvel at their faith and devotion! (European Mission History.)

After visiting among and blessing some of them, we went to the partly destroyed hotel where the officials of the trials are staying. Half of the building is destroyed, and we walked through halls of rubble to get to our cold and bare quarters. We were most thankful for an army cot with clean linen. (ETB Journal.)

The old city of Nuremberg is accredited by many to be the worst bombed section in Germany. Not a single building remains standing and many of the streets are still hopelessly blocked with rubble and bomb craters. Both of our meetinghouses are completely destroyed. Nearly every member was bombed or burned out of their homes one or more times. The present need for relief and assistance here, as in most other sections we have visited, is very great. Every possible effort to help is being considered by the local Saints and they are doing a remarkable job, but their resources are now exhausted. (European Mission History.)

TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 1946:

NUREMBERG, GERMANY, AND PRAGUE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Arose early and inspected a bomb-damaged half-house which the local Nuremberg Branch proposed to purchase. Left for Prague, Czechoslovakia. (ETB Journal.)

The sight of entering Czechoslovakia and seeing most cities without serious damage—to see the shop windows filled and attractively decorated, to see the factory chimneys smoking and people cheerfully working—was a real treat after having seen nothing but desolation and despair for over a week. It seemed almost like entering another world.

As we entered Prague, the city lights were twinkling. We had little difficulty finding the mission home and were warmly welcomed by Elder Josef Roubicek, acting mission president, and his family.

Nearly all of the 115 members of the Czechoslovakia Mission have remained active and faithful to the Church. Through their combined efforts, they have been able to remain self-supporting as a mission in spite of their small number.

Most of the mission funds have been "frozen" in the banks until a restabilization policy can be effected, and in spite of their having less than five dollars in accessible funds, they are carrying on a vigorous campaign of missionary proselyting work.

A strict system of rationing is in effect, and many items are still impossible to secure. As a result, the welfare packages the Saints have received have been most welcome and have filled a real need, a need which continues. (European Mission History.)

President George Albert Smith called on me this evening. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 27, 1946:

PRAGUE AND PILSEN, CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Called on the Lord Mayor of Prague and on the American Ambassador and the first secretary. Held a fine meeting with twenty-seven Saints and blessed two babies. (ETB Journal.)

Permission was granted for missionaries and a mission president from Zion to resume their proselyting activities in this land. The Church enjoys and very favorable reputation. Before leaving for Vienna later in the afternoon a special meeting was held with the Saints, 29 attending, and an unusually sweet spirit enjoyed. (European Mission History.)

On the way to Prague yesterday, we had tire trouble, and three more flat tires in rapid succession this evening made us alter our plans of trying to drive through to Linz, Austria. We stopped overnight in Pilsen, Czechoslovakia, where we were able to secure good vulcanizing service. (European Mission History.)

I feel so much better today. I can now carry on in "full blast." That spark the Lord has given me must not become dim—it's a priceless blessing and possession.

Friends and neighbors have been so kind to me. Many have called today, among them are Elder George F. Richards and Sister David O. McKay.

The baby and I had a much better night. (FAB to ETB.)

THURSDAY, MARCH 28, 1946:

PILSEN, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, AND VIENNA, AUSTRIA

Left Pilsen after repairing tires and rode hard all day to Vienna via Passau and Linz. Roads were rough and bridges out, necessitating long detours, but we arrived in Vienna to find a hall full of Saints and friends who had been awaiting our arrival for two hours. We met with these faithful souls for an hour and then with the district presidency and the branch presidents of Austria for one-and-a-half hours.

I am grateful that this day we have had the way opened for us and that in all our travel we moved unmolested in spite of serious warnings given by friends and officials who seemed sincerely interested in our welfare. Guards with rifles and tommy guns stopped us many times, but each time we were permitted to proceed. (ETB Journal.)

President Smith dropped in to see me and got me out of bed last night.

President Clark had given me quite a scolding about working so hard and to see that I got enough rest to carry on, so I repented and went to bed at nine o'clock—and who should get me up but President Smith calling. (FAB to ETB.)

SATURDAY, MARCH 30, 1946:

MUNICH AND STUTTGART, GERMANY

It is two months today since we left Salt Lake City by plane for Europe in accordance with my appointment to preside over the European Mission and look after the relief needs of our people and reestablish our work again in these war-torn countries. As I contemplate our unusual accomplishments, my heart is filled with gratitude to God for His blessing in opening the way and sustaining us with His loving care.

Two months ago no one, I am sure, even dreamed so much would be done in so short a time. There is so much to be accomplished, and the needs are so great that with all my heart I pray for a continuance of His sustaining power in the mission to which He has called us. (ETB Journal.)

We stopped at Dachau to visit the concentration camp there. The things we saw and the statistics which were given us made us shudder to realize how far men will go in the direction of evil and sin when they fail to accept the eternal truths of the gospel.

We visited the human crematories, saw the gallows, the trenches in which innocent victims were machine-gunned, and the kennels in which prisoners were thrown to be torn to pieces by the ferocious dogs kept there. In this camp alone over 238,000 persons were exterminated. Some of the ashes of the victims were sent to their near relatives, who were required to pay a stipulated sum for them or suffer themselves in turn to be subjected to the horrors of such a camp.

Persons were thus systematically and brutally killed in this and the other some 300 such camps established by the Nazis. The fiendish bestiality that was here related to us made us sick at heart.

Today over 20,000 S.S. troops are confined in the prison barracks awaiting trial at the conclusion of the major war criminals trials being held in Nuremberg.

Later President Max Zimmer related how plans were discovered in the German Embassy in Switzerland, after the cessation of hostilities in May, for the construction of five such concentration camps in Switzerland by the Nazis after their planned seizure of that land. German troops were at the borders for the intended invasion, but the heavy losses and unexpected reverses at Stalingrad necessitated redeploying the troops at the Swiss border, and thus the invasion of that land was averted. The names of several of our Swiss members were found to be on the list of those intended to be sent to these camps, so it is with gratitude in their hearts that our Swiss Saints thank the Lord for having spared their land.

From here we went to Stuttgart, where announcements were made over the radio of our meeting with the Saints this evening. We were gratified to see 275 persons in attendance of which at least 100 were investigators and 16 were servicemen.

In this meeting President Max Zimmer, Chaplain Howard C. Badger, Brother Frederick W. Babbel, and I sang "Let the Lower Lights Be Burning," to the delight of the entire audience. On our trip we have often sung the songs of Zion together and decided to make a public appearance before becoming separated. We named our quartet "The K-Ration Quartet." (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, MARCH 31, 1946:

STUTTGART, GERMANY, AND BASEL, SWITZERLAND

Left Stuttgart and arrived in Basel. Spent balance of day reading mail forwarded from London. Received the shocking news that my youngest child (nineteen months) was critically ill with pneumonia.

After devout prayer, I placed a call from Basel, Switzerland, to my wife in Salt Lake City. In minutes I heard her sweet voice and received the assurance that the baby is well on the way to recovery, for which I thank the Lord. I also thank Him for the wonders of science which make, through His inspiration, the telephone possible. (ETB Journal.)

I arrived at Basel just about two hours before it was time to dedicate the new Basel chapel.

We often received mail there, and there was a letter from Flora. I opened it hurriedly and learned for the first time that Beth had been critically ill with pneumonia. The letter was several days old because we had been traveling. It was a great shock.

I went immediately to my knees in prayer and then placed a call for Flora in Salt Lake. It usually took from once to three days to get a call through. As I placed the call, I went to my knees again in prayer, asking that the Lord would open the way. It was less than fifteen minutes from the time I placed the call until I was talking with Flora through a perfect connection.

I was greatly relieved to hear her say that Beth was well on her way to recovery. She had been administered to by President George Albert Smith and some of the other brethren, following which she took a turn for the better.

I was greatly relieved and thankful to the Lord and went to the dedication with increased appreciation for the priesthood and the faith and care of a devoted wife and family. (ETB Reminiscences.)

This day shall never be forgotten because my loving husband called me long distance over the telephone from Basel, Switzerland. I am indeed thankful for him and hope the Lord to bless him constantly because he is so anxious to do good upon this earth.

Our baby, dear little Flora Beth, is over the pneumonia. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, APRIL 1, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND

Dictating letters and attending to mission business all day in Basel. (ETB Journal.)

You can never know how happy and thrilled and soul-satisfying it made me feel when I heard your sweet and loving voice over the telephone. (FAB to ETB.)

The baby is over her pneumonia but is left very weak and very much underweight. I am feeding her an egg yolk in each bottle of milk she takes, and she just loves it. I am sure this will help to build her up. The sulfa drug is hard on their little bodies, but I know she will do all right. I am giving her close care, and the Lord is constantly with me. She has been off her feet for about three weeks now, but she eats well and is happy and sweeter every day.

I knew without a doubt that the Lord would make her well and strong again, and it didn't seem to hurt my body to stay up countless nights and plaster her every two hours day and night and hold her close to my body and rock her sweet little precious body close to mine.

Many asked me if I wasn't afraid being alone when she was so sick. I told them I wasn't alone or afraid in the least. The Lord and His angels were constantly helping and working with me. I could just feel them, and I was so happy and peaceful when I worked over the little soul.

In the morning, as day broke, I never felt tired and I could carry on my day's work just as though I had a good night's rest.

His angels were actually helping take care of our baby and helping me with the work. I don't know how it was all accomplished so well and her speedy recovery came so fast if it hadn't been for the Lord's help and the many prayers for her recovery and the thoughtful things folks did and said.

We knew that your prayers were offered up in her behalf, and that you, as her loving father, always would be praying for her health and well-being. Your prayers helped so much, dearest. I know that you are constantly praying for me and our little flock of children. I can feel it so much, and I couldn't carry on without your faith, love, and devotion for us. (FAB to ETB.)

The tasks which have been given to you and me are not beyond our strength, "T", its pangs and toils are not beyond our endurance as long as we have faith in each other, live our religion, pray always, and have willpower to direct our thoughts and energies along the proper channels. (FAB to ETB.)

TUESDAY, APRIL 2, 1946:

BASEL AND BERN, SWITZERLAND

Left Basel for Bern. After transacting some business here, we rode up to Interlaken and Grindelwald for a view of the soul-inspiring Alps. Then we drove to Neuchatel, where we held a splendid meeting with the Saints in the Swiss district of the French Mission. Members were present from all of the four branches. (ETB Journal.)

After traveling several weeks in a land that leaves one appalled and sick at heart to witness the terrible scenes of destruction and poverty everywhere, this was a most delightful and restful change. (European Mission History.)

President J. Reuben Clark called on me for a few minutes. President Clark said I deserved a rest. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, APRIL 5, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE, AND LIEGE, BELGIUM

Along much of our journey from Paris to Liege, Belgium, we passed through mile after mile of stores of munitions sheltered under corrugated steel shelters. These concentrated ammunition stores, which were in evidence most of the way to the Belgium border, along with occasional burned out tanks, destroyed trucks, cars, etc., were practically the only remaining signs of the war just ended. (European Mission History.)

In a special meeting held in Liege with Elder Paul Devignez, acting president, and his counselors it was learned that over 600 welfare packages have been received by the Saints. All packages have been opened upon entering the country, and some items have been removed by marauders, but these packages have been set aside by the members for shipment to the Saints in Germany as soon as permission to do so is forthcoming. Such unselfishness is most commendable.

Among a people in such great need, it was an inspiration to see that their anxiety for their brethren and sisters in Germany exceeded their concern for themselves. Foodstuffs, especially fats, vitamins, milk, and cereals for children, are still urgently needed. It was reported reliably that approximately one-third of all the children are afflicted with tuberculosis as a result of malnutrition. (European Mission History.)

This is the first day of general conference in Salt Lake. My thoughts have turned westward many times today as I realize I'm missing a general conference of the Church for the first time in many years. I am fully contented, however, and happy and grateful to be here where I'm sure the Lord wants me to be. I thank Him for every blessing. (ETB Journal.)

Attended April conference—the first session. All the General Authorities were present except our dear and beloved husband and Apostle Cowley, who was ill. (FAB Journal.)

I attended the opening session of conference. I enjoyed it so much and was indeed happy to be able to go. I thought and prayed for you much, as many hundreds of others were doing for you. (FAB to ETB.)

I surely thrill with pride and joy over the marvelous work you are doing with the Lord's help. I know the Lord is surely close to you at all times, and I know you are working extremely hard with the Lord with no fear or doubt in your mind at any time, knowing always that right shall prevail and that insurmountable things can and will be accomplished by you and the Lord.

Your faith is undaunted and never wavers but is always firm, knowing that you shall succeed in all righteous things and that truth shall prevail. (FAB to ETB.)

SATURDAY, APRIL 6, 1946:

LIEGE AND ANTWERP, BELGIUM

It is 116 years today since, in the goodness of the Lord, His Church was again organized on the earth. How grateful I am that I have been made a partaker of its rich blessings.

The more I see of the world, the more I am convinced that it needs the blessings of the restored gospel. I hope and pray that we may all do our utmost to carry it to the children of men and that God will touch the hearts of people everywhere that they may see the beauties of the gospel. We left Liege for Antwerp and Amsterdam. The countryside was lovely, especially in Holland where we saw the first of the fields of tulips and daffodils on every side. (ETB Journal.)

Listened to an inspiring conference. We surely miss our father and husband. The first conference he hasn't been able to attend since being an apostle. (FAB Journal.)

President Clark and his daughter called on me. They were so thrilled and happy you had telephoned me. (FAB to ETB.)

Congratulations, my dear, on being chosen to represent the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives at the agricultural gathering of leaders in London. Ernest Wilkinson told me about it last night. He said, "Tell Ezra I was to the meeting when he was selected." He said that when it was brought up whom they should send to represent them, immediately your name was brought up. He said the whole group just thrilled at the thought of hoping you could go and represent them. He said the wonderful feelings and admiration they have for you are gratifying. (FAB to ETB.)

SUNDAY, APRIL 7, 1946:

AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

This has been a glorious day of meetings, greetings, and blessings among the faithful Dutch Saints.

The building was filled to overflowing at our Amsterdam chapel. Housing is so short it was impossible to rent a larger hall. We held priesthood meeting, public sessions, and an officers' meeting. There was a sweet soul-satisfying spirit in all the meetings, and most eyes were wet with tears as we enjoyed a rich outpouring of the Spirit in all our meetings.

The Saints, having suffered the ruthless occupation by an enemy power, are still suffering much but are true and faithful. It was so sweet to mingle with them, hear their testimonies, and listen to the fervent singing of the songs of Zion. May the Lord add His blessings. (ETB Journal.)

President Zappey reported that nine members of the mission were lost as a result of the war. Thousands of packages sent by the Church Welfare Committee have been gratefully received by the Saints. With the exception of the occupied countries, the need for continued assistance is probably most critical and urgent in Holland and Norway.

The Church buildings at Rotterdam and The Hague, which were seriously damaged during the war, are now being repaired. (European Mission History.)

Today was the happiest day I have experienced since my devoted husband left for Europe.

All of our family except Flora Beth attended the last session of conference. At the morning meeting Elder Thomas E. McKay read a beautiful letter that was written to him from my husband in Europe.

In the afternoon session of conference a grand letter was read by President Smith from him about his work in Europe and the fine members of our Church there.

The Deseret News took our picture, and it was in the paper yesterday. Also in the paper was a lovely article telling of the wonderful work my husband was doing in Europe. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, APRIL 8, 1946:

AMSTERDAM, UTRECHT, AND THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS

The mission home at The Hague was badly damaged by V-bombs, but in addition the building was stripped of all windows, chandeliers, etc., by marauders. Doors were removed and most of the paneling was torn off and apparently used for firewood.

Through the cooperation of the American Embassy, most of the necessary materials needed to repair this building have been secured. Most of the major repairs will be completed within thirty days permitting occupancy. Meanwhile the chapel in Rotterdam nears completion also. (European Mission History.)

At conference our family was so proud of you when President Smith read your inspiring letter to the conference. It was read at the closing session, and the crowds were enormous—the largest of any meeting I have ever attended.

The conference was all so wonderful but, my, we did miss our dear husband and father. But the Lord shall make it up to us, and He is truly blessing us both and our children in so many, many ways. (FAB to ETB.)

Brother and Sister N. P. Olsen, a lovely Danish couple who just arrived here from Denmark, spent the evening with us. They had met and been with my devoted husband in Denmark a few weeks before. Brother Olsen and his wife came out to Utah to go through the temple. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 1946:

THE HAGUE AND UTRECHT, NETHERLANDS

Arrangements were made for storage space at a modern warehouse in Rotterdam in which the welfare supplies, which are now arriving in carlot shipments, can be stored. Distribution will be made to the various branches through the mission office.

In this connection several conferences were held with officials of governmental relief agencies and plans discussed to prevent any possible misuse being made of supplies now being received. We were assured of complete cooperation on their part in assisting with our welfare program. (European Mission History.)

While conditions have greatly improved in Belgium and Holland particularly, the situation continues very critical in the Netherlands. That country was stripped of practically everything movable by the invading hordes. As a result, the country is short of clothing, bedding, farm machinery and equipment, all types of railroad rolling stock, automobiles, trucks, and food supplies.

In our contacts with the Saints and leading governmental officials, we were able to get a fairly accurate appraisal of the situation in the Netherlands. Adding to the seriousness of the problem is the fact that the moral tone of the people is at a low ebb and there is much evidence of pilfering, corruption, and selfishness in connection with the distribution of the products that are available in limited quantities.

Newspaper reports regarding the unsavory operations of the two national relief organizations, which are working at cross-purposes in large measure, are in all the papers. This situation, coupled with the fact that these organizations have received the impression that a large part of our products should be turned over for general distribution, has presented a real problem in the Netherlands. (European Mission History.)

I was in attendance at the home of Patriarch Smith and wife to a lovely turkey dinner. Joseph Fielding Smith and wife drove me there. I sat at the table with Elder Harold B. Lee and Sister Adele C. Howells, president of the general Primary. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 10, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Arrived in England and, after two hours clearing customs, etc., we drove to London.

It is good to be back although our rooms were piled high with our office and other supplies, and baskets of mail are awaiting our attention.

Was overjoyed to have six letters from my devoted family, all containing good news, love, and evidence of support and righteous living. Ate meals in the office to save time and, after long letter to my loyal wife, retired at midnight. (ETB Journal.)

Everywhere in Europe today food is the principal topic of discussion. Newspapers carry headlines almost daily. This is particularly true of London.

There seems to be great interest in former President Herbert Hoover's arrival in Europe. It has apparently given the people new hope in knowing as they do his knowledge of and interest in the food problem in Europe and his statesmanlike handling of the problem following World War I. He is certainly faced with an unfavorable situation.

The next three or four months will likely be the most critical in Europe from a food standpoint, assuming of course that we get normal crops this fall—and this is almost too much to hope for in view of the lateness of the season and the shortage of feed, fertilizer, farm equipment, and work stock, to say nothing of the weakened physical condition of the people who are laboring on the farms. Spring has opened up earlier than usual in most European countries, and the moisture conditions are below normal. In the meantime, we find people more hopeful as spring begins to blossom out. All along the way we saw people digging roots in the fields and gathering greens of various kinds to supplement their meager diet. (European Mission History.)

THURSDAY, APRIL 11, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Had lunch today with President Hugh B. Brown and family who have just been released from the British Mission, effective as soon as Brother Selvoy Boyer and family can arrive to take over the work. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, APRIL 13, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day dictating and reading mail. Received a lovely box of fruit and nuts from my devoted wife and family and newspapers containing a report on part of the conference.

The April 8th issue had a picture of my wife and five oldest children with Captain Badger, who arrived in Salt Lake from Paris. It was a joy to receive this only five days after it was taken by a Deseret News photographer. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, APRIL 14, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

At work in office. Attended sacrament and fast meeting in the London Branch and had supper at the mission home. (ETB Journal.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe called at our home. (FAB Journal.)

Brother Hanley brought us up several nice rosebushes and planted them. The electrician came and fixed my oven to the stove. (FAB to ETB.)

Tomorrow I will pick up the lawnmower and, believe me, the lawn surely needs cutting. We've had to wait so long for it to be sharpened. It will be the first cutting, and we will rake it good as you suggested before cutting. (FAB to ETB.)

Know always that we are praying constantly for you—for your health, strength, success in accomplishing the Lord's work—and praying that the Lord will be your constant companion and that the children and I shall always be a support and help to you forever in accomplishing the things you so much desire to do. (FAB to ETB.)

TUESDAY, APRIL 16, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day. (ETB Journal.)

Your two letters were so wonderful. I've just been walking on air today since I've received them. I have read and reread them. Just can't get my work done, and I don't seem to care either. (FAB to ETB.)

SATURDAY, APRIL 20, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND BASEL, SWITZERLAND

Office and then left for Zurich.

We rode to Basel by fast electric train, and in evening attended conference of the Swiss Mission, where I spoke for twenty minutes. (ETB Journal.)

Tomorrow is Easter, and we shall be thinking of you so much and we shall miss you. (FAB to ETB.)

SUNDAY, APRIL 21, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND

This has been a memorable day for the Saints of the Swiss Mission. We have held an all-day mission-wide conference and dedicated the lovely new Basel chapel.

Meetings began with an officers' and teachers' meeting and continued, with time off only for food served at the building, until 9:15 P.M. It was a joyous occasion.

The large chapel-recreation hall was filled to overflowing, and the Lord blessed us richly with His Spirit. The music was a credit to the people as was their entire program which compares favorably, as does their leadership, with the better stakes at home.

The dedicatory service had 540 people in attendance—95 nonmembers. I then gave ten more blessings and left for the mission home with a deep feeling of gratitude for the Lord's sustaining power throughout the day and for the love and devotion of the Saints. (ETB Journal.)

Easter Sunday, and we surely miss our wonderful husband and father.

Reed and Mark are making it a lovely Easter for the four girls—hiding Easter eggs, taking the girls to the capitol to roll their eggs. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, APRIL 22, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND, AND ZURICH, SWITZERLAND

In the evening I visited with Brother Badwagen Piranian, former president of the Palestine-Syrian Mission. I hope to be able to reopen this mission soon, the Lord being willing, and hope to visit the people there in the fall. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 24, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Conferences today with officials regarding transportation of missionaries from London to continental posts and movement of relief to European countries now under military control. (ETB Journal.)

The baby is getting along just fine now and growing so fat. She has put on several pounds since she has been sick. I have been feeding her more and seeing she gets a lot more rest.

When we mention your name, she just bubbles all over and is just so thrilled to talk about you and see your picture. She talks so much. She can say sentences now. (FAB to ETB.)

Darling, I sent another box of candy and a box of nuts, fruits, paper pads, pencils, etc.

The Lord is surely constantly with me. He is helping me so much, and, T dear, I certainly feel the power of your prayers to help me. The Lord's guiding Spirit is close to me. (FAB to ETB.)

T, this home is just like four walls since you left. It just isn't home without you. (FAB to ETB.)

SATURDAY, APRIL 27, 1946:

SUNDERLAND, ENGLAND

Left Birmingham and drove to Sunderland.

After a lovely lunch at the home of Brother and Sister William Oates, both of whom were young people in their early teens when I was here on my first mission, we attended the first session of the conference in the old chapel on Tundall Road.

It is a source of joy to come back into a district where one has labored on his first mission as a young man of twenty-two years. Fond memories pass through my mind as I contemplate those sweet and satisfying experiences of twenty-three years ago.

I am grateful that, as I look back on that first mission, I have not one single regret. I thank the Lord for His mercy and for the great strengthening of my testimony which came during that period.

I am sorry to find that some who were faithful twenty- three years ago are inactive now. I called on one of these families on my way home tonight and hope to see others before I leave as time permits. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, APRIL 28, 1946:

SUNDERLAND, ENGLAND

Attended conference of Newcastle District and spoke in all four meetings, three of which were public sessions. There were 147 at the evening meeting.

It has been a joyous day meeting those whom I learned to love and with whom I labored twenty-three years ago on my first mission. My feelings have been so tender today it has been difficult to speak. They have all been most kind, and my heart goes out to them in the pure love of the gospel.

After a good supper at Brother and Sister F. William Oates', I ordained Fredrick William Oates, Jr., a teacher and had a good visit with these good people and President Hugh B. Brown and family. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, APRIL 29, 1946:

SUNDERLAND, ENGLAND

Left the Oates at Sunderland and, after visiting the spot near the Sunderland railway station where I was mobbed while holding my last street meeting in England in 1923, drove to Carlisle. (ETB Journal.)

We drove from Sunderland to Carlisle, my first field of labor on my first mission. I spent all the time, when not driving, visiting the Saints I had known years ago. It was a real joy, and I hope I did some good. Some of them aren't as faithful as they once were. The branch was closed during the war because there were no missionaries or priesthood. I'm hoping it will reopen soon. I spent nine happy months here after bidding good-bye to loved ones at home. (ETB to FAB.)

Toward evening we went to nearby Gretna Green, Scotland, and visited the notoriously famous blacksmith shop, scene of thousands of runaway marriages performed during the past 150 years over the blacksmith anvil under the laws of Scotland, which eliminated God and the church from the wedding ceremony and united couples simply by declaration of their desire to wed. Its history was very interesting to hear from the lips of the last "priest" who performed marriages here, the last official ceremony having been performed in 1940. (European Mission History.)

President and Sister Boyer, who will take President and Sister Hugh B. Brown's place, called me up. I am going to see them before they leave for England. I want to give them a box of cookies (homemade) for you. I wish they could take me with them. I do long for you, dearest, but always I know your work with the Lord comes first, and when your work over there is completed and done well, then we can be with each other again. (FAB to ETB.)

TUESDAY, APRIL 30, 1946:

CARLISLE, ENGLAND

Drove from Carlisle to the Tyne Commission Quay between Newcastle and North Shields. (ETB Journal.)

Along the way we viewed the famous Roman wall, stretching most of the distance between the cities of Carlisle and Newcastle, as we rode along the ancient Roman road which in its present repaired state is still a marvel of highway construction. (European Mission History.)

Cleared customs, had car loaded, and got aboard the SS Jupiter, a 2,500-ton Norwegian boat, bound for Stavanger, Norway. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1946:

STAVANGER, NORWAY

We are many miles from land headed northward to Norway.

The sea was a bit rough last night, but is quite smooth today. We aren't seasick yet, and I believe we'll escape. Hope so anyway!

It is a sobering experience to be where you cannot see land in any direction. As one views the vast stretches of swaying water, he feels so small and dependent. Occasionally we see a sea gull even this far out, and we sighted a mine sweeper this morning. They have cleared a strip three miles wide of mines, and the boats are to stay in this lane for safety while the sweeping process is extended to other vast areas. (ETB to FAB.)

President A. Richard Peterson, his wife, and a number of the Saints were on hand to greet us upon our arrival in Stavanger.

Interviews were held with press representatives of the leading newspapers that evening and the following morning. Arrangements for the holding of meetings here, in Bergen, and in Oslo were consummated during the day.

With the arrival of one carload of clothing, one carload of food, and 300 cases of meat from Zion, the Saints of this mission have been adequately supplied with necessary wearing apparel and many items of food which are still critically short. The housing situation is still most unfavorable and may seriously limit the number of missionaries who will be permitted to enter this land.

Conditions generally throughout the mission are very encouraging, and the faith, loyalty, and devotion of the Saints to the Church are greater than ever before. (European Mission History.)

THURSDAY, MAY 2, 1946:

STAVANGER, NORWAY

We held a meeting at which seventy-one members and forty-two friends were in attendance. Brother Gustav Wersland, the branch president, who led the Norwegian underground forces during the war and who exemplifies—through his courage, faith, and many miraculous escapes—the spirit and faith of our Norwegian Saints, reported that through the timely assistance of the Church welfare supplies all members in that branch are being adequately clothed and nourished.

To see the large number of members almost completely outfitted in American clothing makes one feel as though he were speaking to an American audience. The gratitude of the Saints is reflected in their increased activity and devotion to the Church. Too much cannot be said for the feeling of brotherhood this has engendered among our people.

During the day the branch president took us sightseeing and showed us some of the destruction and wastefulness of war. Many evidences were seen of the ruthless disregard for life and property by many members of the occupation forces. We saw large graveyards of wrecked German planes and equipment and great storehouses of ammunition and weapons being salvaged for future needs. (European Mission History.)

SATURDAY, MAY 4, 1946:

STAVANGER AND BERGEN, NORWAY

Many highways north are still snowbound, and a number of bridges still unrepaired, so we found it advisable to leave our car in Stavanger and proceed by steamer to Bergen, where we arrived early Saturday morning.

Here the Saints tendered us a hearty reception, and evidence of the invaluable assistance which has come through the welfare program to these good people could be noted on every hand. They look well and strong and are better clothed and fed now than the average. (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, MAY 5, 1946:

BERGEN, NORWAY

Held three sessions of conference of the Bergen District with about 240 in attendance. The spirit and program were lovely, especially the program by the children of the Sunday School and Primary. It would have been a credit to the people anywhere in the Church. The Saints were most gracious, and the lovely sunny day one to be long remembered. Thanks to the Lord for it all. (ETB Journal.)

I attended the luncheon of the wives of the General Authorities.

I am going to make you some candy and cookies for Brother Boyer to take over to you. I'll have to make the candy tonight. I am going to give them to him in the morning when he is at the Church offices to be set apart for his mission. (FAB to ETB.)

MONDAY, MAY 6, 1946:

BERGEN, STAVANGER, AND OSLO, NORWAY

Left Bergen last night by boat for Stavanger. The trip was pleasant though quite rough as we crossed the widest fjord. From Stavanger, after bidding the Saints a fond adieu, we left by auto enroute to Oslo.

The beauties of the landscape will always be remembered. Roads were narrow and torturous but generally smooth. The scenery was second only to Glacier National Park and is so different that it really has no superior.

As I gazed on the inspiring valley with its green fields and mountains and hills in the distance and the lovely clear river meandering its way to the fjord looking out to the sea, I was led to exclaim, "Behold what God hath wrought!"

This seemed a day of perfect beauty, except for the absence of my devoted wife and family. We stopped at night in a lovely lodge as the only guests in an ideal, quiet spot looking out on the lovely fjord.

God be praised for His goodness in providing such beauty for His unappreciative children. How I pray for the time when the children of men will cease wars, strife, and selfishness and enjoy what the Lord has provided in peacefully living together. (ETB Journal.)

Seeing the millions of large rocks along the way, neatly piled in massive stone fences close together, as far as the eye could see in all directions—rocks removed from the land to permit cultivation—causes one to marvel at the tedious task involved in earning a livelihood from these small plots of land.

The primitive scenery of this land is most delightful to see. We had to skirt around many fjords along the way and were spellbound by the beauty of Kvinnesdal, considered one of the two foremost scenic beauty spots in the nation. We had comfortable accommodations during our overnight stay at a picturesque summer resort on the shores of one of the many majestic fjords. (European Mission History.)

I just came back from buying some groceries at our old shopping place. I ran into Elder Mark Petersen and his wife. They were enjoying themselves together and slowly and casually buying groceries. I thought how lucky and fortunate they were to be able to spend so much time with each other. (FAB to ETB.)

Went to Church offices to say good-bye to Brother and Sister Boyer, who leave for London and who will be taking over the missionary work in that part of Europe.

I couldn't help but shed some tears when I thought of their being able to see my husband before I would. They were tears of love and appreciation for my husband. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, MAY 7, 1946:

OSLO, NORWAY

Many of the welfare supplies received recently in carload lots have already been distributed to our people. The remaining stores of food and clothing were inspected before leaving for Sweden and found to be in excellent condition. Almost without exception the shipments have arrived intact, and their distribution is proceeding in a very orderly manner. Future welfare needs were ascertained and a program outlined for the inauguration of welfare projects within the mission.

A visit was also paid to the American Embassy to solicit their assistance in securing permission from the Norwegian government for our missionaries to continue their work in this nation, permission which had been refused three days ago. We are hopeful that the cooperation assured us will result in the desired permission being granted.

Government officials at present are very unwilling to admit aliens unless it can be shown that such persons are assured of food and housing upon their arrival. In view of the food and housing situation in Norway, it would appear we will not be able to have missionaries go to that country in large numbers until conditions improve. (ETB Journal.)

The mail today brought the sad news of the passing of Sister George F. Richards, a chosen daughter of God, mother of fifteen children (thirteen living)—a queen if ever there was one. May the Lord comfort Brother Richards, president of our Council and a true Latter-day Saint and prophet of God. (ETB Journal.)

Mark took me to the Deseret Theater players' show "Lady." I was wishing I had stayed at home, but my son thought it would do me good to get out.

I am not going out again for a long time. I don't like to leave home even for two or three hours. When my husband comes home from Europe, then I will enjoy going out. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, MAY 8, 1946:

OSLO, NORWAY, AND GOTEBORG, SWEDEN

We talked with President Hugh B. Brown from Goteborg. He informed us that the British government has just ruled that aliens coming to England will not be permitted to stay longer than two months. However, he reported that they had extended this ruling to six months in the case of our missionaries. This, of course, will help very little.

We hope to look into this matter further as soon as we return to London. However, in view of the serious food situation in all of Europe and the fact that it is becoming increasingly serious in England, it is quite likely that the British government will discourage foreigners coming to the country for some months to come. The food outlook for 1947 is not encouraging, and Great Britain will likely feel the pinch of food shortages for a considerable period.

In view of this fact, I am wondering if it would not be well to consider sending missionaries intended for Great Britain to Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, Czechoslovakia, and France, where the policies of the governments are more liberal at present regarding aliens. The opportunity for missionary work is unusually favorable in some of these countries, particularly Sweden. It would be a great blessing if we could have a hundred missionaries here at the earliest possible date to take advantage of the favorable situation which exists. (European Mission History.)

I receive so regularly such inspiring and beautiful and encouraging letters from my husband. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, MAY 10, 1946:

JONKOPING AND OREBRO, SWEDEN

Inspected proposed building sites and drove to Orebro. Held meeting with Saints and public meeting. At least half of the congregation were nonmembers, and several stayed to ask questions and discuss religion. Loaned three copies of the Book of Mormon and passed out several tracts and pamphlets. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, MAY 12, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

Arrived in Stockholm and began reading mail, which kept me busy until time for meeting. Spoke to Saints for forty minutes. The chapel was filled. Many friends were present. Music and spirit were excellent. (ETB Journal.)

Today is Mother's Day. My dear husband sent me such a beautiful letter.

The baby, myself, and all the rest of the family went to church this morning.

We took several pictures of the family to send to our dear daddy.

Several called to the home to visit with me, both friends and relatives.

Our baby, who is around twenty months old, looked so sweet today. I bought her a sweet new dress and hat of yellow, new sweater, shoes, stockings—and she's such a dear! (FAB Journal.)

The day was beautiful, and the children were all so kind, and tried so hard to take your place and treat me as you would have done if you had been home. There is no one that could take your place, dearest.

It would have been perfect if we could have had the privilege and honor of your being with us, but we realized that it wasn't to be and are so thankful for you and what you have been and are to us and that you are helping thousands of unfortunate people and doing so much for us as a family by living and doing as you are. (FAB to ETB.)

MONDAY, MAY 13, 1946:

STOCKHOLM AND NORRKOPING, SWEDEN

On this visit we have had more time and have attended many meetings in the branches and in the districts and conferred with local leaders. In doing so, we have found many doctrines and practices which have crept in during the war period which must be corrected. We have discussed the details of these problems with the mission presidents and feel certain, with the help of the Lord, it will be possible to make the necessary adjustments.

What we have seen in the last two weeks only emphasizes the inspiration of the First Presidency in warning the priesthood of the Church regarding the dangers of world doctrines and practices creeping into the Church and the importance of keeping our procedures and practices simple and plain as the Lord intended.

Among the practices we have encountered may be mentioned the following:

Weddings: After the civil marriage, another marriage ceremony was held in the chapel patterned after the ceremony of the state church—viz., the chapel was decorated and lighted with candles, bride and groom would walk up the aisle with all their attendants, kneel at the altar, and be blessed and remarried by the presiding officer.

Prayers. Only ordained elders could be used in opening any meeting with prayer.

Speakers. Only presiding officers were permitted to speak at Sunday night meetings. LDS servicemen connected with the U.S. legations, who were former missionaries in the respective countries, were not being used in any capacity of Church activity even though they were fully worthy and willing.

Priesthood: Elders have been organized into quorums instead of groups.

Candlelight. Candles were being used at various meetings and social events.

False Doctrine. All nonmembers belonged to the church of the devil and, as his children, would not be saved. This was driving many otherwise sincere investigators away from our meetings.

Title Changes: Branches were being called assemblies instead of branches, and the mission president was called the mission leader. Some of the local leaders had emphasized that the titles were too American and should be changed to conform with national practices.

Meeting Procedures: Congregational singing in many places was completely eliminated, and in other cases choristers or song leaders have been eliminated. In the British Mission it is a universal practice to stand for a minute of silence at the end of the prayer while the organ plays.

The above will be enough to indicate some of the practices which have crept in during the war period. I am sure that all of them can be corrected in the spirit of kindness and love without any serious offense.

The local brethren have done a remarkable work and have given unselfishly of their time and means in the furtherance of the work of the Lord, but thank the Lord the war did not extend for a ten-year period! Otherwise, I fear we would have found crosses and crowns on every pulpit and many of our practices and procedures so far removed from the standard procedures of the Church that it would be difficult to differentiate between our practices and the practices of the world in many matters. (European Mission History.)

At 8:30 this morning the telephone rang and my precious husband was trying to talk to me over the phone from Sweden. The operator said it would take some time to get the call through. She just now called and said the call couldn't get through. When my husband called me a few weeks ago from Basel, Switzerland, he said it usually takes three days before they can get the call through.

I know my husband will keep on trying. He is so thoughtful and good and precious in every way. I think he was trying to get the call through, especially for Mother's Day greetings and love to me. I appreciate his efforts and knowing he tried to call me. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, MAY 14, 1946:

NORRKOPING, JONKOPING, AND MALMO, SWEDEN

The prospects for missionary work in this mission were never more favorable. People generally have adopted a very friendly attitude, and goodly numbers of friends and investigators are responding well to the limited missionary activities now carried on.

Our members are very enthusiastic about the possibility of launching a building program throughout the mission, and every effort is being made by them to assist in the establishment of comfortable Church buildings throughout the mission that will be a credit to the Church and to the communities in which they live.

A few days prior to our arrival in Sweden, Elder C. Fritz Johansson, former acting mission president of the Swedish Mission, who had been called during our former visit to labor as a missionary in Finland, left with a companion to begin his labors in that great land. The prospects for a rich harvest in that field appear very opportune. In connection with his missionary activities, a survey will be made of the present and future welfare needs of our members there. Most of these will be supplied by the Swedish Saints in response to a recommendation that they organize such welfare projects as will enable them to care for the Finnish members of this mission.

Conditions generally in Sweden are conducive to large numbers of missionaries from Zion being sent to that land. President Blomquist observed that he believes this nation to be more receptive to the gospel now than ever before. All necessary books, pamphlets, and tracts are being secured in preparation for extensive missionary activities. (European Mission History.)

We are surely kept busy with Relief Society work. We (all the wards) are making hundreds of rag rugs to help with the Church welfare. We have our own loom and are weaving them ourselves, the sisters coming to the ward countless extra days of the week to work so hard on making these rugs. (FAB to ETB.)

THURSDAY, MAY 16, 1946:

COPENHAGEN AND AARHUS, DENMARK

Left Copenhagen by train for Aarhus. Was met at the train by the branch presidency and other brethren, who presented me with a lovely bouquet of flowers.

Spent afternoon visiting and writing to my family and had a good bath—the first since Saturday.

Attended and spoke at meeting tonight. The hall was full to overflowing. (ETB Journal.)

The meeting hall in Aarhus would not accommodate all those present, so the brethren had installed a public address system so the entire proceedings could be broadcast to some fifty people seated on benches provided in the lovely front yard of our chapel there. Many passersby and curious neighbors also listened with interest. (European Mission History.)

I ran into Brother George F. Richards, and he told me how much he appreciated the lovely letter you wrote him.

You asked about Sister Richards and her passing. She took pneumonia very suddenly and passed away so quickly. She had attended the April conference, and her husband in his conference address paid her lovely tributes and compliments and said how much she had meant to him, etc. (FAB to ETB.)

FRIDAY, MAY 17, 1946:

AARHUS AND AALBORG, DENMARK

One new branch has been organized since the missionaries were evacuated some six years ago, and another branch will be organized shortly. Throughout the land great interest is being shown by the honest in heart for the gospel message, and the opportunities for missionary work are most favorable. The present national policies are conducive to large numbers working here with the people. (European Mission History.)

During the war years this mission sent considerable relief supplies to Norway and Holland, and the spirit of welfare activity is already deeply rooted here. (European Mission History.)

President George Albert Smith is just fine. I have seen him several times lately, and he is making trips here and there. (FAB to ETB.)

SATURDAY, MAY 18, 1946:

AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

President and Sister Cornelius Zappey were at the airport in Amsterdam to meet us in a new Citroen car which, during our recent visit there, we had arranged for them to purchase for use in this mission. This has greatly facilitated their work inasmuch as all types of transportation in Holland are still badly crippled.

We were pleased to note that the mission home at The Hague, which was quite seriously damaged by a V-2 bomb and resultant pilfering, has been largely restored. Additional materials needed were authorized for purchase. It is impossible to purchase any type of beds at the present time, so temporary beds have been constructed from the lumber in which some of our welfare supplies for the mission have been shipped.

The first carloads of welfare supplies have arrived, but most of them have not yet been unloaded due to strikes at the waterfront. Those unloaded thus far appear to be in good condition. A survey of the needs of all members in the mission has been conducted, and arrangements to quickly distribute the needed articles, insofar as they are available, have been made.

Although this nation has made a remarkable recovery during the past few months, the need for assistance is still quite acute. The Saints are deeply grateful for all the assistance that has been given them.

A farewell testimonial and banquet were given the retiring mission presidency this evening by the Saints of the Rotterdam District. We were pleased to participate and see the splendid feeling of brotherhood that exists among these people. Following the testimonial, a special baptismal service was conducted at which nine new members were added to the Church. (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, MAY 19, 1946:

AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

This day will be long remembered. We held conference all day with the devoted Saints from all parts of the Netherlands. They turned out in great numbers, and hundreds were unable to gain admittance although we had loud speakers in the basement hall.

The sweet reception, as I walked through two lines of Boy Scouts and was presented with a lovely bouquet and plant in a large wooden shoe as I reached the front of the hall, brought tears to my eyes as the vast audience stood as I entered. I know it was not me but the office I represent that they honored, and how humble it makes me feel as I witness the love and loyalty they show a representative of the General Authorities. How I pray I shall never do anything to weaken their faith and love. (ETB Journal.)

We held our largest conference so far in Europe. President Zappey referred to you and the children in the big conference attended by over 700 people. He read a few lines he had copied from Barbara's letter where she told about missing me, especially Mother, and how you were "pretty sad at times, but we all try to cheer her up the best we can." (ETB to FAB.)

Many stood the entire time during a meeting of over two hours. Some of the Saints had stood for three hours on a bus or train coming to the meeting and then had to stand throughout the entire meeting. Later we asked that all such people be given preference in the next meeting.

They all do whatever they're asked to do in a real spirit of devotion. They truly have the real love of the gospel in their hearts. I am so encouraged over the prospects for work here. I feel sure we'll baptize many hundreds in the next few months.

How we need missionaries! Three have arrived and eleven more are enroute, but we could use two hundred at once! (ETB to FAB.)

These meetings were all that one could ask for with one exception—there was not a hall large enough to hold all the people. Many were turned away, others were seated on the floors, standing in the aisles, and seated in classrooms below the main assembly hall listening to the proceedings over the public address system. It was inspirational to see this great gathering, and their singing was a real credit to any conference.

There is urgent need for a new building to accommodate the members and friends in Rotterdam. We formerly had two branches here, one being destroyed during the blitz on Rotterdam, but now both branches are meeting in one meetinghouse. (European Mission History.)

There is a wonderful spirit in this mission. The field is white already to harvest. Hundreds of new investigators are inquiring about the Church. Many of these are from the upper class in the nation and have no need of or particular interest in any type of material assistance. Every precaution is being taken to insure that all new members are truly converted and not just applying for baptism in the hope that they may become recipients of Church welfare assistance.

Housing facilities for missionaries are very scarce, but every effort is being made to secure quarters so large numbers of missionaries may come to this land. (European Mission History.)

MONDAY, MAY 20, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

At the suggestion of the First Presidency, I previously accepted an appointment to represent the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives on the five-man delegation from the United States to the first International Conference of Agriculture Producers at which thirty-one nations participated. (European Mission History.)

I met with the American delegation to the International Conference of Agricultural Producers in a preliminary meeting at the Dorchester Hotel. (ETB Journal.)

All delegates were presented to the King and Queen and then honored on the eve of the first session at a lavish reception and dinner at the Savoy Hotel as guests of the National Farmers Union of England and Wales. (European Mission History.)

After I had some pleasant talks with various delegates about the Church, we ate a lovely dinner.

It is a fine group of men, but what a contrast in atmosphere in this tobacco-filled room with tables laden with liquor and the atmosphere of our conference in Holland yesterday. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, MAY 21, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Met with American delegation and joined the first plenary session at Church House along a large U-shaped table running out from the speaker's table with markers indicating each national delegation. It was an impressive sight to see leaders from thirty-one leading agricultural sections assembled.

The language used is English, although the delegations from France, Belgium, and Luxemborg have asked for time after each important statement to allow their translators to give the purport of each.

In the evening a formal reception was held at Lancaster House, St. James. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, MAY 23, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

International conference committee meetings all day.

Tonight President and Sister Selvoy Boyer, new president of the British Mission, and eleven missionaries for Holland and three for Denmark arrived in London. (ETB Journal.)

The leak in the gutter near the front door I will have checked on.

I have had men up several times to fix the stove, toilet, sprinklers, a leak on the front sidewalk.

Brother Hanley insists on putting some more flowers in place of the tulips that you planted and were so lovely that have all died down now. He is coming up right soon to put more flowers in for us. (FAB to ETB.)

Thanks so much for the post card you sent me of the two bears hugging each other. I wish it could have been you and me hugging each other, but it won't be long before we can enjoy that with each other again. (FAB to ETB.)

FRIDAY, MAY 24, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office and conferences all day. President and Sister Boyer called at the office and brought presents from my ever-loyal wife. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, MAY 26, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

A day to be long remembered because I talked for five minutes to my darling, devoted wife and sweetheart and my sweet family—first Flora, then each child, and then my dear wife again.

How my heart filled with emotion and deep gratitude as I heard their dear voices—those I love even as life itself. I am deeply thankful for the wonders of science that make this glorious experience possible. The Lord be praised for His Spirit which has blessed His children and would do so even more if we'd live worthy of it.

I'm most grateful for my ever-loyal family. No man could ask for sweeter, cleaner children—more devoted to the Church and all that's fine and good. How I thank the Lord for them and especially for my true companion, who is all a man could ask for in a wife and mother. To her goes most of the credit for the excellent training of the children and the little I've been able to accomplish.

Of course, we both give the Lord full credit for all things. She constantly reminds me and the children of this important fact. May the Lord bless and keep her and the children and exalt us in His celestial kingdom as a family unit unbroken.

I attended Sunday School in the London Branch and spoke to the adult members.

I attended a conference of the U.S. delegation to the International Agricultural Conference of Farm Organizations. (ETB Journal.)

We were a very happy family because our wonderful husband and father called from London, England. He talked to his six children too. It was grand to hear his dear, kind voice again.

He wanted to know how we all were, and wanted me to go to the doctor and be checked. I have been needing an operation, but when my husband was called as president of the European Mission, we put off having it.

I have been blessed by the Lord, and as long as we do as we are told by the Church authorities, we have no need to worry. (FAB Journal.)

I sent you a box with dried fruits, nuts, towels, pins, needles and thread, pads, etc., a few weeks ago. Hope you get it okay. By now you should have received the box of gum and hard candy drops. (FAB to ETB.)

MONDAY, MAY 27, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Attending conference. In the evening I visited the headquarters of the Oxford Group Moral Rearmament and had a pleasant visit with some six of their young leaders.

At the close of the conversation, at their request, I led the group in prayer and received an invitation to return, which I hope to do. This is a constructive force based on some of the basic principles which Christ taught and a recognition of the power and existence of the Spirit of God, which will lead and guide people who place themselves in tune with it.

I hope and pray they may be led to investigate the truth of the restored gospel. To Latter-day Saints, there is nothing new in what they accept. It is but a small part of the glorious plan of salvation vouchsafed to the Latter-day Saints for the blessing of the children of men. (ETB Journal.)

I believe I'm the happiest man in all the world this morning. I've had a most peaceful and restful night's sleep after an experience I shall never forget. It was a joy that defies description to talk to you all on the telephone last night. It was a bit of heaven on earth.

How I thank the Lord for the telephone and the blessings of science which made last night's experience possible. You'll never know how good it was to hear your sweet voice, darling, and the brief but affectionate greetings from the children. (ETB to FAB.)

TUESDAY, MAY 28, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Committee meetings of international conference. Attended a branch testimonial for President Hugh B. Brown and family. (ETB Journal.)

I am still walking on top of the air, thinking of the joy and satisfaction that I and the children received in talking to you over the telephone from London. It was so good to hear you laugh over the phone, and it was so soul-satisfying to hear your sweet dear voice again. (FAB to ETB.)

President J. Reuben Clark has told others that he feels that it was too much for our ward to expect me to be a counselor in the Relief Society when I already have such a big load to carry with you gone. (FAB to ETB.)

THURSDAY, MAY 30, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Resumption of plenary sessions of conference and special caucuses to adjust differences. It appears that the Constitution Committee report will be unanimous. Unity is hard to win, but the effort is worth it. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, MAY 31, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

The report of the Constitution Committee, where I've been serving when not in the Cooperative Committee, was unanimously approved in good spirit.

The conference came formally to a close at 6:00 P.M., followed by an hour or so of visiting at a buffet supper. Many fine friendships have been formed which I hope to preserve in the interest of the work of the Lord. (ETB Journal.)

The delegates representing the thirty-one nations all seemed to be men of high moral character who devoted themselves conscientiously to the job at hand. From the very beginning there were differences in both objectives and methods, but there was a spirit of give and take and a frankness of discussion throughout the conference which was most refreshing.

The spirit of this group of farm representatives was the most outstanding single feature of the conference. Most of them had never met before, but as they continued their deliberations through eleven days there developed bonds of friendship and a warmth of spirit that was most heartening.

While the conference closed on a very high note and while much good will no doubt result from this meeting of farm leaders from all parts of the world, yet the most difficult part of the projected program lies ahead. A twelve-month period for the various nations to carefully think through some of the matters discussed and considered in the excitement of the first international conference of farm leaders may tend to temper somewhat the action which most of the countries were ready to take immediately.

The National Farmers Union of England and Wales, which served as host for the conference, did everything within their power to make the visit to England most profitable and pleasant. Many tours, receptions, and social functions were arranged, including a visit to their Majesties, the King and Queen, agricultural shows, experiment stations, farming areas, estates, etc.

In this conference much consideration was given to the food problem. Perhaps the best summary of the world food situation was given at the concluding plenary session by Sir John Boyd Orr, member of Parliament and head of Food and Agriculture Organization, who flew from Washington, D.C., to address the closing session. Sir John, a Scotsman past seventy years of age, is recognized as one of the world's authorities on world food production, demand, and distribution. He had just attended a meeting of FAO and participated in the establishment of an International Emergency Food Council, with representatives of twenty nations in attendance.

The substance of his summary was that with the 1946 harvest, acute shortages of food would continue the 1946-47 crop year. He stated that the only hope for enough cereals to feed the world in 1947 was through emphasis on maximum production of cereals and the diversion of grains used by animals to direct use as food for humans.

In view of the conference proceedings and findings, the vision of the General Authorities of the Church in reemphasizing the great importance of continuing and expanding the Church welfare program stands out in bold relief, and the inspiration behind the Word of Wisdom, given to the world 113 years ago, concerning the Lord's will regarding man's diet, presents a real challenge to all the world.

Throughout the conference many opportunities were afforded to discuss the Church and its program with many of the delegates from several countries, and their response was most gratifying. I was pleased to accept the invitations of many of these men to contact them further when I visit their respective countries. (European Mission History.)

Attended John H. Taylor's funeral. Brother Taylor stayed at our home several nights when we lived in Washington, D.C. He was a grand man and was always so kind and thoughtful of myself and children. (FAB Journal.)

SATURDAY, JUNE 1, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Saw a matinee of "Song of Norway" showing life and music of Grieg. It was exquisite and most enjoyable. Wished my family could have seen it.

Retired early with a bit of a cold.

Received lovely encouraging letters from my devoted family. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, JUNE 2, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

In room all day with a slight cold and sore throat. Stayed in bed until 1:00 P.M. and doctored myself. Later prepared a bulletin for mission presidents.

Alone all afternoon and evening, but it seemed good. Am feeling much better. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, JUNE 4, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office until noon. Then met President Hugh B. Brown and were the guests of Captain Bing, member of Parliament, at lunch at which we discussed the problem of having our missionaries permitted into England. Captain Bing was very much interested and said he'd do all possible to help us. He introduced us to another member of Parliament with whom we discussed the matter.

The captain also took us into the House of Lords Chamber where Commons are now meeting while the House of Commons Chamber, destroyed during war, is being rebuilt. We also saw the House of Lords sitting as a court and saw the speaker march in with his retinue of attendants just before Commons was to meet. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 5, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

To airport intending to fly to Frankfurt and Berlin. Weather prevented.

Went to House of Commons to introduce President Boyer to Captain Bing. Later was guest of Bing's at debate of foreign situation in House of Commons. Heard excellent analysis by Winston Churchill and Prime Minister Attlee. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, JUNE 7, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Bade President Hugh B. Brown and family good-bye as they left for Zion via Liverpool. President Brown has done a good work in England and the people love him. (ETB Journal.)

Took Barbara, Beverly, Bonnie, and Flora Beth to the Lion House to dinner. I bought four dresses alike for them, and they surely look adorable.

I took the girls in to shake hands with President Clark, Apostle Lee, and others. Everyone admired them, and they are sweet beautiful girls.

The Saints from Sweden sent lovely ribbon for the girls' hair. The color is blue and gold, their country's flag colors.

We all, including mother and the four girls, had our hair in braids and each wore the ribbons on the top of our heads. (FAB Journal.)

SATURDAY, JUNE 8, 1946:

LONDON AND ROCHDALE, ENGLAND

We had a lovely Gold and Green Ball—nine queens and eighteen attendants. They were all lovely Mormon girls. I was proud of them.

I longed for you many times, especially during the dance. Of course missionaries don't dance, but how I would have loved to dance with you, darling. (ETB to FAB.)

SUNDAY, JUNE 9, 1946:

ROCHDALE, ENGLAND

Conference meetings all day. The meetings were a joy—full of the spirit of love, unity, and gratitude. The largest session had over 500 present and all were well attended. (ETB Journal.)

At the afternoon session, a large group of LDS Boy Scouts participated in a most impressive presentation of the colors at the beginning of the session. Prior to this presentation, these Boy Scouts and a number of Beehive girls marched around the town hall square to the music of their twenty-piece drum and bugle corps. They are a most enthusiastic and well-disciplined group of whom the Church may be justly proud.

The latter part of this session of conference was devoted to the presentation of a most impressive symbolical pageant depicting the war between good and evil, entitled "Truth Triumphant." (European Mission History.)

Attended June Conference. All of the family attended three meetings today. We enjoyed them very much, and especially hearing a lovely telegram that was sent from my dearly beloved husband, who sent it from Europe. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, JUNE 10, 1946:

ROCHDALE AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Before attending a second meeting with branch and district presidents, we visited our Boy Scouts at their camp area. A drenching downpour of rain had forced them to abandon their tents and seek shelter in a nearby farm estate. Though thoroughly soaked, their spirits were high, and they sang enthusiastically after they got started. (European Mission History.)

The expressions of testimony and gratitude manifest in the general priesthood and Relief Society meetings this morning were evidence that the spirit of the conference had been received and that a new era for the gospel in Great Britain had been inaugurated.

This conference has been most successful not only in winning the love and confidence of the people, but in lifting the Saints from their spirit of war depression to new heights of enthusiastic missionary endeavor. A new era of expansion is on the threshold. (European Mission History.)

TUESDAY, JUNE 11, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

The lovely box of dried fruit, nuts, candy, pads, towels, pencils, pins, and thread arrived this morning just in time. I'm taking them to Germany with me for the children. They'll be so grateful. The pins will be useful here as the laundry, when we can get any done, takes off most of the buttons. I haven't had a shirt laundered right since coming here except when Saints have done it.

You almost keep us in food—one more proof I have the most thoughtful wife. Really it's true! (ETB to FAB.)

The Lord just opened the way so I completed a telephone call right through to Berlin, the first into the occupied areas since I've come here. (ETB to FAB.)

FRIDAY, JUNE 14, 1946:

ESBJERG, DENMARK, AND KIEL, GERMANY

Held a meeting with the missionaries, after which administered to some of the Saints.

Left for Kiel, Germany. At border were threatened to be held up, but after some persuasion we were permitted to go through even though we had not received our military orders. (ETB Journal.)

We arrived in bombed-out Kiel to find that the telegram sent the Monday before had not yet arrived notifying the district president of the meeting. The local brethren wanted to borrow bicycles and ride around to the various Saints and out to the little branches some miles away and tell them to come to the meeting that night.

When we told them not to do this, they said, "President Benson, you won't go away until we've had a meeting with you. This is the happiest day of our lives." After some consideration, we promised to return here for a meeting Sunday night although it would be out of our way some 150 miles. (ETB to FAB.)

President George Albert Smith called over the phone and inquired as to how we were getting along. He said that my husband was doing a marvelous and wonderful work in Europe as president of the European Mission. President Smith said, "He is accomplishing things that none of us others could have accomplished. (FAB Journal.)

SATURDAY, JUNE 15, 1946:

KIEL AND BREMEN, GERMANY

After visiting briefly with local and district officers and arranging for a meeting with the Saints, we left for Bremen without military orders.

Near Hamburg, through the courtesy of the British authorities, I was able to call Frankfurt regarding our orders. Received no personal assurance we'd receive them but, feeling sure the Lord would open the way, we drove on and entered the USA conclave and drove into Bremen.

After careful checking, I cabled the First Presidency to route all welfare supplies via Antwerp, Belgium, and Geneva according to first instructions. Also cabled the International Red Cross in Geneva to divide up the two shipments for Munich and Austria so part could go at once to Kiel, Hamburg, the Ruhr, and Frankfurt.

Held a lovely meeting with the Saints and visited with them until 9:00 P.M. (ETB Journal.)

In a meeting held with the Saints in Bremen, 240 were in attendance, the greater part of which were friends and investigators. Here, as in the other cities, we found our members true and faithful, devoted and optimistic even though all of these large cities are seventy to ninety percent destroyed. (European Mission History.)

Brother Toronto, the newly appointed president of the Czechoslovakia Mission, just called in to see me with his wife and to say good-bye and to be able to tell you he had seen me and that I am feeling fine and send you all my love. (FAB to ETB.)

SUNDAY, JUNE 16, 1946:

HAMBURG AND KIEL, GERMANY

This day will linger in my memory forever.

Left for Hamburg for meeting of priesthood and officers.

We held a general session with the large hall, one of the very few not bombed out, filled to capacity and people standing. Nearly 500 attended.

There were the largest numbers of children I have seen at any meeting in Germany. They very beautifully addressed their greetings to me and presented me with some lovely flowers, and one little girl gave an original poem. I've never seen lovelier children anywhere over here, although they were pale and thin.

Just before the closing song, I had all the children eight and under line up in the middle aisle and, as they walked past me, I gave each one some gum or candy from those you and the children sent. President Zimmer said they'd been sent by my family for the German children. There must have been fifty to seventy-five children. I had to break some of the gum and candy (Life Savers) in two to make it go around.

These sweet, eager but polite little ones almost broke my heart as they looked up with their large eyes and pale faces filled with gratitude. They continued to thank me every chance they got until we drove away.

Then I had all mothers with babies come up, and I distributed a bar of soap (which you sent) to each and a few safety pins, needles, and thread, and an orange which we had coaxed from the army chef in Bremen. Flora dear, you'll never know how much these few little things meant. These women hadn't seen an orange for six-and-one-half years and hadn't had a bar of toilet soap or any pins or needles for years. They couldn't hold back the "ahs" and "ahas" as they saw them and yet they were most polite. You could see they'd starved themselves to try and give more to their children in true mother spirit.

How I wish I could have had baskets full of things—especially food—to give them. If I could have for each of these families the food wasted in the average American home, it would be much more than their total food supply at present. (ETB to FAB.)

There was much feeling of love and gratitude in the meeting. Many tears were shed.

No people could show more love for a church leader than that which these dear people showed me. The spirit of the meeting was excellent, and our hearts were warmed by the Holy Spirit. Somewhere over 400 attended. They stayed in their seats from 8:30 A.M. to 3:00 P.M. Some ate a little black bread or some chicken feed in water for lunch. (ETB Journal.)

I shall ever remember the scene of these sweet, innocent victims of the ravages of war—humble in their gratitude for the gospel, with no trace of enmity or hatred in their hearts. Surely when the Lord chooses the most faithful, these, His suffering children, will be among those most blessed. I shed tears with them, gave what encouragement I could, and left my blessing and love with them. (ETB Journal.)

Here's a thrilling story of the spirit behind the Church welfare plan. It has possibly had its parallel in many cities, but this particular instance is worthy of being called to the attention of the Church membership.

Screaming air raid sirens and unusually active anti-aircraft batteries announced the beginning of the thousand-bomber annihilation raids upon Hamburg, Germany. Before the night had passed, the city was a mass of flames and a smoldering wreckage. Among the thousands of casualties resulting from this first concentrated bombing raid were twenty-eight Latter-day Saints listed as dead and a larger number seriously wounded.

During the following two weeks bombers by the hundreds and by the thousands continued to pour their bombs upon this once proud and beautiful city. When the fires finally subsided and the smoke cleared away, Hamburg had been leveled to the ground. Hardly a building was left standing in the entire area. Somewhere in all the debris were thousands upon thousands of dead and many more thousands of wounded either receiving emergency treatment underground or in overcrowded hospitals nearby to which they had been evacuated.

Brother Otto Berndt, the district president of the Hamburg District, although he found himself bombed out for the second time and homeless, called together the members of the Church who could be contacted to determine the losses sustained and the relief and rehabilitation needs of the Saints comprising the five branches in Hamburg.

It was learned that of the 300 members of the St. George Branch more than sixty had been killed and a larger number were receiving medical treatment. The other four branches, though smaller, suffered proportionate losses. Nearly all were homeless and many had lost practically every piece of clothing, all of their provisions, furniture, etc. It was mutually agreed that insofar as possible all should share alike in things which were yet remaining in the possession of the Saints. Family after family brought their entire stores of clothing, food, and household supplies and shared them with their brethren and sisters who were destitute.

Many items of clothing were impossible to supply from this source, so a relief fund was established to which all contributed, according to their abilities to do so, and these funds were made accessible to the Relief Society for the purchase of materials with which to patch up and remodel old garments as well as to sew new ones. The needs of all were supplied according to their particular requirements, no charge being made to any of them.

Of the five branch meetinghouses in the area, only the Altona Branch chapel remained. This hall was used as a temporary barracks for a large number of homeless families, and the remainder were housed in the homes of members whose property still permitted habitation. Groups of brethren were sent out and made purchases of small plots of land in the suburbs upon which they built hastily constructed homes for the members, using what materials could be salvaged from the blasted ruins.

In a remarkably short time the mammoth job of relief and rehabilitation had been accomplished through the application of basic Church welfare principles with which most of these members were quite unfamiliar, but they had responded unselfishly as true brothers and sisters in the spirit of love and consideration for others, which is, after all, the basis of the Church welfare program.

As we met with these devoted Saints in Hamburg—over 500 of them—we found them more united and stronger in the faith than ever before. Three meetings were held and five full-time missionaries called and set apart, all eager to teach the gospel and bring to men and women the message which, if accepted and lived, is the only answer to the ills of the world and its only promise of peace and happiness.

Many of those in attendance were thin, weak, and hungry—their clothes threadbare and hanging loosely from their starved bodies—but in their eyes shone the light of truth and from their lips came a testimony of faith and devotion that should be a testimony to all the Church. There was no expression of despondency or bitterness, only a feeling of love and gratitude for the gospel of Jesus Christ and for their brethren and sisters in whose lives is reflected the true spirit of Mormonism. (European Mission History.)

As we rode back to Kiel to meet the fine Saints here, we saw people along the road and ditchbanks in the country who had walked for miles on Sunday to try and find a few dandelions or other herbs to take home for food. Some take ordinary grass and weeds and cut them up to mix with a little chicken feed and water, which is their meal. I noticed between meetings some would take out of their pocket a little cup partly filled with chicken feed or cereal and water which they would eat cold. This was their entire lunch.

How I pray our welfare supplies will soon reach them. The first shipments for Germany have just arrived in Geneva, Switzerland. The trains are so slow it may take weeks to go 100 or 200 miles. Then too there is so much stealing by desperate people there is great danger of losing it. Of course we must take the chance and pray to the Lord that these desperately needed supplies reach their destination.

We were told the American army has lost millions of dollars worth of food from stealing on the part of hungry people and some rogues who sell it again in the black markets to get gain. It's a strange situation to see the army wasting food and yet refusing to let hungry people even come near the mess hall to take the garbage that is thrown out. People are wasting in one building and in the next starving.

Sweetheart, I didn't intend to write all this sad picture. I have tried to spare you at home most of the heartrending scenes in Europe today. But somehow I just couldn't hold it this morning. It's terrible to contemplate. I know that the Lord permits the righteous to suffer as He pours out His judgments on the wicked. And I know that even amid the suffering the true Latter-day Saints are sustained by His Spirit. They never complain but suffer in patient, sweet silence knowing as they do that soon it will all be over and, if they are faithful, they shall be exalted on high never more to suffer. Thank the Lord for the testimonies which they have. It is most priceless. What would they do without it? (ETB to FAB.)

MONDAY, JUNE 17, 1946:

KIEL AND HANOVER, GERMANY

Left Kiel for Hanover. Held conferences with British military authorities regarding our people and program. Got quarters (billets) at British officers' camp and mess.

Met with about 200 Saints from the Hanover District in a partially bombed-out schoolhouse. There were no lights and, as it poured with rain outside, it was almost impossible for speakers or singers to read. (ETB Journal.)

The building had seven-eighths of its windows out, and cardboard was nailed up to keep out the rain. The entire roof had been bombed and a temporary roof was installed. The balcony was still out and much of the plaster off the walls. The Saints had brought in flowers and plants, including some large ones, which they placed in either end of the hall to cover the riddled walls.

There was a sweet spirit in the two-and-one-half hour meeting. A lovely little girl presented me with some beautiful red roses following an impressive message of love and welcome to me. A little choir of small girls and a piano trio by three children from the same family were most impressive.

The Saints were most grateful for this, our second visit, to Hanover, and some from Bielefeld particularly, where we have no meeting planned, pleaded with us for a meeting. We'll try and leave Berlin early Friday morning and drive through for a meeting that night. There is nothing I wouldn't do for these poor, suffering Saints. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, JUNE 18, 1946:

HANOVER AND BERLIN, GERMANY

Left Hanover for Berlin. There is no serviceman to make the trip with us as we had desired, so with a new "USA" painted on our car front and rear, we started for the Russian Zone, where such unfavorable reports of bad treatment of civilians had come from.

The trip was made on the autobahn in good condition, except for blown bridges and except for questioning by the Russians as we entered their zone. There were only the usual formalities at the barricades.

On arrival we went to the Economics Building at USA headquarters where arrangements had been made.

We called at the mission office and completed plans for church meetings and conferences. In evening attended a meeting of servicemen and women and a social hour. (ETB Journal.)

We received details concerning the recent missionwide conference held in the city of Leipzig—one of the most amazing chapters yet written in the history of any mission in Europe.

The Russian government permitted extensive advertising—the radio carried announcements three times each day for two weeks in advance, posters were on every bill-board in the city and in every streetcar, so by the time the conference began, nearly every person in the entire area knew of it. The amazing attendance of 11,985 persons at the various sessions was the result, and the Sunday evening meeting alone attracted 2,082 persons—by far the greatest attendance ever to be present at a meeting of the Latter-day Saints in Europe.

At a special concert, featuring a missionwide chorus of 250 voices and an orchestra of eighty-five pieces held June 10, 1,021 were in attendance, and at the Gold and Green Ball that evening 1,251 participated. The beautiful congress hall at the Leipzig Zoo, which is being rebuilt, afforded excellent accommodations, and hundreds of people became sincerely interested in the program of the Church.

We feel with all our heart that events such as these testify stronger than words of the faith and devotion of our Saints in these war-devastated areas. Railroad officials scheduled two special trains which went from city to city to pick up our members and take them to this great conference. This has been without a doubt one of the outstanding events ever to take place among the LDS people in this land. The spirit of faith and courage it has engendered will do much to strengthen them during this very critical period which they now face. (European Mission History.)

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 19, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Began efforts to visit Poland and believe, the Lord being willing, I'11 be able to visit the distressed Saints there.

Met in public meeting with 459 Saints and friends at which I was presented with three bouquets of flowers and, after speaking for an hour, I shook hands with all present as they left the auditorium. It was an inspirational meeting and the Lord richly blessed us.

After the meeting we ate some fruit and bread in our room as time did not permit us to have dinner at the army mess. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, JUNE 20, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

The needs of these Saints are still very great, particularly for fats, cereals, and sole leather. We hope to purchase emergency quantities of these items as soon as we arrive in Basel. Arrangements have been made for shipment through the International Red Cross with an office here in Berlin.

There have been no welfare products arrive as yet from Zion, although a letter from the general Church Welfare Committee was received yesterday notifying them of a shipment of clothing from Los Angeles. It is a miracle how the letter came through in view of the mailing restrictions! All arrangements are made for the handling of the clothing and food supplies when they arrive.

We have been able to purchase two used cars, which will help in the distribution to the various branches. The local International Red Cross office is also getting some used trucks, which they agreed this morning might possibly be available for our use.

In order to avoid interference with our program of food distribution, we now plan to break up the various shipments as they arrive at Geneva and send small quantities to the various districts at more frequent intervals.

We will discuss further details of this plan with the International Red Cross authorities in Geneva later this month and have already reached full agreement with their office here in Berlin. If at all possible, in the future food shipment arrangements should be made to include some soap, shoe leather, and wheat as it comes from the elevator. There is also a great need for recreational equipment, but we will check further into the possibility of making purchases locally from the army or from the Red Cross before requesting any shipments from Zion.

Most of our Church funds are still "blocked" in the East German Mission, but they have all been freed in the West German Mission. All Church funds have been released in the American sector of the Berlin area. Our funds are in a bank in the British sector where the matter of release is still under consideration. We believe that favorable action will be taken before very long.

The need for Church publications is great. Most of the families do not even have a copy of the Bible or of the Book of Mormon. Present restrictions make it almost impossible to bring in shipments from outside the occupied areas. We are trying to make arrangements for printing of the Book of Mormon, so urgently needed, either in Frankfurt or in Berlin. It is estimated that 2,000 copies of the Book of Mormon could have been sold at the missionwide conference at Leipzig had they been available. Bibles are unavailable. However, through the excellent cooperation of the Religious Affairs Branch of the U.S. Office of Military Government (OMGUS) here in Berlin, we believe this situation will be partially taken care of before too long.

We have conferred with many officials and various heads of departments and branches of the armed services and the military government regarding many problems in addition to those mentioned, such as use of interzone telephone and telegraph communications, priorities for building materials to repair Church buildings, prisoners of war, more liberal mail service, youth activities, and many other matters.

The mission presidency was delighted that we were able to complete arrangements for the installation of a telephone—a convenience they have not enjoyed since the mission home was bombed out early in the war. They were also most happy to learn tonight that arrangements have been largely completed for travel into the Polish area for the purpose of visiting those of our Saints still remaining in those sections of Poland which were formerly Pomerania and Silesia in Germany.

Further checking here confirms the conclusion that all of our shipments for Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia should be made via Antwerp and Geneva at least for the time being. We are building up experience through Antwerp and Geneva that will be most helpful in the future, and we are most encouraged in our relationship with the International Red Cross. They did a very satisfactory job in handling the shipment into Berlin, which we purchased in Switzerland, and their office here is now able to give very satisfactory service. They have just completed arrangements with the Russians for shipments into the Russian Zone on the same basis as in the other zones. We are all happy over this because the greatest need is in the Russian Zone.

While most of our contact with military authorities to date has been with American officials, we are now beginning similar contacts with British, French, and Russian authorities in their respective zones. The prospect is encouraging, although obviously more difficult than with our own representatives. (European Mission History.)

SATURDAY, JUNE 22, 1946:

BIELEFELD, DUSSELDORF, AND HERNE, GERMANY

After breakfast and a night's rest and bath (first in a week), we drove up the Ruhr, the heart of industrial Germany. After some negotiating with British military authorities, we arranged for billets in some rather bare rooms.

Two hours later we learned that a meeting was scheduled in Dusseldorf in fifteen minutes. We drove to the meeting through the ruins of Essen and Dusseldorf and found some sixty Saints crowded together in a home.

I spoke to them for forty-five minutes, and then we drove rapidly back to Herne for a meeting with the priesthood of the district. We viewed the twisted steel and rubble of the once powerful and extensive Krupp works as we rode. I spoke to the priesthood for half an hour and then retired to our quarters. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, JUNE 23, 1946:

THE RUHR, GERMANY

This has been a glorious day of meetings with the happy but destitute Saints of the Ruhr District. Three meetings have been held. Some 350 were present in the school auditorium.

In the morning session the children performed, and as a feature we listened to fifteen minutes of the broadcast from Radio Stuttgart of the Tabernacle Choir and organ. It seemed almost as though we were in Salt Lake City. (ETB Journal.)

Through the efforts of one of our splendid servicemen, Captain Fred G. Taylor, Jr., who has general supervision of this radio station, this program was inaugurated some weeks ago. It was a thrill to see the electrifying effect this music had upon the audience. The room was filled with inexpressible joy, and the Spirit of the Lord was richly manifest. (European Mission History.)

MONDAY, JUNE 24, 1946:

HERNE, FRANKFURT, AND LANGEN, GERMANY

Left Herne for Frankfurt, where we arrived having eaten our K-rations in the car.

We began conferences with representatives of International Red Cross and local government officials regarding our refugees at Langen. Later held a meeting with some ninety of them from Poland and eastern Germany. (ETB Journal.)

This evening we witnessed the most heartrending scene thus far in Europe. We met in meeting at Langen (near Frankfurt, Germany) with about 90 of 120 refugee Latter-day Saints who have come into the American Zone from Poland. They have been organized into a branch of the Church in a town where we had no members before.

It was an inspiration to see these poor creatures sit with upturned faces literally drinking in every word we uttered. It was a joy to hear them sing the songs of Zion and to feel of their warmth of spirit and their deep abiding faith in the gospel.

After a meeting of an hour and a half, which was altogether too short for them, we mingled among them and took a picture of the group. During our associations not one word of criticism or bitterness was spoken by any member of the group, although they have lost all of their earthly possessions and some of them their entire family. (European Mission History.)

The saddest moment came later when we drove out to the rough barracks where these people are living. There in the rudest of shelters, without any sanitary facilities whatever, we saw from one to four families living in a single room. The first place we visited had four families living in a single room (twenty-two people), where they slept, ate, and lived. Two-decker bunkbeds had been built along the walls on three sides to accommodate the group for sleeping. A small stove in the middle of the rough board floor provided the only heat for the room and for cooking. Beds were made at night on the floor for the younger members.

The occupants range from babies in arms to one lady past eighty years, and there were several young people in their middle teens. These are all persecuted people from eastern Germany, which is now Poland. They are unwanted in their former homes, and they have come to the American Zone seeking refuge, although technically their coming is illegal since refugees from Poland are supposed to go into the British Zone and those from Czechoslovakia into the American Zone.

We were happy, however, to receive permission yesterday for them to remain inasmuch as they have planted gardens and shown a real desire to help themselves. There was a fine spirit among them. It was a thrill to hear one of the members of this group of twenty-two tell about them all kneeling in prayer night and morning together in their rough quarters. (European Mission History.)

Their spirit is good but their condition desperate. I gave them everything edible we could find in the car and took some of the little children for a short ride in the car.

How I hope and pray we can, in spite of military restrictions, get some lumber or barracks and more food, blankets, and clothing and provide at least one room for each family. Will try and purchase immediately in Basel on Thursday curtain material and wire for dividing the large room into a bit of privacy—also barracks, blankets, and mattresses which can be sent to Langen immediately by my car. (ETB Journal.)

We have now established two refugee camps, one at Langen, near Frankfurt, and the other at Wolfsgruen, south of Berlin. At Langen our members are living under most unfavorable conditions in rude barracks. However, we are providing additional space for them through army barracks purchased from the Swiss government. At Wolfsgruen our members occupy a large castle in cooperation with the Russian military authorities. To both camps we are sending food, both that purchased on the market in Switzerland and that being supplied now through shipments made from the Church welfare stocks.

Facilities at both camps are badly taxed, and our Saints continue to arrive from branches in what was formerly Germany but which is now Poland.

It seems quite certain that German people will not be permitted to remain in the area now covered by Poland. Present Polish regulations provide for the removal of 50,000 Germans monthly. We will likely know more of the details regarding this situation following our visit to Poland later this month.

In the meantime, we have authorized the brethren in Berlin to proceed immediately to negotiate with the Russian military authorities for the rental or purchase of lands formerly used as a military training camp. Much of this land can be used for agricultural purposes, but some of it will have to be cleared first. It is intended that the land be divided up into small farming plots where the people can become largely self-supporting and self-sustaining. We hope to be able to purchase some finished barracks and necessary additional lumber and materials for the construction of new buildings. We also anticipate the purchase of horses, cows, pigs, and chickens and possibly the importation of small gardening tools and implements. We expect, of course, that some supplementing food will be provided through the welfare supplies now at Geneva.

Final approval of the project will not be given until after we have contacted the branches which we are able to reach in the Polish area and have an opportunity to confer personally with the brethren of the acting mission presidency in Berlin.

Eighty members, constituting the balance of the membership from the Danzig District, arrived in Berlin and have been located temporarily at Wobesde by Stolp. A letter came through from the branch president in Breslau a few days ago indicating that the three former branches have joined together in one branch and are holding regular meetings, although their general condition is most desperate. The group has apparently acquired a small piece of land on which they are trying to raise some vegetables during the summer months. This letter confirms other information which has been received to the effect that all of our German Saints now in the Polish area will be required to move west to one of the four zones.

The general policy seems to be that these people should move into the British Zone. However, the Russians have shown no disposition to force them to leave their zone providing they can be properly taken care of. To date we are receiving very satisfactory cooperation from the Russian authorities. (European Mission History.)

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 26, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY, AND BASEL, SWITZERLAND

Left Frankfurt by auto and drove to Basel, stopping at Mannheim to inspect building lots.

Detained at Swiss border for some time and finally had to leave Brother Babbel for a period because of lack of proper visa. Later we cleared the matter and he came to Basel by streetcar. (ETB Journal.)

Attended a summer garden party and dinner given by the General Authorities of the Church. It was held at the home of Apostle Stephen L Richards.

Reed went with me as my partner. Apostle and Sister Mark Petersen called and took us in their new car.

We had a lovely time, but I missed having my wonderful husband with me.

The Lord is blessing us both during our separation from each other. But we know the Lord's work comes first. Whatever the General Authorities say, we are to do—we shall know it to be for the best, and we shall always do as they advise and counsel. (FAB Journal.)

THURSDAY, JUNE 27, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND

We arrived at Basel, where I had a long conference with Presidents Taggart and Zimmer regarding certain matters concerning use of mission home and future work and relationships. Retired at 1:00 A.M. (ETB Journal.)

I was invited to a lovely luncheon party at the home of President J. Reuben Clark. It was a lovely affair. President Clark is most thoughtful and kind to me. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, JUNE 28, 1946:

GENEVA AND ZURICH, SWITZERLAND

The situation with reference to relief needs and distribution regulations is changing daily. For this reason it seems important that every precaution be taken to avoid concentration of large quantities of food or clothing at any one point in the occupied areas. The policy with reference to displaced persons and refugees has not been finally determined.

A number of our people from the area formerly included in eastern Germany, but now in Poland, have already moved into the western zones. To date we have been quite successful, after conferences with the authorities, to get permission for them to remain in areas where we are best able to give them the help which they need. We feel very strongly the importance of maintaining at all times a stock of supplies at Geneva for distribution in accordance with existing policies and the needs of our people.

The International Red Cross has now completed arrangements for distribution of foods within the whole of the Russian Zone. We are most grateful for this development. With this and other facts in mind, we have today sent official instructions to them at Geneva for distribution of the food and clothing already received in Geneva. This distribution has been made on the basis of size of districts and need of the people and will provide a small shipment to each of the districts in the East and West German missions and the Austrian District of the Swiss-Austrian Mission.

We are most grateful that the first shipments have arrived and that others are enroute. We are also pleased to note the inclusion of a sizeable proportion of whole-wheat cereals and dried beans and some soap. May I suggest that in future shipments you increase relatively the quantity of whole-wheat cereals and dried beans and peas and reduce somewhat the proportion of canned fruits and vegetables. The inclusion of meat products is greatly appreciated, although if we could have quantities of concentrated fats included in each shipment, it would be even more valuable.

Correspondence with the Saints in the Palestine-Syrian Mission indicates that our members will likely have to leave their present homes for Armenia this fall. The question of transportation of these unfortunate souls, who now become a part of the ever-increasing "displaced persons" group, will likely be an important problem. (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, JUNE 30, 1946:

PRAGUE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Held a meeting with the Saints of Prague in the little meeting hall at the home and mission office where President Roubicek has lived and had his office during the war. There were twenty-eight present.

We had a glorious time, and the Lord richly blessed us. Tears of joy were shed by practically all present. This is the first meeting of the Saints since President Toronto and the two missionaries have arrived, and second only to the meeting I held with them in March, the first since the war.

In the afternoon, with several members of the branch, we rode for an hour and a quarter on the train and walked a mile up a hill to the Karlstyn Hills near the famous castle by that name. Here we stood on sacred ground, at the top of a hill overlooking the castle and valley, where the nation was dedicated to the preaching of the gospel seventeen years ago (July 24, 1929) by John A. Widtsoe. We held a short service during which we sang "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet" and "Count Your Blessings." President Walter F. Toronto told of the opening of the mission and the acting mission president, who had been released at the morning service after six years of service, told of the securing of the plot of ground and the erection of the lovely little monument commemorating the beginning of the work here. I then dedicated the monument. (ETB Journal.)

The site and monument are recognized by the government as a historic landmark, standing as a tribute to the devotion of the Saints even during the most adverse circumstances of the war years. The Saints stood with tearfilled eyes as they heard the prayer of dedication offered upon this lovely spot. (European Mission History.)

MONDAY, JULY 1, 1946:

PRAGUE AND BRNO, CZECHOSLOVAKIA

This is the birthday of my faithful and ever-devoted wife, Flora, whom I love more dearly as the years pass. Arose at 5:00 A.M. and wrote her a letter.

After a breakfast of bread and cocoa, we left by train for Brno. We were met by Saints who greeted us warmly and presented us with flowers.

We went to the home of the branch president, Otokar Vojkuvka, where we had a lovely dinner. (ETB Journal.)

Today is my birthday. I am forty-five years young. The children were very sweet, thoughtful, and kind to me.

I received a beautiful letter from my adorable husband for my birthday. He told me of his deep love for me and how he thanked the Lord for me. All of his letters seem like Mother's Day letters because all of his letters are so full of love and appreciation for me, our religion, and our children. (FAB Journal.)

THURSDAY, JULY 4, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Morning spent in conference with President and Sister Barker. Left for London on a rough partially reconverted army plane.

Arrived at my London office to find my desk piled high with mail and several emergency problems awaiting my attention. Spent four and one-half hours opening and classifying mail and talking with officials of the International Red Cross at Geneva.

Was happy to receive letter and several packages from my ever-devoted wife and children. (ETB Journal.)

This is a day of celebration in the good old USA, a land choice above all other lands. Our independence has been somewhat of an inspiration to many other peace-and liberty-loving peoples in various parts of the world. (ETB to FAB.)

President Selvoy J. Boyer of the British Mission reports that the British government has now given permission for visas to be granted to our missionaries called to this mission and has expressed its willingness that the Church resume its full-scale, pre-war activities. (European Mission History.)

FRIDAY, JULY 5, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

At office dictating letters all day and evening. (ETB Journal.)

Clyde Cummings gave me a box of his candy from his store to send to my husband. I enjoy sending my devoted and kind husband boxes of candy, cookies, cake, dried fruits, nuts, and some canned food. He is so appreciative of what the children and I do for him. (FAB Journal.)

SATURDAY, JULY 6, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day. In late evening, after a most heavy day, saw the picture Caesar and Cleopatra in technicolor, now running at the same showhouse for over two years. (ETB Journal.)

I sent a large box of old-fashioned peppermint candy. I thought perhaps you might like to give them to the children, and I also remember you like them real well.

I sent a box of tuna fish, dried fruits, nuts, gum, and bouillon cubes. The bouillon cubes make a nice beef broth. Drop one in a cup of hot water, and it's delicious! Some of the less fortunate Saints may enjoy these, and you would like them too yourself. One little cube could be given to several of the German women perhaps, and it would give them a little taste of something nourishing. (FAB to ETB.)

We are really getting real hot weather, and it certainly keeps me stepping with our fine boys having to leave so early for their work and working so hard.

I too am working hard during the summer, but the Lord is blessing me—although I feel pretty "dozy" at times and "drag" myself around, but still I'll have a lot of pep left for you when you get home. I can still hold my own with any of them. (FAB to ETB.)

MONDAY, JULY 8, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

We continue to receive a large number of letters from members of the Church in Zion regarding their relatives in the occupied areas, requesting that we get relief to them. We are trying to do all we can in this regard; however, in the American Zone particularly relief may be sent direct to relatives of members of the Church through the shipment of parcel post packages or the CARE thirty-pound food packages. The American military authorities seem to prefer the regular eleven-pound parcel post packages. (European Mission History.)

Everyone has been so unusually quick and thoughtful to really put themselves out to do for me since you have been gone. (FAB to ETB.)

TUESDAY, JULY 9, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

Left London for Amsterdam. Met by President Cornelius Zappey at about noon.

Drove to mission headquarters at The Hague, where we had lunch. We then inspected the 15,000 boxes of welfare supplies in the rented warehouse where some fifteen sisters and eight men were stacking, sorting, and taking inventory.

After some pictures, we went to the city planning office and then inspected and selected a lot on which to build a new chapel.

After dinner, telephone calls, etc., at mission home, we drove to Amsterdam, where we attended an opera in the branch. It was a three-hour-long comic opera entitled "Escape."

After some administrations and interviews with missionaries, I retired at 12:30 A.M. (ETB Journal.)

I opened that choice box of candy. We all sang your praises. The cake, cookies, dried fruit, and nuts have kept us living high. It is all deeply appreciated, honey. (ETB to FAB.)

WEDNESDAY, JULY 10, 1946:

AMSTERDAM AND GRONINGEN, NETHERLANDS

Arose early and drove to Groningen across the twenty-mile dike. Here I inspected proposed building sites, held a meeting with the missionaries, and in the evening met with 250 members and a few friends.

The meeting was not publicly advertised because of the lack of space. We hope we can build a large commodious chapel here in this branch of 350. Many will yet accept the truth here. (ETB Journal.)

Deseret News came up and took several pictures of us with some of the things on that the Saints sent us from Europe.

We will send pictures to the Saints in Europe of our family. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, JULY 12, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN, AND ABO, FINLAND

Interview with other reporters and then inspected several proposed buildings as mission homes. None of them were suitable. Conferred regarding mission matters and left by boat for Abo, Finland.

It is a beautiful sunny pleasant day. The water is calm. We rode through the delightful fjords for three hours with wooded land and islands on either side. Boats of various kinds plied the placid waters. Summer homes were in evidence on the shores and lovely sailboats, launches, and motorboats as well as larger craft were everywhere. As we retired at 10:30 P.M., we were well out in the Baltic Seas and, while the waves were a little greater, it was all most peaceful and restful. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, JULY 13, 1946:

JAKOBSTAD, FINLAND

Before docking we were met by a news reporter aboard the ship and were greeted by others waiting at the docks. The reception was most friendly and cooperative, not only on the part of the people, but by the press and leading civic and governmental groups. They have a very high regard for the American people and expressed their desire to have the Church establish a mission in that land.

Their testimonies were inspiring, and the appreciation expressed for the assistance rendered them through the welfare packages was most sincere. A good many members of the branch were outfitted in welfare clothes and are better dressed than the average people of the community. Many of the welfare products are still kept in the basements for special occasions. (European Mission History.)

The population of three-and-one-half million includes about 300,000 Swedes, located largely on the west and southwest coast. About ten percent of the population is in Helsinki (Finnish) or Helsingfors (Swedish).

Russia has taken over three parcels of land on the eastern border and leased for an extended period a part section in the south. The Finns in the Russian-occupied areas (500,000 of them) are being forced to leave. This presents serious problems of adjustment as the area taken is Finland's richest dairy and industrial area. Russia also moved factories, rolling stock, etc., to Russia as in Germany. The part of Finland occupied by Russia was inhabited only by Finns.

The Germans entered Finland the summer of 1941 and left September 1944. The Finns first accepted the Germans as their protection against the Russians with whom they had war in 1939. Their own safety influenced them. Later, through Allied pressure, they fought the Germans and drove the last of them out into Norway January 1945.

Finland is now paying heavy reparations to Russia, and Finnish taxes are very high. The Lutheran Church is the state church. There are some Greek Catholics.

A recent survey showed that ninety percent of Finns would like to leave Finland—sixty percent prefered Sweden and thirty percent USA.

The Finnish are fine people. Practically none of them speak both Finnish and Swedish. The Finns need a mission of their own with a president, possibly at Helsinki, from the USA. Their love for Americans is great. We have a brother in Helsinki who speaks English, Finnish, and Russian who could help.

We left Abo and rode on a day coach of ancient vintage. After an hour's wait, we transferred to a pullman with proper sheets. For dinner we had a raw vegetable much like a turnip and one slice of black bread with a little artificial cheese on it, but even so it tasted very good as I was hungry. (ETB Journal.)

Mrs. Hugh B. Brown and daughter dropped in a minute. They just returned from England.

My darling husband had given her gifts to deliver to us. They were most thoughtful and lovely gifts and presents. (FAB Journal.)

SUNDAY, JULY 14, 1946:

JAKOBSTAD AND LARSMO, FINLAND

Arrived at Jakobstad and went to the hotel. Had breakfast of bread and jam and drove out to Grev School in Larsmo for a meeting with the Saints in a schoolroom. As we drove up at the gate of this rural school, I was impressed to see a large U.S. flag flying from an improvised pole so that the tip of the flag hung over the middle of the entrance to the path leading to the schoolhouse. The path was lined with little boys and girls with U.S., Swedish, and Finnish flags. As I walked through the lines, the first children I passed followed me and, in turn, all followed into the schoolhouse with their parents joining at the door.

There were many tears of joy shed, especially when the children sang in English "America" and presented me with a little silk Finnish flag on a metal pole in an inscribed base. Expressions of gratitude for welfare packages were most touching, and frequent reference was made to the fact this is a historic day—the first visit of one of the General Authorities. How they love us!

Forty-two attended the two-hour meeting, after which we visited, took pictures, and then went to some of their nearby small farms for lunch.

We held a public meeting—ninety-one present. After an hour and forty minutes, we closed the meeting and walked off the stand, but none of the congregation would leave. They all remained seated. So we spoke to them more, sang songs, and I even sang as a solo "I Know That My Redeemer Lives."

Over half the audience were nonmembers. It was a most friendly and appreciative group. The schoolmaster, who with his family occupies a small apartment in the school building, expressed on behalf of the group their gratitude to USA for all their help. They were delighted when I told them I'd convey their expressions to President Truman, whom I know.

Returned to hotel at 5:45 P.M. Spent evening reading Era and prayers and meditation regarding the Finnish people. (ETB Journal.)

Groceries are surely climbing sky high. Butter is now eighty cents a pound. Milk has gone up, bread, meat, and so many things are higher. (FAB to ETB.)

TUESDAY, JULY 16, 1946:

JAKOBSTAD AND LARSMO, FINLAND

We are still in the midnight sun period here. Last night in my room I wrote at 10:45 P.M. without any artificial light. In fact the sun didn't set until after 9:00 P.M. This morning at 3:00 A.M. I awakened and it was broad daylight.

I arose at 4:45 A.M. to keep an appointment with a taxi. We left for Grev School in Larsmo. Here we met fourteen of the faithful Saints and walked one mile to a spot selected last night as the highest elevation in the area and an appropriate place to dedicate this land of Finland for the preaching of the restored gospel.

We formed in a half-moon on the large flat rock from which we could see in all directions for long distances as in the quiet of early morning the glory of God's sunlight shown through the trees. According to previous arrangement, President Eben R. T. Blomquist conducted the little service consisting of the opening and closing prayers, the skillful singing of "Praise to the Man," "The Spirit of God," and "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," brief historical remarks by President Blomquist, and the dedicatory prayer by me.

The Lord was with us. During the prayer we were overjoyed in our humility to feel powerfully the Spirit of the Lord as we were all moved to tears. Several sobbed like children with gratitude for this occasion and the rich blessings of the Lord which are ours.

Even after the impressive service was over, several of those present bore their testimonies of how the Lord had revealed unto them the happenings of this day. We all seemed reluctant to leave, but after one and one-quarter hours, we quietly left as I led them through the trees and underbrush onto a country road and on to the humble, sweet home of the branch president, where we ate breakfast and visited for an extended period before we left for the city of Jakobstad.

In the evening we held a public meeting in a public hall, the Svenska Garden. About 100 were present and were most attentive as I spoke for an hour and ten minutes with perfect freedom—thanks to the Lord's sustaining power.

The devoted Saints, who were almost all present, were reluctant to leave us. We all sang "God Be with You Till We Meet Again," and after several goodbyes and expressions of love and gratitude, we parted.

As I waved a final good-bye as they went out of sight, I thought silently, "These are the kind of Saints I should like to associate with in eternity! Thank the Lord for the precious experiences of the past three days here and for His kind sustaining power. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, JULY 17, 1946:

JAKOBSTAD AND HELSINKI, FINLAND

Arose at 3:45 A.M. to catch a 4:40 A.M. train for Helsinki. To our surprise, when we reached the station, the faithful Saints from the branch were there to bid us a fond adieu. More tears were shed as we shook their hands warmly and then sang "God Be with You" as our train pulled out. As far as the eye could reach, they waved good-bye to us as our train, old and dilapidated, rolled away into the white birch forest.

We rode all day, arriving in Helsinki. It was a long hot ride with practically no food, much dirt, crying babies, and overcrowded cars filled with poorly clothed but good people. We had several fine gospel conversations enroute.

We went immediately to the hotel, where representatives met with President Blomquist and me in my room for over an hour. They were most friendly and interested in the Church and its program. I gave them photos at their request.

We then rushed to our meeting and were pleased to find 250 people present. (ETB Journal.)

This summer is really the most rushing and busiest I have ever experienced, but I am pulling through with flying colors and I am so thrilled and happy for what the future may bring us.

So please excuse me if I neglect in not writing my letters so perfectly because you'll know I am trying to do so many things for us all. I love to write to you so much. It's my chance of entertainment and relaxation and my means of companionship.

I hear of families taking lovely vacation trips. Do you think a thing like that was ever meant for us or will come to us? Perhaps it will come in the next life, or perhaps we wouldn't be happy if we weren't always working the hardest possible. At the same time I do believe the Lord expects us to take care of ourselves and not overdo too much. That's one thing I still will have to learn. (FAB to ETB.)

THURSDAY, JULY 18, 1946:

HELSINKI AND ABO, FINLAND

Held conferences with American ambassador to Finland, also First Secretary and Consular and Third Secretary and Vice-Consular—all of the embassy.

Later called on Mr. M. Asko Ivalo, Foreign Minister of Finland, who assured us every cooperation if we decide to open a mission in Finland.

Left by train for Abo on Finland's best train. We were required to go two hours out of our way because of the area on the south coast appropriated by Russia.

Arrived in Abo and attended our public meeting. There were 117 present—all friendly and seemed appreciative.

After the meeting I visited with a lady who seems quite prominent in Finland. She has a large farming area with her husband, who is a newspaperman, and has a home in Abo and Stockholm and property in Helsinki. She and several others urged us to come to Finland with a mission. They said that the time was now opportune since the Finnish people are more religiously inclined now than ever before and church attendance is at an all-time peak. America is most popular here, and thousands will attend our meetings if given an opportunity. (ETB Journal.)

Spent time contacting leading civic and governmental officials, both American and Finnish, all of whom were most considerate and solicitous of our welfare. Each expressed his willingness to assist wholeheartedly in any missionary activities which we may wish to undertake as a Church. At the urgent request of some of the Finnish leaders, I wrote a letter to President Harry S Truman as follows:

Dear Mr. President: Since early February I have been representing my Church on a religious and relief mission in the various countries of Europe. I have just returned from my first visit to Finland, where I held a number of well-attended public meetings in the principal cities. Everywhere I was received with the utmost kindness. Never at any time or in any other places have I heard so much favorable comment regarding the United States.

At the urgent request of some of the Finnish leaders, I promised to write you and express to you on behalf of the Finnish people their deep gratitude to the American people and their leaders for the unselfish assistance which the nation has rendered to the Finnish people through the years. I am free to admit that these sober-minded, solid, splendid people completely won my heart.

I have noted during my absence from my home in the States the many perplexing problems which confront you. May a kind Providence endow you with wisdom and inspiration in carrying the great responsibilities of your all-important office. Faithfully yours, Ezra Taft Benson. (European Mission History.)

The Finnish people have suffered much through the war. They are humbled, and their hearts are full of anxiety. They are seeking after religion. Attendance in the established churches of that land is greater than ever before.

Now that this land has been dedicated to the preaching of the gospel, we are most hopeful that ways and means to provide them with that opportunity may soon be realized, that the honest in heart of this great nation may enjoy with the Saints throughout the world the sweet fruits of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Finnish people were most friendly, have a very high regard for the American people, and showed every indication of wanting us to come into that land and establish a mission. I have never met a more favorable press or a more friendly and cooperative people.

While there are no occupation forces, the Russians control the only important airport some forty-two miles from Helsinki and the chief port, which necessitates the Helsinki-Abo train making a two-hour detour to avoid passing through this now Russian territory. Although the Russians have taken the rich nickel mines in the western part of Finland and much of their rich agricultural lands, the people are not discouraged. Their hearts are full of hope and they are grasping for something hopeful to sustain them. The gospel will fill this need in large measure. (European Mission History.)

Our visit was a joy from beginning to end in spite of the difficulties in communications and transportation, acute shortages of food (even salt is rigidly rationed), and the apparent anxiety of the people over the future. While we have two missionaries laboring now among the Swedish-speaking people and there has been work done sporadically in years past among this group of people, I feel to recommend that serious consideration be given to the early establishment of a mission, to be known as the Finnish Mission, with headquarters in Helsinki. Educators, the press and government officials, as well as a number of the many people who attended our public meetings, gave us every encouragement to establish our work among the Finnish-speaking people.

We were informed that the Finnish language belongs to the Hungarian group and that experience has demonstrated that Swedish-speaking people seem to learn that language most readily. The Finnish people, who were once a part of the Swedish nation, are very friendly toward Sweden. President Blomquist plans to send four to six more missionaries into the Swedish-speaking area. (European Mission History.)

SATURDAY, JULY 20, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

During last night, about midway in the Baltic, we ran into heavy fog which slowed us up considerably—in fact, stopping us completely a time or two.

We arrived four-and-one-half hours late, and were warmly greeted by missionaries and Saints, some of whom were there at the wharf since early morning. The morning dawned lovely and calm, and it was greatly enjoyed as I sat on deck in the sun and finished a letter to my sweetheart.

Held a meeting with the missionaries and a public meeting attended by 245. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, JULY 21, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

This has been a heavy but happy day of meetings, visits with Saints, and administrations.

Held and spoke at meetings of joint officers, Relief Society and priesthood, branch presidencies, members of mission, and public session. All the meetings were full of spirit and quality. There were 265 at the meeting tonight.

The meeting with members was a testimony meeting and lasted three full hours—and then more wanted to bear testimonies. The first person on her feet was the oldest member, ninety years. President Blomquist says this evening's meeting is the largest gathering of Saints ever held in Sweden.

The Saints were most gracious and kind to me and sang as the last song, in English, "God Be with You." Many tears were shed.

I then performed five more administrations, conferred regarding buildings, ate some lovely strawberries, and retired—grateful for the Lord's rich blessings.

Have received a wire that the new mission president for Denmark, Alma L. Petersen, has just arrived in Copenhagen. Complying with his request that I stop off enroute to London, I have been able to change my ticket even though they reported in Stockholm full bookings from Copenhagen to London for two weeks. Once again the Lord has opened the way. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, JULY 22, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

Conferences with President Alma L. Petersen, recently appointed president of the Danish Mission, and Elder Orson B. West, who has been acting mission president since the outbreak of war in 1939. Although the Copenhagen Saints had filled their hall to capacity Sunday to greet their new mission president, they met again on Monday night in even larger numbers. At that time Elder Orson B. West was honorably released and President Alma L. Petersen wholeheartedly sustained in his new assignment. (European Mission History.)

I spoke for three-quarters of an hour, and the music and spirit were lovely. After visiting with the Saints, who gave me a most warm reception, and administering to some, I retired with President Petersen—and after talking problems for another time, slept between 1:00 and 5:00 A.M. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, JULY 23, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Was made very happy to receive 8x10 pictures of my lovely wife and family. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, JULY 25, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

All day in office dictating and reading letters.

Visas for Poland being delayed. I called Berlin, where I hope we'll find everything all right. We expect to leave here for Frankfurt and Berlin in the morning. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, JULY 26, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND BERLIN, GERMANY

Left London for Berlin. We rode in an army transport sitting on hard metal seats. Before we took off, in a cabin that was roasting hot, we received instructions on how to put on the Mae West life preservers and parachutes. The ride was terribly noisy, and the cabin filled with smoke as there was nothing but the metal framework of the plane and no ventilation as in the modern passenger planes.

We arrived in Berlin in the once great German airport and terminal building.

Through some misunderstanding in time, we were not met and so took the OMGUS bus to American headquarters, where Brother Francis Gasser picked us up and took us out to the beautiful home of Brother and Sister Eugene Merrill, formerly of Washington, D.C. He is a son of Joseph F. Merrill and head of the Communications Branch of U.S. Military Government here. They occupy a mansion, the home of Germany's former chocolate magnate.

After a walk through the beautiful grounds, following a chicken dinner, I retired to a bed fit for the kings—or even an average U.S. civilian in military government work. (ETB Journal.)
