Ezra Taft Benson, Labor of Love: The 1946 European Mission of Ezra Taft Benson ( 1989)

PART 2:

NEWS OF SUCCESSOR AND CONCLUSION OF MISSION

Saturday, July 27, 1946: The appointment of Elder Alma Sonne, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, to preside over the European Mission to succeed Elder Ezra Taft Benson, was announced today by the First Presidency.

Elder Sonne will be accompanied by Mrs. Sonne. They will leave for the mission headquarters in London as soon as arrangements can be made. (Church News.)

SATURDAY, JULY 27, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Spent day in conferences with military government and mission authorities and in arranging for visit to Poland. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, JULY 28, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Held meeting with mission presidency and then met with Saints (322) of the Berlin area in a special meeting in the auditorium of a school building. As I entered the hall, little children were standing on benches along the aisle by the wall and, as I walked along, they each threw flowers in my pathway. It was so touching I could not hold back the tears.

We held an excellent meeting, and afterward the people lined the aisle, hallway, and stairs (three flights) and shook hands with me as I made my way to the car.

I was surprised to find the little children, three lines deep, on tables in the hall, where I shook hands with them as they all shouted three times in English, "Good-bye, President Benson."

We held a sacrament meeting with servicemen and U.S. government people and then enjoyed music and good food at Brother Merrill's lovely home, where we closed the day in prayer together. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, JULY 29, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Conferences today with Religious Affairs Secretary, military government, and United Nations Relief Agency (UNRA) officials with whom I was a luncheon guest.

Met the Polish ambassador and received passport visas. Further conferences and arrangement for supplies to take to Polish Saints. These were packed in several cases in the evening in readiness for our journey. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, JULY 30, 1946:

WARSAW, POLAND

Arose and left for the airport. After some weather delay, left and had a most rough ride in an old army transport freight plane—only room for eight passengers (rest of space taken by freight for embassy). On arrival, our plane could not land because workmen, trucks, and cows were on the runway. There is no radio contact with the ground, so we flew low over the field to let everyone know we wanted to land. Then we rode out five miles and turned around and landed on a rough field.

We were met by several guards with machine guns. Had some little difficulty clearing customs and passport control because of difficulty with English and Polish and reluctance of Poles to speak German.

With help of embassy, we were given cots in a room with five of us together at the Polonia Hotel, the only one intact in the city. Our room was also a sort of club room or meeting place for U.S. news correspondents, so things were lively.

Had a very satisfactory conference with the ambassador and for an hour discussed religious and economic problems.

Later I walked for several miles through this once proud city which has probably suffered more than any national capital in Europe. The streets are still filled with litter; people are barefoot and in rags and many are begging. I began by giving to each one, but soon realized this could not be as there are so many.

Fruit, cigarettes, and hardware are for sale on the street by peddlers, but prices are so high most people cannot buy. Many are calling "Americanski cigarette"—they are $2.50 per package.

As one walks about the city, the most sickening odors meet you from debris, dead bodies in the ruins, and filth. The sidewalks and streets are torn up in many places, and because of the lack of sanitary facilities, the people generally are filthy. It is indeed a sorry sight.

There is no service worthy of the name available anywhere. Cripples are everywhere and the terrors of war on every side. The feeling becomes so depressing on the streets, and one feels so helpless amidst it all that you find yourself wanting to leave or shut yourself from it in your room, poor though it be.

When we walk down the street, well-dressed and with U.S. pins, everyone stares at us and turns around and looks back at us as we walk on. The terrors of war will never be fully told. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, JULY 31, 1946:

WARSAW, POLAND

Saw embassy officials this morning. Had satisfactory conference with Polish Minister of Justice. Although the interpreter did a poor job both with English and German, we were able to make ourselves understood. He said Poland would welcome us in if we decide to establish a mission and declared that Poland wanted full religious freedom. He asked me to outline our beliefs and practices, organization, etc., which I did and promised to send him a Book of Mormon and other literature. (ETB Journal.)

We secured permission to visit Breslau in Silesia, where we have nearly 100 members remaining. Plane reservations could not be secured as planned, so Elders Gasser and Babbel left by overnight train Wednesday evening. They reported that the train trip was most revealing. All cars except one were horribly dirty freight cars into which people were jammed beyond capacity—women with babies, expectant mothers, men, women, and children—with all their belongings. Everyone looked so dirty and ragged. It was sickening to witness. People were piled on top of the cars, sticking out of the doors, standing outside between the cars, and it rained nearly all night. There were no facilities of any kind nor any water. People were forced to discard decency and privacy. (European Mission History.)

THURSDAY, AUGUST 1, 1946:

WARSAW AND BRESLAU, POLAND

Brothers Gasser and Babbel, who are traveling with me, left last night by train for Breslau. I remained for important conferences intending to take a plane; however, the travel bureau, the Polish airlines, and relief agencies were unable to get reservations. So I borrowed a jeep and driver and went early to the airport.

There I spoke to the man in charge, who fortunately could speak a little English. The Lord touched his heart, and he promised me I would get on although all seats were taken. I finally found myself in the plane sitting on a wooden stool instead of the wooden bench along the side of the plane. There were no safety belts, parachutes, or other equipment. I sat in the aisle until a Polish gentleman insisted I trade places with him. When it was evident resistance would avail nothing, I agreed.

We arrived in Breslau on a green, grassy runway after a one-and-one-half-hour trip. The brethren were not at the airport, so I walked up to a group of men busily talking and asked if anyone spoke English. A man who said he was a journalist came forward. I told him my desire to get to the city and to the address of the branch president. He wrote the Polish street name instead of the German one I had, introduced me to the president (mayor) of the city, and we started for the city in a car of ancient vintage, the gear of which kept slipping out about every five minutes.

He took me to the address of the branch president, where I greeted warmly some eight members huddled up in partly bombed-out buildings, none of whom could speak any English. They did make me understand a few things. The brethren had been here but had left to return at 2:00 P.M. But they never returned.

After searching on the streets for someone who could speak English, I found a lady, with the help of the postman, and we got a few things straight. Later I visited the hall where we were to meet, also UNRA and the printing establishment of my journalist friend.

The meeting with some fifty Saints had just started when my lost brethren came in. We held a meeting with the Saints, learned of their conditions, gave what comfort and counsel we could, and then turned over relief supplies we'd brought with us and walked about three miles to our hotel.

There I got a private room with bath for which I am most grateful. (ETB Journal.)

Breslau has been nearly as badly damaged as Warsaw. The city is a shambles, swarming with displaced personnel from eastern Poland who have arrived here largely destitute, dirty, and hardly knowing where to go. Our Saints, who must now leave for the British Zone in Germany, are still carrying on bravely. Between the ruins of the building near their meetinghouse, which they have been able to keep through the long war years, they have planted a lovely garden and a potato patch which are assisting greatly in supplementing their meager food supply.

We met with forty-six of them in the evening and learned that living conditions here have been most deplorable. They have been subjected to slave labor, to plundering, rapine, and every manner of inhumane crime. To sustain life, they have been forced to sell what goods they have kept out of the hands of marauding bands, including their winter clothing—and, in many cases, everything except that which they had on their bodies. (European Mission History.)

Through the cooperation of the chief of the press association, announcements will be carried in all the large syndicated publications in an effort to locate our members wherever they may be in Poland so we might render them every assistance whether they remain in this land or find it necessary to be repatriated to Germany. Every effort is being made to assist those who remain and insure safety and security for those who are forced to leave. (European Mission History.)

Thanks so much for sending the pictures of you. They are grand. You get better looking all the time, and you don't look a day older. Don't you dare say again that you look old enough to be my father! (FAB to ETB.)

FRIDAY, AUGUST 2, 1946:

BRESLAU, KATOWICE, AND WARSAW, POLAND

Conference with local brethren in my room. Then went to city hall in Breslau and, although the outer office was full, was ushered in immediately to the office of the president (mayor) of the city. I had previously met him at the airport, and after explaining our purpose in visiting Poland, he assured us his full cooperation in giving our people special help in preparation for leaving and travel accommodations. I introduced him to our branch president, who will keep in touch and who left a list of our members for the president's use.

He invited me to stay over and ride with him to Katowice tomorrow, but because of appointments with government officials, I was unable to accept. But Brother Francis Gasser stayed behind to accept the offer.

Brother Babbel and I left by bus at 11:00 A.M. for Katowice, and after a rough ride on an overcrowded bus arrived at 4:40 P.M. After some checking on transportation, we accepted the invitation of a British UNRA official to ride to Warsaw with him. He kindly drove us to Gleiwitz, where we found a family of Saints with whom we left instructions and money and supplies. They will contact the branch president in Breslau for details regarding moving and send a list to me in London. (ETB Journal.)

Then we accepted the invitation to ride in the station wagon to Warsaw. Although we had heard numerous stories of marauding bands who infested the highways at night, plundering, stealing and endangering life, we drove through the night without incident, being stopped only by military control posts several times along the way. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, AUGUST 3, 1946:

WARSAW, POLAND

Arose late (9:00 A.M.) and after conferences with Ambassador Lane and others, I had a most pleasant visit with Poland's courageous democratic leader, Stanislaw Mikolajozuk, Vice-President and Minister of Agriculture for Poland. He assured me, among other things, of his full cooperation if we open a mission here.

Later I conferred with the new Minister of Labor and Public Welfare, who assured me of his help in locating our Saints and looking after their needs.

Later in the day I held a profitable conference with officials of the American Relief for Poland. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, AUGUST 4, 1946:

WARSAW, POLAND, AND SELBONGEN, EAST PRUSSIA

We left by jeep (there was no other transportation available) for the southern half of East Prussia, which is now Poland, to try and locate and learn of the whereabouts of our members in that area.

We drove hard all day through rough roads and heavy rain in an army jeep. Several times we were directed in error, but finally we drove into the little cluster of homes where most of our Saints in the area live. (ETB Journal.)

Not a sign of life was upon the streets as we entered the little village of Selbongen, East Prussia, in our faithful jeep. We thought it rather strange because it was a beautiful day to be out walking and enjoying the cool summer breezes. (European Mission History.)

The few Saints and children in view flew to cover as the jeep approached, fearing a repetition of experiences (which they related later) with soldiers. (ETB Journal.)

One sister tarried, and when she realized who I was, she exclaimed for joy and kissed my hands. Then she dashed to several homes, and in a very few seconds a roomful had assembled. Women and children and the one brother present broke into tears of joy, some of them out loud—so great was their happiness. Every few minutes others would be added. (ETB Journal.)

All was quiet as we entered the home of the branch president next door to the chapel, but as we were announced by the good sister whom we had met at the front of the chapel, women, children, and young girls appeared almost miraculously, crying and laughing excitedly and each trying to express as best they could the inexpressible joy that was theirs. Within a matter of moments, the cry went from one house to the next, "The Brethren are here," and soon we found ourselves surrounded by nearly fifty of the happiest people we have ever seen. Having seen the strange jeep approaching with what they feared to be either Polish or Russian soldiers, they had abandoned the streets as if by magic. Likewise when they learned of our identity and mission, the village became alive with joyous women and children—women and children because only two of the former twenty-nine priesthood members remain.

That morning in fast and testimony meeting over one hundred Saints had assembled together to bear their testimonies and to petition Almighty God in song, fasting, and prayer to be merciful unto them and let the missionaries again come to visit them. Our sudden and unheralded arrival, after almost complete isolation from Church and mission headquarters since early 1943, was the long-awaited answer to fasting and prayer—so wonderful that they could hardly believe their good fortune. Never have we seen love and gratitude more deeply expressed. Nothing could do but to have another meeting, and within an hour 104 members and friends were crowded into the plain but attractive chapel to enjoy the outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord in a most marvelous manner. (European Mission History.)

We greeted all warmly, and I gave fresh packages of gum to the children, which the children had never seen—sent by my never-failing wife. Although the Saints had held Sunday School and fast and testimony meeting, they all wanted us to hold one with them. Then they told how they'd fasted and prayed for the "Lord to send the Brethren," and that the theme today had been for contact with the Church.

We decided to meet at 6:30 P.M. as there are no lights available in either church or homes. There were 102 Saints and friends in the little church next to the branch president's home, and a sweet spirit prevailed.

While I was speaking, two armed soldiers entered the door at the front of the building in a most authoritative manner. The people were filled with fear, but the fear soon left them as I stopped long enough to motion them to a front seat, which they accepted somewhat reluctantly, as I went on telling of our activities in Europe, conferences with national and military officials in various nations, including Poland, our belief in freedom, liberty, and the basic principles of democracy. They were most attentive during my entire talk and also the brief talks of my associates which followed.

The Saints were overjoyed at the outcome, and after the soldiers left we all sang and prayed and I gave them some final instruction.

Later in the home of the branch president, after shaking hands with all present, we visited further and we ate from their scanty store of food augmented somewhat by food we'd brought with us. Then again we listened to the most harrowing accounts of the dastardly deeds of soldiers on the members of this branch as a part of the German population of East Prussia.

Women and even little girls twelve years of age were ravaged as fiends in human form abused and raped these innocent faithful souls. Cases were reported where as many as ten soldiers, one after the other, forced relations with young girls of the branch—and in some cases while parents looked on at the point of a bayonet or were forcibly held by brutal soldiers. Never in all my life have I heard of such terrors, many of which included cold-blooded murder of husbands as their wives looked on helplessly.

No wonder the people acted like hunted fugitives. They've been plundered and robbed so many times that they have learned to secretly hide food, clothing, etc. Women and girls wore old-fashioned clothes, let their hair go unkempt and even their faces and homes dirty so as to be as uninviting as possible to the soldiers. (ETB Journal.)

Since the end of hostilities, our Saints have become a despised, persecuted and unwanted people because of their nationality. They have endured the most shocking and unspeakable cruelties and bestialities. One of the faithful brethren was shot down in cold blood by the invading troops from the East because he could not produce the cigarettes for which they had asked him. His mother, who ran to lift up his lifeless body from the pool of blood in which it lay, was driven away at the point of bayonets and threatened with death. As this forlorn mother comforted his grief-stricken wife—the mother of two lovely children—these soldiers whipped and flogged them so severely they were unable to lie down for two weeks. Since that day women and girls, some of them just approaching adolescence, have been repeatedly ravished.

One of the sisters, whose husband was snatched from his sickbed of six weeks and deported to Siberia—a cripple on crutches and a semi-invalid for some time—was ravished three times in one night after having her home plundered, resulting in the birth of a little baby boy for whom she is now caring along with her two former children.

Until some two months ago they stood in daily fear of their lives; their homes were repeatedly entered at night and plundered. Everything the marauders desired was confiscated; their lusts ran rampant. Men, women, and children were taken from their homes never to be seen again.

When the armies withdrew in favor of the Poles, practically all cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, and fowl were taken with them. Remaining livestock was scarce and each family had one or two chickens, many of which have since been confiscated. Nearly the total egg production has been required by the occupying forces, and the present shortage of feed makes it questionable whether remaining poultry can be kept alive.

At one time the people found ingenious means for retaining the few remaining chickens. They placed them in watertight metal containers, weighed them down with stones, and placed them in the lake, going at night to bring them up to feed them, to replenish their air supply, and gather the occasional eggs which they laid. During the winter they found it necessary to cut holes through the ice in order to take care of their poultry.

Clothing and valuables were being ruthlessly confiscated as well. Many of the people dug up the sod and buried their belongings in shallow containers under the sod which they replaced. When such hiding places were discovered, the military went from place to place with long sharp metal probing rods to locate hidden articles, most of which had been removed after the first alarm.

Most German men and women are forced to work eight to twelve hours a day, many of them receiving no pay or meals. Those who receive pay get the equivalent of forty cents per day (ten cents on the black market) for their labors: Women are required to work on road construction crews, as railroad section hands, as lumberjacks, or in jobs where filth and disease are ever present.

Our people have been forced to sell nearly all of their belongings, their winter clothes, their jewelry, etc., in order to sustain life. Ration cards allowing people to buy certain articles at regular prices have not been honored, necessitating purchasing food and other items at exorbitant prices on the black market.

Our Saints are facing a most critical period. One brother, after being repeatedly plundered, was again accosted for further plunder. When they learned that the coat and pants he was wearing had been given him by a friend to cover his nakedness following the last plundering in which everything had been taken and that he was wearing a woman's slip as a shirt—also borrowed—they felt rather ashamed and have since left him alone.

These are but a few of the innocent victims of war. The victorious armies, ever mindful of the inhuman atrocities which their loved ones had suffered during the long war years at the hands of the aggressor, their hearts now filled with hatred and the spirit of revenge, became fiends in human form and sought to justify their own villainous and cowardly acts by reason of the inhuman treatment meted out by their enemies during the conflict.

With the reestablishment of national boundaries, millions of people were required to seek homes elsewhere and are today milling around as homeless, displaced persons, fearful for their lives and despairing of the future. They are striving to avert death by starvation in the hope that they may soon be repatriated and find a measure of security once more.

Most of our members in this community own their own lands and homes. The lands have been turned over to the Polish people coming into this territory, and all of the homes will subsequently be conscripted and confiscated as soon as the German people can be removed—all without one cent of money being paid in exchange for them. Some of the Saints still have retained a couple of small pieces of land on which they are raising potatoes and rye. They plant, grow, harvest, thresh, and grind the rye and then use it for bread. Particles of the grinding stones used were in evidence in the bread we ate.

This branch has carried on regular meetings throughout the entire war years with one or two brief interruptions. Twenty-five of the male membership are missing as prisoners of war. The two remaining brethren are doing a splendid job of trying to keep up the spirit of unity and love among the Saints and have succeeded marvelously.

Their faith and devotion today should be a testimony and an inspiration to the entire Church. The murdered brother is buried in a grave by the side of the chapel and the Saints are keeping it decked with flowers. I visited the grave in the cool of the morning and dedicated it. (European Mission History.)

After visiting this once beautiful city, it is easy to understand why it is considered the most devastated city in Europe. The buildings have all been gutted out by fire, thousands have been reduced to rubble, and the large ghetto area is completely leveled to the ground. The ruin and desolation are so complete that one cannot adequately describe it, nor does one desire to do so.

Poverty, disease, and filth are most apparent. The streets are terribly dirty, many of the people are in rags, walking barefooted, looking badly in need of bathing and sanitation. Yet the stores which are open and the streets and marketplaces are displayed with large quantities of all kinds of good food and every imaginable commodity and luxury.

Much of what is available is sold on the black market openly at outrageous prices. The average earnings of the people here are so small that hunger and starvation stalk in an agricultural land producing an abundant supply of food and other commodities. We were told repeatedly that normally a person can buy anything he wished in Warsaw if he had the price. American cigarettes are sold on the streets by scores of small boys and girls and old men and women at black market prices. Many of the food items for sale are from army stocks, and often these items, received through charitable institutions, are sold in order to secure sufficient funds to buy potatoes and bread—the two staple food items of the population.

During our stay in Poland we were shown every courtesy and the various governmental officials whom we visited were most cordial in their invitations extended to us and in their desire and willingness to assist us with the Church program in this nation. We were informed that religious freedom has now been established and the people are fighting desperately to retain it. The Polish people love freedom and liberty, but have been under domination so long in religion and politics that they rather fear to express themselves freely. (European Mission History.)

I am sitting in a small room in the upper part of the Polonia Hotel. There are three cots in the room, two of which hold Brother Babbel and the night watchman, both sound asleep. The table on which I write is covered with papers, food packages, and personal effects and is the only one in the room.

As I look out of the three-story window across the narrow street into windows of a partly bombed tenement house, I see people stirring and others still asleep. Dish towels and other materials are hanging from the windows, and some items of food are sitting in the windows to catch the cool night air.

On the street below can be heard horses' feet on the cobblestone streets as they pull small and very old wagons and other vehicles along.

Off in the distance can be seen, as far as the eye can reach, the ruins of what was one of the gayest, richest, and wickedest cities in the world—the capital of Poland. Of all the cities in Europe which I have seen, this presents the saddest sight of destruction and contrasts. People are ragged, poor, and terribly filthy and dirty. Food and clothing are available and unrationed, but prices are so high and people so poor they cannot buy. Small children are everywhere on the street calling, "Papyroiosa, Americanska, Papyroiosa," which means American cigarettes.

It is estimated that about 450,000 people live in the city although during the worst of the long war almost everyone left. Before the war 1,350,000 lived here, many of whom were rich and of whom 350,000 were Jews. During the war through Nazi efforts many Jews were brought here until there were 500,000 here, practically all of whom were killed when the Ghetto (their section) was completely destroyed after Hitler had forced the Jews to build a high stone wall fence with electric wires on top around the entire area with machine guns mounted on the walls. Then the Jews were robbed, ravished, beaten, bombed, and burned until not one house is standing or even an apartment. It is the most desolate sight imaginable. It is estimated that 200,000 bodies of the helpless people lie buried in the rubble. Before the war there were 3,250,000 Jews in Poland of which only 40,000 to 50,000 are alive today. The total Jewish population of Europe was 9,612,000 before the war of which 5,787,000 were slaughtered. Only 1.3 to 1.6 percent of all the Jews in once Nazi-occupied territories are alive today.

Well, sweetheart, I mustn't dwell longer on this sickening scene. I am, however, mailing you a book, German Crimes in Poland, just released by a special government commission which has been investigating for a year. You use your best judgment as to how much you show the girls. The reading is worse than the pictures and I've read only a few pages. I haven't the heart to read more now as I reside in the midst of the beastly results. (ETB to FAB.)

This is my husband's birthday. I have been blessed with the finest, purest, dearest, most devoted, and loyal husband and sweetheart. I truly thank my Heavenly Father for him constantly and for his wonderful life of service and devotion he is rendering to God's children. (FAB Journal.)

May you enjoy a pleasant and happy birthday and may the Lord grant that both of us may have many, many more useful birthdays together upon this earth to spend that time which the Lord sees fit to give us in spreading the truths of His Church and helping others to live better and happier, more worthwhile lives. (FAB to ETB.)

TUESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1946:

WARSAW, POLAND, AND BERLIN, GERMANY

Conferences this morning in Warsaw with Ambassador Bliss Lane and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and New Territories of the Polish government.

Boarded an army freight plane for Berlin and arrived after a pleasant trip except for a few minutes in an electric storm.

Had dinner at the quarters of Brother Francis Gasser and then attended the MIA session of servicemen and women at which I was presented with a lovely birthday cake.

Arrived at the lovely home of Brother and Sister Eugene Merrill.

Brother Merrill informed me he had just received a letter from home containing a clipping to the effect Brother Alma Sonne has been appointed to preside over the European Mission and that he will come as soon as he can make arrangments. Although it is a surprise, if true—and I had expected to continue for at least another four to six months—I will be pleased to turn over to him the pleasant responsibility of directing affairs in Europe for the Church.

I hope I'll be able to carry forward some of the plans projected for the next two or three months, but I'm sure all will work out for the best as the First Presidency may direct. The conditions of the last six months have been a bit rough and rugged, but the Lord has sustained me in a most remarkable way—for which I shall ever be grateful.

I can well imagine how happy my family will be. They have been most loyal and devoted. No man ever had more complete unity or support in any mission than I have received in this one. As my noble forebear Ezra T. Benson said of his families as the Saints were driven from Nauvoo in 1846 (100 years ago), "Never at any time did I hear a murmur from their lips," so can I say of mine. How I thank the Lord for them and for all His rich blessings. (ETB Journal.)

It was sad to see so many men under arms and so much idleness in [Poland]. These are not conducive to reconstruction, to sound political or moral habits and ideals.

Here is a nation whose struggle for survival will require the united efforts of its people, an effort which the strong leaders are endeavoring to bring into fulfilment.

The spirit of the people seems very conducive to missionary work, and many of the government leaders contacted expressed the hope that we would see fit to extend our activities as a Church into that land now that religious freedom is being granted. (European Mission History.)

Upon arriving in Berlin, I received the following wire from the First Presidency, dated July 27, 1946: "Announcement made today of Alma Sonne as your successor to preside over European Mission. Date of departure will be sent you later. The First Presidency." (European Mission History.)

WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 7, 1946:

WARSAW, POLAND, AND FRANKFURT, GERMANY

A day of conferences, including East German Mission presidency; Dr. Olsen, head of Religious Affairs Branch; Col. Hester, head of Food and Agriculture Branch; the Polish Ambassador, etc. The results have been most satisfying.

In the evening after dinner with the Merrills in their lovely villa, I was honored at a birthday party by the servicemen and women at the home of Brother Gasser. A huge birthday cake provided by the boys was the center of our refreshments. Later Brother Gasser presented me with a lovely set of field glasses. (ETB Journal.)

Had further conferences with the Polish Military Mission and secured permission for future trips into Poland.

The representative of the International Red Cross informed us of the present shipments of welfare supplies now arriving throughout Germany, and contacts with General Clay and other military government officials were most profitable.

This trip has endeared our appreciation of the gospel and has shown the great need for the gospel principles to be taught to the nations of the earth, that the basis for real freedom and liberty might be proclaimed and established among the honest in heart. Our Saints, who have been called upon to suffer so much, to endure so many hardships and cruelties, show in their sweet spirit, in their increased loyalty and devotion to the Church and its principles, that the gospel of Jesus Christ brings to men and women the true peace, the true freedom and liberty for which the world is so desperately seeking. (European Mission History.)

The Religious Affairs Branch is becoming increasingly important to us in our work in Germany. Dr. C. Arild Olsen, a former associate in the cooperative movement in the USA, heads this important branch of OMGUS. He has a very sane approach to the religious problems in Germany and has been most friendly and helpful to us since his arrival here some two or three months ago. He and the members of his staff are doing all they can to increase the recognition on the part of General Clay and others of the importance which the Church can play in the reconstruction of Germany. Dr. Olsen favors the admission of mission presidents and missionaries, but to date his views have not prevailed, although I feel confident that this branch is making headway with its recommendations.

While I was in his office, word came from General Clay that approval had been given to the appointment of three permanent representatives of the three major religious groups—viz., Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish. He expressed his pleasure that I had been given permission to travel in the occupied areas, a privilege apparently not enjoyed by representatives of other faiths. Dr. Olsen feels confident that if we are persistent but patient we shall receive the permission we seek for mission presidents to be admitted for supervision of the work in the two German missions. (European Mission History.)

In Germany, as in several other European countries, the Church has not been recognized on an equal basis with other denominations. This lack of recognition has proven to be a great disadvantage in many instances and is generally unfavorable to the best progress of our work. I was assured today, however, that the four occupying powers have mutually agreed that in the future all religious organizations will be recognized on an equal basis and that complete religious freedom will be guaranteed. Our local brethren, who have labored under the old policy of discrimination, are delighted with the decision. Of course, only time and experience will determine whether it will work out as we hopefully expect. (European Mission History.)

In our visits with leaders of the Polish government, it was quite evident that the Polish people are determined to have complete religious freedom in the future. They were quite outspoken in their satisfaction that the Concordat between Rome and the Polish government has been broken and that in the future all churches will be on an equal basis throughout the nation. They offered every encouragement for us to establish a mission, and I was pleased to learn that several of them were somewhat familiar with our Church program. They seemed somewhat disappointed to learn that practically all of our membership in Poland today are German nationals.

We came away from Poland with the strong impression that now would be an opportune time to consider the establishment of a regular mission in that land. The people seem hungry for something that will satisfy their yearnings, and many of them seem disappointed in the failure of the dominant church to meet the needs of the people in spite of their strong hold on the religious and political life of the nation. (European Mission History.)

THURSDAY, AUGUST 8, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Last night, in dream, I was privileged to spend what seemed about an hour with President George Albert Smith in Salt Lake. It was a most impressive and soul-satisfying experience. We talked intimately together about the great work in which we are engaged and about my devoted family. I felt the warmth of his embrace as we both shed tears of gratitude for the rich blessings of the Lord.

I love this great and good man—a friend of all God's children. The last day or so I have been wondering if my labors in Europe have been acceptable to the First Presidency and the Brethren at home and especially to my Heavenly Father. This sweet experience has tended to put my mind completely at ease, for which I am deeply grateful. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, AUGUST 9, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Went to the airport preparatory to leaving for London, but after three hours of waiting the flight was cancelled on account of bad weather. As there were no other means of travel available, we returned to the hotel and did some reading and writing for the balance of the afternoon. (ETB Journal.)

Darling, how I miss you and the children and long for the time when I can see you again. I am so grateful we've been able to come here to offer a little help to these poor people. Their needs are great. How the terrors of war have torn people from their moorings and brought untold suffering. How thankful I am my family are in the good old USA—a land choice above all others. The people stop and stare at us as we go anywhere. We are admired and wondered at—the marvel of the world is the USA. (ETB to FAB.)

SATURDAY, AUGUST 10, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY, AND PARIS, FRANCE

Left for Paris enroute to London. Arrived in Paris, but stormy weather again delayed our flight and we were taken to Paris for the night.

Spent the afternoon visiting the Arch de Triumph and Louvre Art Gallery—a most enjoyable and profitable experience. It was especially impressive to view the city from atop the arch. The lovely field glasses given me in Berlin were greatly enjoyed. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, AUGUST 11, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

I cabled the First Presidency as follows: Just received wire regarding successor. Surprised but it's all right. Believe it important I remain at least until Sonne arrives and complete September schedule and another visit to Poland. (European Mission History.)

Today was most glorious because our wonderful husband and father called from London, England, over the telephone. He sounded tired in his dear voice but, oh, so sweet and dear. He talked to all six children.

He told of receiving his letter of release as president of the European Mission. It will still be necessary that he stay until Brother Sonne arrives, which will be two or three months, and then the Presidency of the Church want him to stay and explain and help Brother Sonne get on to the work that he has accomplished with hard work and the help of our Heavenly Father. My husband has done a most magnificent work in Europe helping our Church people and others. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day. Dinner at British Mission home and then played ball with members of the London Branch on the Wandsworth Common Green. I was amused at the surprise of the Saints when during the game, in four times at the bat, I made four hits and three runs. It was a pleasant diversion. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, AUGUST 15, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS, AND GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

Left London for Geneva. Stopped for two hours in Amsterdam and had pleasant conference with President Cornelius Zappey of the Netherlands Mission. Left for Geneva, but returned to airport because of a bad motor. Took off again in fifteen minutes but the second plane returned to the field because of a defective radio. The third time was a success, after I'd joshed the KLM officials about providing us with horses, and we arrived at Geneva. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, AUGUST 16, 1946:

GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

Conferences with International Red Cross officials and inspection of our welfare supplies in the warehouses in the morning. I then prepared instructions regarding distribution into Germany and Austria and in the afternoon held another conference with officials of Red Cross and completed all arrangements for future handling of our welfare products. It surely seemed good to see these large quantities of food, clothing, and bedding here for our Saints in good containers, well preserved, and in good storehouses. I hope and pray it reaches those so sorely in need without undue delay. (ETB Journal.)

To date the equivalent of sixteen carloads of foodstuffs and seven carloads of clothing have arrived for distribution in these stricken areas. In addition, welfare supplies in volume have arrived for our Saints in Norway, Holland, Belgium, France, and Czechoslovakia and parcel post packages of food and clothing for these and other missions in Europe outside the occupied areas. (European Mission History.)

The Church welfare supplies have arrived in good condition and are neatly stored and properly catalogued in the modern and spacious warehouses of the International Red Cross at Geneva. These supplies were inspected and all inventories carefully checked, loaded, and unloaded entirely within these enclosures. A large staff of trained men insures every precaution being taken for efficient and expeditious handling of all supplies in accordance with the schedule agreed upon.

On the basis of this schedule, approximately ten percent of our present welfare stocks will be shipped with each succeeding train scheduled to move about once per month into the occupied areas. Distribution will be based on fifty-seven percent for the West German Mission, thirty-six percent for the East German Mission and seven percent for Austria. Each shipment is to include some of each commodity in our total stocks, made up in approximately the same proportion. The officials of the organization are cooperating wholeheartedly and are doing a splendid job of following through on all the details. (European Mission History.)

SATURDAY, AUGUST 17, 1946:

GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

In Geneva all day alone. Brother Zimmer left for Basel last night. Further conferences and work in my room. Also walked about the city and heard the symphony for an hour in the park. (ETB Journal.)

The cost of living has gone up terribly. Children's clothes and other things are very high. Groceries and foodstuffs are simply outrageous. Eggs are seventy cents a dozen, butter eighty cents a pound, milk is real high, and everything is climbing up fast. (FAB to ETB.)

TUESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1946:

ZURICH, SWITZERLAND

Spent the day with President Taggart regarding mission problems. Made careful inspection of mission home and authorized considerable needed repairs and renovation inside and out.

Left for Paris by train sharing a sleeping compartment with a cigar-smoking Hebrew. He was cordial and I had a fairly restful night. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 21, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Arrived in London. Was happy to find sweet letters from my wife telling that all is well at home. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, AUGUST 23, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Met in missionary meeting with sixteen newly arrived missionaries and others at British Mission headquarters.

Afternoon spent in office. Wired the First Presidency regarding definite advice on proposed trip to Palestine-Syrian and South African missions. I have been anxious to go, if they approve, because our Saints in Syria are faced with the necessity of moving in body to Armenia which is now in the Soviet Union. We, of course, will be guided by the decision of the First Presidency. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, AUGUST 25, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

All day important mission work at the office. Attended the evening session of the branch conference of the St. Albans Branch near London. Spoke forty-five minutes with great freedom. There was a sweet spirit present for which I was deeply grateful. (ETB Journal.)

Have just had our little dinner, which made me think again of your constant kindness because most of the meal was from things you sent—tuna, bouillon, and candy. Thanks for all the things you've sent and done! (ETB to FAB.)

It's cold in London today. I have the electric heater going full blast in my room. As I enjoy my cozy little bedroom-office, the photo of my lovely wife and children looks down at me, and once or twice during the day I've looked through the leather folder at all the pictures. These make you all seem a bit closer, but not nearly close enough. (ETB to FAB.)

MONDAY, AUGUST 26, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Arose and wrote my devoted and ever-faithful wife as I aim to do at least twice each week. My gratitude for her and the children increases with the passing weeks. Always loyal, unselfish, and understanding, I prize her love and companionship more each day. She is a true and fully worthy companion who in every respect puts the Church first and her husband and family before all else.

No man could ask for more than I have in the "choice companion for the journey of life" which was promised me in my patriarchal blessing on my return from my first mission in December 1923. This has been fully fulfilled as have all other promises made in my two blessings. How I thank my Heavenly Father for it all. May I increase in worthiness for all His rich blessings. I marvel ofttimes that I have been so richly blessed—if I can only remain ever true and faithful, which I pray for daily.

Wrote a joint letter to my ten brothers and sisters today. Time does not permit, now at least, personal correspondence with each one even though I would enjoy such. It was a joy to write them. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, AUGUST 29, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

London office and at British Mission headquarters checking on European library and the history of our work in Europe. Evening spent dictating letters. (ETB Journal.)

Went to the temple this evening and helped with sealings for the dead on the Benson lines—thirty-five couples and one hundred forty-nine children. The evening was most glorious. It would have been perfect if you could have been present. (FAB to ETB.)

SATURDAY, AUGUST 31, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND GOTEBORG, SWEDEN

Left office for Goteborg. Wrote letters enroute to my children. Met by President Eben R.T. Blomquist and missionaries and Saints. Inspected three prospective buildings for chapels as no materials are available for building. Attended meeting with Saints and friends—80 present. Then, after a cup of Postum, retired on a Swedish pullman at 11 P.M. (ETB Journal.)

This trip to attend the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) conference was made in conjunction with a scheduled visit of the three Scandinavian missions. (European Mission History.)

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1946:

MALMO, SWEDEN, AND COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

Left Malmo by boat and arrived in Copenhagen.

After checking in at the mission home went direct to FAO meetings. This is the conference of the FAO of the United Nations Organization. At the request of the USA delegation, I spoke to the group in the evening regarding my observations in Europe. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

Meetings of FAO all day. Made several acquaintances and received old friendships from the London IFAP Conference of last June. In evening took dinner with some of the Saints. President Petersen accompanied me. (ETB Journal.)

As I sit in the first row balcony near the chairman in the FAO meeting convened in the beautiful Christiansborg Palace, my thoughts turn to you, sweetheart.

The conference, attended by representatives of 30 nations with many others represented by observers, is conducted in English and French so when the French translation is being given I have little in the conference to hold my attention. Of course, I realize that, with so many nations represented, two languages at least are necessary.

This is possibly Denmark's most lovely building which is adapted so well to a world conference of this kind. I am mixing in a good bit of church work, and look upon my attendance primarily as a missionary endeavor.

Last night, at the invitation of our USA delegation, I spoke to them regarding my observations in Europe. We were together for four hours and the last one-and-a-half hours were spent discussing spiritual and moral problems and our Church. I am most grateful for the opportunity which was provided.

Today I guided some of the USA group to see the famous Thorvaldsen's Museum and the Frue Kirke (Church) where the Christ and Twelve Apostles, done in marble by this world-famous sculptor 100 years ago, are located. (ETB to FAB.)

I went and canned corn at the Church Welfare Square until two o'clock in the morning. (FAB Journal.)

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 5, 1946:

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK, AND MALMO, SWEDEN

FAO meetings. Also attended a meeting of the executive committee of the IFAO created last June in London. Conferred with Presidents Petersen and West.

Left Copenhagen by train and later took boat to Malmo, Sweden, where I took midnight sleeper for Stockholm. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

Arrived in Stockholm and spent the day conferring with President Blomquist, visiting with President and Sister Cowles, missionaries, and friends and in taking care of mail and inspecting three prospective mission home buildings.

Attended meeting of the Saints and spoke for forty-five minutes on the children of Judah, which question is very much in the news today. Many people, nations, and prominent Jews are opposing the return of Judah to Palestine. The spirit of gathering is resting so powerfully upon them that they are flocking to that land under the most adverse circumstances resulting in much suffering. Of course it is all in fulfillment of prophecy in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants, and no matter what nations or individuals say or do, the Jews will return to Palestine.

Left for Oslo on sleeper. A large group of Saints were at the station with gifts of food, flowers, etc., and sang a sweet farewell.

In the meeting they presented me with a lovely pair of sterling silver candlestick holders for my wife and me. I shall never forget their love and kindness. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 7, 1946:

OSLO, NORWAY

Arrived in Oslo. Met at the station by President A. Richard Peterson and several missionaries. After breakfast at the mission home office, we drove to Drammen—some 20 miles—to inspect the building now being rented but which will soon be offered for sale. I found the building quite undesirable both as to location and condition and advised the brethren against purchase but encouraged them to locate a suitable lot in a desirable part of the city and plan to build in keeping with our needs and Church policy.

In the evening I addressed a large meeting of the Relief Society and the priesthood in Oslo. (ETB Journal.)

One of the truly unforgettable experiences of a visitor to the services of the Oslo Branch in Norway is the memory of the delightful singing of the famous Oslo Choir and the stirring music of the equally talented orchestra. Missionaries for many years have thrilled to their artistry and have returned home loudly singing their praises. Today they are the pride of the Scandinavian missions.

According to information received through old reports, the choir was organized on January 31, 1856. Today it has seventy members, and its leader, Ramm Arveseter, has been conducting for the last fifteen years. Sister Mary Nielson has been its organist for the past twenty-three years.

The choir, in addition to rendering musical numbers for every Sunday evening service, holds two concerts yearly. These concerts have become traditional, and the attendance fills the chapel to overflowing. The choir has also made a practice of visiting various hospitals from time to time to sing for the patients. At the present time the choir is preparing for its ninetieth jubilee, which will be held this fall.

The Oslo Branch orchestra was organized on November 20, 1944, under the auspices of Ramm Arveseter, Brother Alf Johansen being selected as its supervisor. The orchestra's aim was not only to assist in accompanying the choir but also to stimulate musical interests among the Saints. It now consists of seventeen active members. One of their former members, Brother Eric Brunn, was a leader of the Norwegian underground during the war. Upon being discovered, he was shot to death, his body thrown in the ocean and never recovered.

These two outstanding musical organizations, products of a mission branch, should be a challenge to the entire Church membership and an inspiration as well. What they have done and are continuing to do might well be duplicated in other missions, wards, and stakes throughout the Church. (European Mission History.)

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 9, 1946:

OSLO, NORWAY, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Left Oslo via American Overseas Airlines and arrived at Croydon, London. Reached my office and found my desk piled high with mail. Many difficult problems are awaiting my attention which I pray the Lord will direct me in meeting. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Arose at 6:00 A.M. on the twentieth anniversary of my happy marriage. It has seemed a short twenty years. They have been most happy and filled with activity.

I have been given a choice companion for the journey of life. My loving and devoted wife, Flora, has been all I could ever ask for in a faithful and loyal companion.

As I arose this morning, I thanked the Lord for her as I am wont to do each day. As a mother, I never have seen her superior. She is all, I am sure, that the Lord expects in Latter-day Saint motherhood.

Spent the day at the office dictating and talking on long distance phone. Three or four times during the day Brother Arthur Butler sang a group of lovely songs which I have asked him to sing to my wife and children as an expression of my love for them and our sweet and sacred home life.

I was overjoyed to hear the voices of my wife and six children as I spoke to them over the telephone in my home in Salt Lake City for five minutes.

It has been a pleasant soul-satisfying day, although I have missed my lovely and ever-true companion and children. God bless them all at home. (ETB Journal.)

I love you with all my heart and ever miss you and long for you. Sometimes I wonder what people do who are separated from their wives and not engaged in the work of the Lord. It must be terrible, or else they don't love their wives like I do mine. (ETB to FAB.)

This day is the most important day to me, along with the day I was born. The reason it is the most glorious and wonderful day to me is because twenty years ago I had the privilege of marrying the grandest companion and husband. Today is our wedding anniversary.

My darling, ever-thoughtful husband called me from London, England, at twelve o'clock today. It was most glorious to talk to him. I love and adore him more than life itself. I would do all within my power and strength to make my husband successful and happy. He is so wonderful, capable, and good.

He had two dozen of the Beauty red roses sent to me today and a card saying the following on it: "To my darling wife and sweetheart, Flora, on the twentieth anniversary of the happiest day of my life. You have made the past twenty years the happiest and yet seem the shortest imaginable. Since the day I first saw you, I have loved you. That love, through our years of courtship, interrupted by two missions, and happy marriage, has become deeper and more sacred. God bless you. With all my love and affection, T." (FAB Journal.)

This evening President George Albert Smith came to our home and made a nice, cheerful, and pleasant visit on our family. I did appreciate it so very much.

He told of the wonderful work my husband was doing. He said I deserved a vacation, and he thought it would be fine if I could meet my husband when he came home from Europe. He said he was going to write my husband in the morning. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 13, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Early dictation. Received call that President Boyer had been hit by a car while crossing the intersection near the British Mission headquarters enroute to the train. I rushed to the hospital, administered to him, and arranged for his care. After being assured by the physician that he would X-ray his head because of pain there, but that he would be all right, I returned to my quarters for a conference with cooperative leaders enroute to Zurich to attend a meeting of coop leaders sponsored by the International Cooperative Alliance. Helped them a bit regarding travel and economic questions pertaining to Europe. (ETB Journal.)

I know you are under a great strain, and I wish so much I could do something to help relieve you of part of your heavy load. It worries me, dear. You are such a hard worker and so courageous. Isn't it possible to get a little help in the home, to eat out a bit more, or something? Please spare yourself all you can. (ETB to FAB.)

SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Left London for Frankfurt. Arrived in Frankfurt just late enough to miss my connection for Berlin.

Checked in at the Carlton Hotel (army officers), and fortunately the German girl at the desk remembered the call from General Lucius D. Clay's office in Berlin reserving rooms for me on my last visit, so I was spared the trouble of going to the billeting office and taking a chance of being unable to get quarters or getting less comfortable ones.

Went to booking office and got reservations for Berlin. Called our LDS servicemen's group to tell them I wouldn't be there and learned they had planned open house tonight honoring me with printed programs, orchestra, etc. Am very sorry we are all disappointed.

Spent evening working in my room. Following dinner, I walked through the city for an hour. Ruin is everywhere. My heart became so heavy as I walked through streets lined with rubble and bombed and burned buildings that I found myself silently shedding tears of sorrow.

Then my attention would be attracted to old men, young men, and boys following smoking U.S. soldiers waiting for them to throw the cigarette stub away so they could pick it up and either smoke it or, more commonly, put it out and then slip it in their pockets to be rerolled later and used, or more than likely sold, on the black market.

Crude as it may seem, it reminded me of hogs following grain-fed steers in the feedlots of the Corn Belt, only in the latter case the scavengers received some food value while these human scavengers receive drugs that are harmful to the body but satisfy an artificially built-up craving habit.

My heart has seldom been so heavy as tonight as I contemplate the conditions of these war-torn countries and, in fact, the world as a whole. (ETB Journal.)

I am still hopeful it will be possible to go into Poland again, although the serviceman who was going with me has been refused permission, after former approval, because of the tense feeling in the Russian Zone and in Poland since Secretary Byrnes' speech a few days ago at Stuttgart. The people have been demonstrating in front of the U.S. Embassy in Warsaw, and five U.S. cars have been stolen in the Berlin area in the last few days—one of them a large new UNRRA vehicle.

We can tell better what to do when I arrive in Berlin and size up the situation. The head of the Polish Military Mission in Berlin has been very friendly to me in the past and assured me after my first trip he'd grant permission for additional visits. (ETB to FAB.)

As I sit in this comfortable room in a partially bombed hotel and look out of the window, I see destruction as far as the eye can reach.

Across the street in the rubble of a once beautiful building, men and women are trying to find a few little sticks of wood to carry home to cook their meager food. Occasionally an old man or woman, often with little barefooted children following, goes by pushing or pulling little old wagons or baby carriages with a few sticks which they've gathered out in the country.

I'm so grateful you and the children can be spared the views of the terrible ravages of war. I fear I'll never be able to erase them from my memory. The effect on little children must be terrible and so lasting. (ETB to FAB.)

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Another meeting with mission presidency preceded by conference with President Ranglack. Later conferences with Polish Military Mission, Ambassador Murphy, Dr. Olsen, head of Religious Affairs Branch of OMGUS, et al.

Was happy to learn that the officials are finally coming to the view that church organizations should be allowed to distribute relief supplies directly to their people without pooling relief through a general relief agency. This is much more effective and will result in more total relief contributions. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Just a hurried note while waiting for my next appointment here in the Office of Military Government U.S. (OMGUS). I have just been to the finance office, where I was the first person to receive the new currency which goes into effect today with all the military U.S. forces in Germany. For three days everything has been closed for purchases or sales pending the changeover. The introduction of the new currency is an effort to control the black market. This money is different from what the Germans have, so the new money can be used only in military places. Of course this will not prevent Americans from buying cigarettes, etc., at the army store (PX) and exchanging them secretly for German articles on the black market, but there is a limit to the quantity of cigarettes, candy, etc., that each soldier can purchase.

Well, darling, I'm not going in to Poland. The authorities advise against it and the Polish military officials here seem to be against it. In fact, they've told me that I shouldn't have traveled freely in Poland contacting our German Saints as I did before. For some good reason, I did not learn of their strict rules and so proceeded to do the work we needed to do and, after accomplishing our mission, reported to the authorities what we'd done.

When I talk with my good Polish friend here who is head of the Polish Military Mission, he tells me that the officials in Poland are surprised I traveled about the nation without being stopped—and apparently they are somewhat displeased. But as our Ambassador Murphy said to me yesterday, "Mr. Benson, it's fortunate for you, I suppose, that you were not familiar with all their restrictions or else you would not have been able to contact your people in Poland at all."

So again the Lord has worked things out for us in a most peculiar way, and all is well because most of our people are now out of Poland according to information received since coming into Germany. Our assistance was just in time.

Honey dear, it seems so different on this trip. For one thing the weather is lovely. The surroundings here at U.S. headquarters have been greatly improved, and many of the traces of war have been removed. However, when one goes into other parts of the city, all is destruction and poverty, and one soon has a feeling of sadness and despondency.

Although the condition of the people is somewhat improved, one of the serious matters is that there is as yet no fuel available for the Germans for the winter ahead. In our meeting yesterday with the acting mission presidency, they wrapped themselves in blankets because already the nights and mornings here are cold. Fortunately for the mission home, the brethren followed my suggestion this spring and cut down three huge trees to let in some sunlight for the garden and have cut them all up and have them stored under cover. This will be a great help during the coldest weather. (ETB to FAB.)

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

More conferences with representatives of the same agencies as yesterday.

To my joy, I learned today of the arrival of large supplies of welfare products—clothing, food, and bedding. With President Ranglack of the East German Mission, following conferences with Red Cross officials, we visited the warehouses where our supplies are stored. They were all in good condition, and tomorrow, after submission of a plan for distribution to the Russian and local authorities, we hope to get approval for immediate distribution to our needy members.

Our hearts filled with deep gratitude as we gazed upon these lovely products of kind and unselfish LDS hands across the sea in Zion. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Appointments mission office. The local mission officers are delighted with the arrival today of 1,000 copies of the Book of Mormon shipped from Frankfurt.

Left for Frankfurt via overnight military train. Three minutes before the train left, a call went out over the loudspeaker for everyone going to Frankfurt to board the train as the doors would be locked and not unlocked until the train reached Frankfurt tomorrow morning.

I shared a compartment with a cigar-smoking Quaker. The ventilation being poor, I am not too happy. Will be pleased when we reach our destination. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

No matter where I go—on land, on the sea, in the air, or amid the horrors of war—my thoughts frequently turn to you, my dear, whom I love so dearly. All I have seen and experienced but increases my gratitude and affection for you.

It is such a joy to hold you in my thoughts and contemplate the time when I'm to be with you again.

Last night on the train—my first ride on the "Berliner" (a military train from Berlin to Frankfurt)—I found myself longing for you to make the trip with me. (ETB to FAB.)

SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Left hotel. Heavy storm during night at airport had leveled some barracks, blown down all power lines, and knocked several planes around. Each plane had to be flight tested before any official flights left. In all, we took off at 11:30 A.M. instead of 8:00 A.M. as scheduled. Then we stopped in ten minutes at Wiesbaden to check finally on weather.

After some little delay, we took off for what proved the roughest trip yet. (ETB Journal.)

The plane was loaded with G.I.s and some German prisoners. I was the only civilian. We sat on regular bucket seats used in planes to transport troops during the war. That was not so bad, as I've done it scores of times, but the man guarding the prisoners got sick and let go on the metal floor. The odor almost made others sick. Well, it's over and my stomach didn't act up a bit, for which I'm grateful. (ETB to FAB.)

However, in due course we arrived at London and the flat to find my desk piled high with mail.

It is a joy to have three choice letters from my ever-devoted and faithful wife. How I love her and thank the Lord for her constantly. She gives me word that Elder Alma Sonne will leave New York City by boat for Europe October 14 and should arrive here about October 20.

My darling Flora—although I know she'd love to join me in Europe—is so unselfishly understanding and emphasizes so sweetly that she will be more than pleased to meet me here, in New York City, or at home as the Brethren and I advise. She has been so closely tied at home and worked so hard for so long that she surely more than deserves a real vacation. Yet she never complains but works unceasingly and loyally supports me in all my labors, for which I am most thankful although not fully worthy, I fear, of such rich blessings. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 22, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

The call I placed for my dear wife yesterday has been delayed because of weather interference. I have been so anxious to complete the call so we can decide definitely where and about when Flora should meet me. I have prayed she would feel as I and would not be disappointed. We have always seen eye to eye, and I'm sure, living as close to the Lord as she does, her impressions will be as mine are. Will hope the call may come through—although it's now twelve o'clock midnight and the prospects aren't very good. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

At two o'clock this morning the call came through. The reception was very good.

I was made grateful to learn from my dear companion that our impressions were the same—viz., that she should not come to Europe at this time. It was a sweet experience to talk to her for six minutes. We are so very happy and grateful for the prospects of meeting in New York City when the work is finished over here and enjoy a few days together.

Worked at the office all day. Had two sisters from the British Mission help me as typists. There is so much mail. I dictated most of the day. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day dictating and preparing bulletin to mission presidents. Had two sisters helping me again today. Received much mail, including a lovely letter from my sweetheart wife.

Called on President Boyer for an hour in the evening and found him up and much improved. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND; BRUSSELS, BELGIUM; GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

Left office for Brussels. Arrived in Brussels and was met by President and Sister James L. Barker of the French Mission, who had driven up from Paris to meet me and take care of other mission business. We had three hours together. We considered several mission problems. Among other things, I counseled him to secure a mission translator to translate literature for use in the mission and that President Barker arrange his time so he could prepare some tracts and pamphlets for submission to the mission literature committee aimed at the French and Catholic people. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND, AND ZURICH, SWITZERLAND

Conferences with President Zimmer and Taggart. Approved, after inspection, the purchase of 300 to 400 Swiss used army blankets for use of refugees and bombed-out Saints in West German Mission.

Went to train in evening with overnight train ticket, as I thought, to find that the 6:56 on the ticket was army time or morning.

Went back to the hotel, where I learned there are only three trains weekly, and fortunately got a room and began at once to check on transportation by air with a prayer in my heart. Was given no encouragement on such short notice.

Finally Swissair called Zurich and got space for seven-thirty in the morning. Then the problem was to get to Zurich and, if I got there, to get hotel room. Took 7:30 P.M. train to Zurich and secured a hotel.

I am now in Zurich and in a comfortable room ready for a rest and to report at the Swissair offices at 6:30 A.M. tomorrow for Prague. Again I thank the Lord for opening the way. (ETB Journal.)

President George Albert Smith called and paid us a lovely visit to our home. He is so kind and thoughtful of me and our needs. He is a most busy gentleman, and his time is so valuable that I certainly feel it is a real honor for him to call on our family and me. (FAB Journal.)

SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 28, 1946:

PRAGUE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA

An effort is being made to locate all of our Saints and visit them as rapidly as possible. A reorganization has been effected in the two branches at Prague and at Brno. Some of the old officers have been reappointed and many new people brought into activity. Plans are underway to open a third branch.

Brother Roubicek, former acting mission president and president of the Prague Branch, who has been deferred from military service twice on account of his Church responsibilities, is leaving this week to enter the military service for a period of five months as a part of the national military service program (compulsory). At the end of the five-month period he expects to return to his work at a local hotel in Prague.

The one-half car of clothing for this mission has arrived, and the one-half car of food which was lost has been located and is in Czechoslovakia, although it has not yet reached its destination in Prague. The American Relief for Czechoslovakia organization has agreed to provide satisfactory storage space free to the Church until our welfare supplies are distributed.

In view of the steady improvement of economic conditions in this nation, it is estimated that the two shipments of clothing and food will suffice to meet the needs of the Saints in this mission—at least for the foreseeable future.

Plans are underway for the organization of welfare food-producing projects in 1947. (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1946:

PRAGUE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Held public meeting with Saints and friends with a good attendance and sweet spirit present.

Following lunch, I reported to the airways terminal, according to the suggestion made to President Toronto a day or so before, in the hope I might get transportation back, as my work was finished—although there were twenty-eight on the waiting list ahead of me. The officials reported there was no possibility, but I felt somehow I was to leave on that plane and so had the lieutenant take me to the airport in his jeep.

On arrival there, I was informed there was no chance. However, I waited while the passengers checked through customs. Then, just as the plane was about to leave, the head official came out and told me he felt impressed to take off some diplomatic mail and make room for me. So in a few minutes we were on our way—one more evidence that the Lord is with His servants.

The four brethren, as I bade them good-bye, shook their heads in astonishment.

About three-and-one-half hours later we arrived at London in a dense fog. Three other planes were there ahead of us and still in the air although we could not see them. We circled the airport for twenty minutes, and then after one unsuccessful attempt to land finally made it with the aid of lights and flares. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 2, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day attending to matters pertaining to the twelve missions in the European Mission. (ETB Journal.)

Our Saints, who generally speaking have lived the gospel, have been much more fortunate than their nonmember associates. In the first place, they have been recipients of the glorious blessings of living the Word of Wisdom. As a result, they do not have the enslaving habits of coffee, tea, tobacco, and liquor. Instead of trading food for these drugs, they have used their allotment to exchange for food.

They have had a more hopeful and optimistic outlook and have done more to help themselves. Our branches have been in an unusual degree fully united. Our people, as a whole, are frugal and careful with their means. They have sustained each other in the spirit of love and fellowship and have not dissipated their energies through worry, fear, bickering, and complaint. They have had valuable help through many loyal and devoted LDS servicemen and, of course, now they have the much-welcomed welfare supplies from Zion. (ETB to FAB.)

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office until noon and then to airport to go to Paris. However, a combination of weather, defective cables, reporting conditions, and other delays made it unwise if not impossible for me to go, especially when one plane turned back at the Channel and we were informed that our plane may have to go into another airport and on to Paris tomorrow. The cost involved, the hazard involved, and the impression which I received against going made me decide not to wait longer at the airport. Returned to lodge and completed dictation. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Today the general conference of the Church convenes on Temple Square. How I miss being in attendance, and yet I know I'm where the Lord wants me and I'm happy and grateful to serve in any capacity or in any part of His vineyard where He may call me.

With all my heart I love this work, those who lead it, and those who strive to live its teachings. I hope and pray that I shall always be numbered with the faithful Latter-day Saints.

Have been at my desk in the bedroom-office most of the day. Had conferences with air and boat transportation officials. Received and answered much correspondence and sent a bulletin to mission presidents together with a proposed itinerary for the visit of President Sonne and myself to the ten missions. (ETB Journal.)

We enjoyed a most spiritual conference. We all missed my husband so much. (FAB Journal.)

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 6, 1946:

LONDON AND BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND

Left London by car for Birmingham. The ride through the beautiful green countryside of ole England is a delight to behold—green fields verdant with forage, lovely fall flowers in profusion, wooded lanes bordered with soft green and lined with stately trees, and old ivy-covered rock walls or hawthorne hedges. Peaceful Ayreshire and Shorthorn cattle, Shire and Clydesdale horses, and Cotswold and black-faced sheep rested or grazed leisurely in the fertile pastures as we sped through one picturesque village after another for three-and-one-half hours. It was a most soul-satisfying experience gripping me almost to complete silence. In every direction were views to challenge and invite the brush of the landscape artist.

We were greeted warmly by the Saints who had assembled at the Conway Road School in Sparkbrook, Birmingham. There we enjoyed three glorious sessions of conference interspersed with pleasant visits, conferences with small groups and individuals. I signed programs and autographed books until I emptied two fountain pens and got writer's cramp—and still they kept coming.

The Lord poured out his Spirit in rich abundance on the more than 600 who attended. Three representatives of the press were present and interviewed me. They became so interested in the morning session they returned in the evening, unknown to me.

The spirit in this mission has greatly improved and the outlook is bright. (ETB Journal.)

In contemplation of returning to the United States in the near future, I bade farewell to the British Saints and expressed my regret that it will be necessary to leave the work among the Saints of Europe in which I am now engaged. I then recalled prophecies concerning events which will occur in the last days—the return of the Jews to Palestine and the part Great Britain is to play in this great movement. However, I warned that all is not well with the British nation, that there is much sin and a great need for national repentance in order to escape the pending judgments promised those who forsake God. I urged greater love of liberty and freedom and independence by the British people. (European Mission History.)

MONDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1946:

LONDON AND BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND

We held a glorious meeting with the fifty missionaries of this mission. There was an inspiring spirit present and everyone was evidently touched to the heart. This is a strong group of missionaries and their spirit is excellent. God bless them as they bring the much-needed message of the restored gospel to this great people.

Drove home to London, arriving at 7:00 P.M. with three missionaries coming with us. After an hour of hymn singing around the piano in our living room, I read through most of my accumulation of mail including sweet and comforting words from my ever-devoted wife. Retired at 10:15. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 8, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND, AND AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

Office dictating then to KLM (Dutch Airlines) office and on to Amsterdam where I was met by President Zappey of the Netherlands Mission.

We then left by Citroen car to drive part way to Gronigen in northern Netherlands. All went well until we arrived at the west end of the dike across an arm of the North Sea at Den Dover. Here President Zappey became very sick. After stopping several times, he was riding quite comfortably when the motor became very hot and began to ping. After some wait in the cold on the dike twelve miles from the mainland with the North Sea rolling in on either side, some men in a car pulled us in to Holinger.

After considerable effort and delay, we found a doctor and a rooming house. After making Brother Zappey comfortable and invoking the blessings of the Lord upon him through administration, in which I anointed him and sealed the anointing, I retired at 1:30 A.M. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 9, 1946:

GRONINGEN, NETHERLANDS

Rose and got a mechanic and found all radiator water had been lost through a faulty connection yesterday morning at a garage. Fixed it up promptly and after the doctor checked Brother Zappey, who is much better, we set out for Groningen.

After inspecting several building sites, we took an option on 900 square meters in a lovely new area overlooking an artificial lake in a park.

Left for Utrecht via Assen, Meppel, and Zwolle. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 12, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

This has been a busy and most happy day, as have all the days of the past eight-and-a-half months in Europe. Possibly at no time since arriving in Europe have I felt so "caught up" with my work as tonight. Practically all correspondence is taken care of, problems answered, material of a current nature read, and filing done. If I can complete a call tonight to Sweden that has been pending all day, the day will be complete and I can leave for Manchester in the morning with no worries or pressing problems on my mind as I attend the district conference and go on to Liverpool to consider the sale and possible purchase of properties for that branch.

Have completed tentative plans for the visit of President Sonne and myself to the mission beginning November 2. I pray that all will work out satisfactorily under the blessings of the Lord. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, OCTOBER 14, 1946:

ROCHDALE, LIVERPOOL, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Left Rochdale for Liverpool, where we inspected the Liverpool Branch property which is in a deplorable condition and a discredit to the Church. I made recommendations for repairs, renovations, and general clean up based on a plan to be prepared by a competent architect.

Drove to London via the beautiful tunnel under the Mercy River, Chester, etc. (ETB Journal.)

Saw doctor and he said I was overworking. He said I should have an operation as soon as possible.

My husband and I knew before he left for Europe that I was to have an operation. The operation has been brought on because of conditions developing from giving birth to the most lovely and perfect children.

I know that the Lord will bless me in my operation that I will be stronger and feel better physically than I ever have in my life. Whatever the Lord wishes for me to have I know will be right.

I have been very close to my children. I feel it is a mother's duty and responsibility to stay home and teach and train her children as they should be taught and keep them well and strong, both spiritually and physically.

Naturally at times I have longed to go out with my husband on trips that he goes on, but then I say, "No, I should not go and leave my children for someone else to take care of. It is my place as a mother to be with them until they are married. If we go on a trip, we as a family will all go together. I can take these trips with my husband when my children are married and on their own. But they need me now, and I have a double responsibility to take the place of both mother and father.

I am going to see that I do all within my power and strength to see that our children have the proper training, home life, and love, and they need me to stay home with them more than ever because of their father having to be away so much.

If more mothers would stay home more with their children and pal and play and talk and advise and counsel with them, there would be few problems with our girls and boys or with juvenile delinquency.

Parents would receive big dividends if they stayed close and at home with their children and not out to parties and traveling so much. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 16, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office dictating answers to correspondence, telephoning, and an hour's conference with Mr. Vivian Meik from the editorial staff of The People. Mr. Meik, who is most friendly toward the Church and who, through the efforts of the Genealogical Society, has learned that some of his relatives are members of the Church, spoke in highest terms of our people. The People paper has the largest circulation of any paper in the English language, five-and-one-half million. He said, among other things, that our people seemed to be the only ones who were satisfied in their hearts and who had no fear for the future. He asked for literature, which was provided, and for further conferences.

Visited the world-famous Madame Tussaud's wax works exhibition and then returned to my quarters and wrote and signed letters. (ETB Journal.)

I think it best until you return that the General Authorities are not aware or concerned or told of my condition, because I have always wanted you to stay in the mission as long as it is necessary for you to do the work of the Lord, as it should be done, no matter what may come or develop with me and our children. I can carry on satisfactorily and I know all will be well. I don't want the Church Authorities to be concerned about me. They have a heavy enough load to carry without added concern.

I am so thankful I have been able to hold up and carry through in doing my small part of your mission at home so you could go to Europe and do such a marvelous work for thousands of distressed people and for you to be able to stay the full time that the General Authorities desired that you did, and the Lord would bless me so the operation wouldn't have to be done until you filled your mission completely. The Lord has surely blessed my humble efforts and helped me on so very much. Please don't worry about me. The Lord won't fail me.

The added responsibilities that have been mine the past year, with your having been in Europe, have no doubt been the main factors in bringing on this added condition in my body. But I am thankful to the Lord for all of it, and I know and feel that the Lord was indeed overly good to me in blessing me and our home with the choice little spirit and body of our dear little Flora Beth and preserving my life. I would go through it all again, and more if it were necessary, to have more of God's choice spirits. But I suppose now the Lord feels we have done all within our part and power and we have our share, and I am indeed thankful for them and grateful beyond words to express thanks for our choice six children—and they are indeed choice.

Too, the Lord gave me such added strength and blessings during Flora Beth's illness. His blessings were showered down upon both of us—so that it didn't interfere in your spirit and work to be able to carry on with your great task as president of the European Mission. I am so grateful and thankful to the Lord for His abundant blessings that He has and is showering down upon me so constantly. I feel at times I don't deserve them all. I hope and pray I shall always be worthy of His many blessings.

I am so desirous at all times to please you and the Lord and to make you most happy—to always help you and the Church my utmost in furthering the Lord's work upon the earth. At times since you have been gone, when the load seemed to get a bit heavy, I would be all the more determined to try and work harder, to pray harder and ask the Lord to help me always put on a better "front" and to help me carry on with a cheerful happy influence of gratitude for the bigger and finer things in life and the life to come.

I have ever felt that you and our family and I were indeed very privileged to be chosen and selected to carry through with such a call as we have been given. I have felt and I know that we would be given added blessings, both in this life and the life to come, if we did our part. I know that both you and I, our family, and thousands of other people in Europe and elsewhere have already witnessed and enjoyed many added blessings because of this call that has come to you and our family. It has brought a deeper, diviner, and purer love for us both toward each other and our family. Our testimonies have been greatly increased and countless other blessings have opened up and been brought to us. (FAB to ETB.)

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 20, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

The second shipment of Church welfare supplies, consisting of thirty-five tons of food products, has just arrived in Berlin. The first shipment, received about a month ago, is stored in the mission home, from which point it is being distributed throughout the various districts according to need. The clothing is being carefully sorted and will be a great blessing to the Saints of the mission as it reaches them at the beginning of the winter season.

I wish you could have seen the clothes as they had them neatly arranged on the floors and in cabinets at the mission home and witnessed the expressions of gratitude, both facial and by word of mouth, from the mission presidency and other Saints. The brethren of the presidency were already wearing some of the items of clothing, the first they have been able to obtain in many years. They are, no doubt, as well, if not better, dressed than any Germans in Berlin today. (European Mission History.)

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1946:

BERLIN AND FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Arrived in Berlin and were required to wait on account of "low ceiling" before taking off for Frankfurt. On arrival there we learned that the two planes for London had left and we would have to wait until morning. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 23, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Left for the airport hoping to get an early plane to London. One postponement after another on account of bad weather at Frankfurt and London caused us to spend the entire day at the airport. I remained in Frankfurt hoping weather would permit me to leave in the morning by plane. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 24, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY, AND LONDON, ENGLAND

Weather is clear. Went to airport, left for London. Rode to London with an official of the U.S. State Department and was at my desk to find it piled high with mail, including four letters from my faithful wife.

The letters from my wife brought the sad news that Flora will have to submit to an operation of major character, largely due to overwork and excessive strain. There was some evidence of this before I left home. In fact, we had spoken to the doctor about it only a few days before my call came from the First Presidency to leave on this mission "as soon as possible." We, of course, postponed the operation and I left in a few days.

Now the doctor says the operation should be taken care of promptly. Flora is so sweet and brave about it all and assures me that our planned vacation and rest period, which will now have to be foregone, is perfectly all right and that she is perfectly contented and happy.

I am advising her to seek a blessing at the hands of the brethren and then meet me in New York from which point we will go directly home and then consider the operation question. She has worked so hard and ceaselessly and has been so brave and uncomplaining all during my absence. I am truly grateful for her sterling character. She is without doubt one of the chosen daughters of our Heavenly Father and a choice daughter of Zion. God bless her. May I be worthy of her eternal companionship. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 25, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Dictating all day. No further word from home and no word from President Sonne, who is delayed in New York City because of the vicious and prolonged maritime strike. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 26, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Received an early (3:00 A.M.) call that my wife was trying to reach me. After an hour's wait the word came that the call was cancelled. After considerable anxiety I placed a call for her at 5:00 A.M. The call was not completed until 9:00 P.M., and then the connection was poor so we could not be fully understood.

I gleaned, however, that Flora, Dr. Skidmore, et al. feel the operation should take place early in November and that she requests that I say nothing to the General Authorities about it because she doesn't want my mission to be affected in any way.

I explained I'd likely be coming home in early December, but she feels it should not be postponed but that all will be well and the Lord will be with her. We could hardly talk for crying, but her last words were, "Don't tell the Brethren but stay and fill your mission."

After an hour of prayer and meditation I wrote her an airmail special delivery letter making certain suggestions and asking for further information, although Flora said she had written me in detail, which letter has not yet arrived. (ETB Journal.)

Even now some of our Saints have their precious eye-sight imperiled, according to reports of physicians, because of the absence of fat in the diet. As Americans, we often find ourselves wishing that our impoverished Saints in these war-torn countries could have even a portion of the excess fat consumed and wasted in the average American home even during this period of short supply. One of the members of the acting mission presidency in Berlin has practically lost the use of his eyes because of a fat deficiency in his diet. We were happy to be able to give him a small can of fat on our visit to Berlin last week, received from a German friend here in London.

Our Saints need practically everything needed to sustain life and health, to say nothing of the many common household supplies that are almost nonexistent in the occupied areas today. However, the greatest need is for fat and sugar. (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 27, 194:

LONDON, ENGLAND

This has been a day of fasting, prayer, and meditation which I have greatly appreciated. I have been blessed with the assurance from my Heavenly Father that all is well and that Flora will be all right whether the operation is performed now in my absence or later on my return. I am so anxious that one of the Brethren administer to her before any operation is performed and that as the decision is made to operate, if this seems best, that the Brethren be apprised of it so that they can join their faith with ours in Flora's behalf. This can be done just prior to the operation so that there will be no feeling of obligation to call me home before my mission is completed.

There is so much to be done yet to get President Sonne acquainted with conditions here and complete plans already projected pertaining to welfare distribution, missionary work, etc. And yet I long to be close to Flora if she is to go through this serious ordeal. She is so brave, faithful, and unselfish. She has never had any thought of fear for herself, and complete unselfishness has always characterized her attitude when she is involved. She exercises such extreme care for others and so little for herself. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, OCTOBER 28, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

It is nine months today since I was set apart by the First Presidency for this mission. Throughout the entire period the Lord has been near me. Never once have I been downhearted or discouraged. Not one murmur has come from my wife or children. To them it has been "our mission," and they have been true blue.

My heart fills with deep gratitude as I contemplate all my blessings. Received a letter from Flora, in fact the original and a copy, the latter sent in care of the British Mission, telling that her condition is such that she and the doctor feel an operation is necessary without undue delay. After prayerful consideration I cabled her as follows: "Just received your sweet brave letters regarding operation. Sonne still in New York. Can't complete mission and return before December sixth. Placing confidential call to Brother Lee requesting he see you and doctor and airmail me. Must do what's best for your health immediately. The Lord will safeguard you. God bless you, darling. Affectionately, T."

After sending cable, I talked to Brother Lee at his home and explained Flora's condition and doctor's advice. He agreed to follow through and write me. We both could hardly speak because of emotion. I have prayed much about the matter and feel some better about the operation in my absence, although naturally during this serious period I'd like to be close to home. (ETB Journal.)

I received a wonderful cable from my husband asking the Lord to bless me and do all I should to take proper care of myself.

Elder Harold B. Lee and his good wife called on me this evening. My darling husband had talked by telephone from London to Brother Lee about my physical condition. Brother Lee told me that my husband said over the phone that there were three things he wanted Brother Lee to do. First, see our doctor; second, call and see me; third, give his sweetheart a blessing.

Brother Lee gave me a most glorious and comforting blessing. My husband wanted so much to be at my side and be with me when I was to have my operation. After the blessing Elder Lee gave me, I felt impressed it would be safe and all right if I waited until my husband came home.

My doctor and Elder Lee said I must get help in the home and be off my feet as much as possible if I were going to postpone my operation. I have a good girl come once a week and clean now, and I have refused and turned down all invitations to parties. I have been invited out so many places but feel my health is more important and taking care of our family. So what strength I have I give it to my home and family and writing my wonderful husband. (FAB Journal.)

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 29, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day dictating and reading mail and in conferences. Wrote Flora, as I plan to do each day until I'm with her, and received a letter from her in a rather sad and somewhat lonely tone which concerns me greatly. I can well imagine she is worried and not well and, as a result, her usually cheerful optimistic spirit is bound to be affected. How I wish I could be close to her. Yet I know that the Lord will overrule all things for our good and that He will speak peace to our souls and preserve her during this crisis. May God grant it may be so. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 31, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Another day at my desk. (ETB Journal.)

Conditions today, generally speaking, in the war-torn countries of Europe are much worse than any conditions which have existed here within the memory of any of the brethren who are coming here as missionaries. Although there has been considerable improvement during the past year, the situation still remains very grim. Food is very, very short in quantity, relatively poor in quality, and limited in variety. The fuel situation is very serious throughout all of Europe both in the war-torn countries and those which were not actively engaged in war. Last winter was a mild winter in Europe. We don't know what this winter will be, but October has been the coldest October in five years and the prospects are not encouraging. The housing situation continues to be most acute. (European Mission History.)

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

At the office all day. Also prepared a short article for the Children's Friend. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1946:

UTRECHT, NETHERLANDS

My heart was filled with joy to receive an encouraging letter from my wife telling me the doctor had approved postponement of her operation until after my return, providing she gets help in the home and doesn't overdo.

She told of Brother Harold B. Lee coming to the home at my telephone request and giving her a lovely blessing, promising that the operation would be successful and she would recover—that her mission was not finished, but that she would live long and enjoy even richer blessings in the future than she has in her past life. It is all most encouraging to both of us.

We left for Amsterdam in an army DC-3 with BOAC seats. The ceiling was somewhat low, but above the clouds and fog it was quite satisfactory although dark on these short days of late autumn. We arrived safely in Amsterdam two hours later and were met by President Zappey, who drove us to Utrecht where we attended the latter part of a missionwide MIA program with some 800 in attendance.

Retired in a small dirty, cold room—the only space available according to the district president. Undressed in the dark because there were no shades. Slept very little but had more comfort than in some places in Europe, particularly Germany. (ETB Journal.)

Hundreds of people chartered private buses, others came by rail and bicycle to join in this great occasion—the largest group ever assembled at a missionwide conference in Holland.

It was interesting to note that, through the efficiently organized Church welfare program of this mission, the Saints are looking very healthy and warmly dressed. Many of those in attendance were proudly wearing American welfare clothing. All of the timely aid received from Zion has strengthened the bonds of love and brotherhood, and the members were happy to be able to express their gratitude and appreciation.

Songs, skits, and group demonstrations under the direction of the MIA made for a most happy entertainment. People were loath to leave for their various overnight quarters and remained nearly two hours after the program ended, chatting with each other, shaking hands, and trying to catch up on a year's visiting in the short time available to do so. (European Mission History.)

SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1946:

UTRECHT, NETHERLANDS

Spent a glorious and full day in a missionwide conference held in a large public hall in Utrecht. More than 1,000 Saints and friends from the five districts were present, and the Lord poured out his Spirit richly. The Saints were so happy and kind and so delighted to be together that it was more than two-and-a-half hours after the meeting closed before we could get away.

A feature of the conference was a singing mothers chorus and a combined chorus of about 300 voices, all of which was recorded and played back after the meeting in part. The singing mothers were clothed largely in welfare clothes, but there were not enough white blouses for all and some didn't fit very well. Most of the Saints were wearing clothes from Zion. (ETB Journal.)

This month I have turned down many lovely invitations and parties that many kind friends have invited me to because of my physical condition. The doctor says I must be careful. If I do my housework and care for the children properly, that takes the time up fully.

Everyone has been so kind, good, and thoughtful during my husband's absence, and all my life I have been so greatly blessed, and I hope and pray I shall always live to merit and deserve such blessings. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1946:

UTRECHT AND AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS; LONDON, ENGLAND

After further conferences with President Zappey and mission staff, we were driven to Amsterdam where we caught the plane to London and arrived at the office one hour later.

Read mail for an hour. I am so anxious to reach home as soon as possible for Flora's sake, so she can complete her hospitalization before Christmas if possible. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND; GOTEBORG AND STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

Office until noon. Left for Stockholm; delayed forty-five minutes for weather clearance. Stopped at Goteborg two-and-one-half hours later after experiencing the setting of the sun and the rising of the moon through the fluffy clouds as we sped at 175 miles per hour above them at an elevation above ground of 6,500 feet.

At Goteborg the passport control officers, to my embarrassment, told me my passport visa expired November 1. However, after negotiations extending during our entire stop of forty-five minutes, during which I missed my dinner, they approved my journey and issued an emergency permit.

Arrived in Stockholm and was met by mission authorities. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1946:

GAVLE, ESKILSTUNA, AND STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

Left Gavle by car for Eskilstuna. After losing our way and having some car trouble, we arrived one-and-a-half hours late for meeting to find the people still waiting.

After a lovely meeting and interviews with two newspaper reporters, we took refreshments with the Saints.

We left for Stockholm. Held a large public meeting at which I spoke on the Word of Wisdom. Later I addressed and visited with the fireside group of fifty fine young people.

After telephone calls and cables to the First Presidency and the Danish Mission, I retired at 12 midnight. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN; COPENHAGEN, DENMARK; LONDON, ENGLAND

Arose and wrote letters to my family and reported at the Swedish Mission home. Left for Copenhagen and spent three pleasant hours with President Alma L. Petersen of the Danish Mission and flew on to London, arriving to find all well and much mail, including two sweet letters from my ever-faithful wife. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Office all day. Packed trunk for boat freight shipment to Salt Lake City. (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Arose and made plans for discussions with Presidents Sonne and Stover at Southampton and further with Sonne in London. Arranged for President Barker to meet the S.S. Washington at Le Havre tomorrow. Also completed reservations and other plans for our continental tour. Dictated about half the day. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1946:

LONDON AND SOUTHAMPTON, ENGLAND

Left for Southampton where I met the S.S. Washington. After greeting President and Sister Sonne, I went aboard and gave instructions to President Walter Stover for Berlin and the missionaries for Switzerland and France. Were successful in clearing customs without being charged duty and returned to London.

Lunched with Sonnes in our rooms. Then I introduced them to our humble flat and the temporary accommodations for them during our visit on the Continent and long-time possibilities for quarters for the future.

It is good to have them here, and I hope I can get President Sonne fully acquainted with conditions in the missions so I can leave with the assurance I've done all I can to help him get started on his new responsibilities. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

With President Sonne, we held a conference with President Selvoy J. Boyer, the district presidents, and a general meeting as part of the London District conference.

Spent the afternoon and evening going over mission matters with President Sonne, who seemed astonished at the humble accomplishments of the past nine-and-a-half months. Truly as I, of necessity, reviewed them with President Sonne, even I was amazed at the manner in which the Lord has opened the way before us in this glorious mission. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

This has been a day of conferences interspersed with dictation and long distance calls. With President Sonne, we had profitable and pleasant conferences.

Retired after rereading the sweetest, loveliest, most faith-promoting and soul-satisfying letter which a man could ever hope to receive from his wife—and this in spite of the fact she is not well. How I love and adore and cherish my darling wife, sweetheart, and companion, Flora. No man ever had a truer, choicer helpmeet. I thank the Lord daily for her and ever pray He will preserve her in health for many years to come and help me to be worthy of her. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND; AMSTERDAM, ROTTERDAM, AND THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS

Left London with President Sonne for our visit to the nine missions of the Continent and arrived in Amsterdam. Were met by President and Sister Zappey and drove to Rotterdam where we inspected the welfare supplies and warehouse. Then drove to mission headquarters in The Hague. Attended and spoke for an hour through an interpreter and shook hands thereafter with the entire audience of 500—some of them more than once. There was a lovely spirit, and I was deeply moved by their loving good-bye.

The Dutch look so much better than when I first met with them several months ago. They seem better fed and clothed and their spirit is much improved. They are most happy with the fifty missionaries—eleven having arrived the last two weeks. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1946:

THE HAGUE, HAARLEM, AND AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

After a good night's rest at mission headquarters, we held a conference for one-and-a-half hours with President Zappey and then drove to Haarlem where I inspected a proposed building for purchase. It was found to be unsuitable. Attended a missionary meeting for four hours.

In the evening attended a meeting in the Amsterdam Branch with 300 in attendance. There was a glorious spirit present, and the love of the Saints was most touching as I shook hands with each one after a meeting in which many tears were shed.

Several gifts were presented, including a lovely silver set from President and Sister Zappey, a famous cake packed for shipping from the Groningen Branch, and some beautiful Dutch needlework from the Amsterdam Branch. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 1946:

AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS, AND COPENHAGEN, DENMARK

Arose and drove to the airport, where I bade a fond farewell to President and Sister Zappey.

Arrived at Copenhagen. President Alma L. Petersen met us and we went to the mission home.

After a short visit and lovely dinner, we held a meeting with President Petersen, rested a bit, and then held a most inspiring meeting with Saints and friends. It was a meeting I shall long remember—filled with the Spirit and with so much love and harmony. Many tears were shed from the time the congregation stood as we entered until we sang "God Be with You" and shook the hands of each one and lingered long to visit.

Never have I felt my feelings more tender and had my heart go out to a people more than here. How I would like to return with my good Danish-Scottish wife to the land of her father. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

As we pulled in to Stockholm station, the strains of "God Bless America" entered the door of our sleeping car. The Blomquist family, missionaries, and some fifty Saints had come to welcome us to the Swedish Mission.

Then followed interviews and photos with the press, a meeting with the fifty missionaries, inspection of buildings, radio broadcast, and public meeting at night interspersed with important conferences with President Eben R.T. Blomquist regarding building purchases and other problems.

It was hard to leave the Saints here. Their love is so deep and sincere. We lingered in fond good-byes for over two hours after the meeting ended. Then I signed some 100 booklets containing my "Farewell! God Bless You" message with a cut of my family on the front and a lovely letter from President Blomquist on behalf of all the Saints. This has ended another day long to be remembered. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 1946:

STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN, AND PRAGUE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA

We left Stockholm by plane for Prague, Czechoslovakia. We were greeted by Saints laden with flowers and went to our hotel and into immediate conference with President Toronto as we ate fruit in my room given us by the Swedish Saints.

We held a public meeting with about 125 in attendance, two-thirds of whom were nonmembers. Little girls in native costumes greeted us and we had a glorious meeting. Afterward we administered to the Saints and visited with them for two hours.

It was hard to say good-bye. Some had come great distances at considerable sacrifice.

Returning to the hotel, we held conference further with President Toronto until midnight. The Saints in Brno with whom I held a meeting last summer presented me with a lovely handmade silk tablecloth. (ETB Journal.)

President George Albert Smith called me by telephone to wish us a pleasant Thanksgiving and see how we all were. (FAB Journal.)

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1946:

BASEL, SWITZERLAND

Thanksgiving Day. Meeting with missionaries, a Thanksgiving dinner at the Basel chapel with the missionaries, and a splendid meeting with Saints and friends made a busy and pleasant day. (ETB Journal.)

The boys went to the football game and when they came home, they insisted the girls and I go to a movie show. We went and enjoyed it. It was very good. The name of it was "I've Always Loved You." It made me think of my devoted and loving husband because I have always loved and admired him to the fullest—from the first day I met and knew him.

We surely missed having with us my wonderful husband and father to our children on this Thanksgiving day. (FAB Journal.)

SUNDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1946:

PARIS, FRANCE

This has been a busy, happy day. Met with President Barker in the early morning, missionaries and district presidents, and with Saints and friends. All meetings were held in the lovely mission home. I also conferred with representatives of the Paris press.

Boarded the train for Frankfurt (entirely military) and bade President Barker farewell. (ETB Journal.)

Today was fast Sunday. I went to church with the six children. I bore my testimony in fast meeting. I felt I should express my gratitude to the Lord and the ward members for the many blessings I have been blessed with and for the love and kindness that the Yale Ward members have shown to me. I also expressed my great appreciation for my wonderful husband and for our precious family.

I said how we sisters should encourage our husbands and male members to do their duty in the Church and the Lord would bless us greatly for the same. I said I was proud of the work my husband was doing and had done as president of the European Mission. I said it is natural for us to have our lonely moments when our husbands are called to perform duties in the Church (that is natural when we love them dearly), but I said the Lord will bless us and there are compensations and added blessings that the Lord will make up to us threefold if we place our church work first and always do our duty in the Church. Above all, we will have blessings rich and everlasting in this world and eternally forever and ever. Our families will be better and greater joys will be ours. (FAB Journal.)

MONDAY, DECEMBER 2, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Arrived in Frankfurt with the trainload of army and U.S. military government personnel and began meetings, which occupied the entire day, with President Max Zimmer, district presidents, and mission auxiliary heads and a public meeting with the Saints.

I shall never forget this meeting with these poor Saints and their loving farewell. Tears filled their eyes as I spoke to them, and I had difficulty speaking because of the emotion which welled up in my bosom. President Zimmer was most kind in his comments.

The Saints sang as the closing song their farewell song as we all wept tears of love and gratitude. Then I stood at the door and shook hands with each of the 300 to 400 present as my hand and arm, already sore from previous experiences, ached. But I could not refrain from responding to the wishes of these poor but happy and great souls who have such great love for the gospel and the leaders of the Church.

There isn't anything that is right I wouldn't do for them. How I wish I had the power to lift them from their distress and suffering. Gladly would I give every material thing in life to ease their discomfort and pain. God bless them and keep them true to the faith and bring us together again where starvation, cold, and suffering are no more. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 3, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Arose at 4:30 A.M. Couldn't sleep because of thoughts of the many problems facing us in Germany, pointed out as they were at our district presidents' conference yesterday.

With President Alma Sonne, went to USFET headquarters to present Brother Sonne to some of my acquaintances and confer with military officials. Had a most pleasant conference with Commanding General Joseph T. McNarney and several others.

Met with President Max Zimmer and Brother Sorenson, a major of the welfare department of USFET.

Later we drove out to Langen and visited our refugees housed there, some in Swiss army barracks we were able to purchase in Switzerland. The condition of these Saints is much improved since I last visited them—thanks to welfare supplies, purchases made in Switzerland, and the industry of the people.

Met further with President Zimmer and took the overnight train ("Berliner") for Berlin, bidding President Zimmer a fond farewell. We have traveled much together in the past ten months in Germany, sleeping, eating, working, weeping, and praying together. He is a magnanimous soul with a great love for the German people of which he is one although living in Switzerland for many years. (ETB Journal.)

President George Albert Smith called on the telephone to see how I and the family are getting along. He said he was writing my husband and wanted to tell him all was well with us. (FAB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Arrived in Berlin and were met by President Walter Stover, Francis Gasser, and Sister Eugene Merrill. We went to the lovely Merrill home where we held a brief meeting and then went to OMGUS headquarters, registered with the Visitors Bureau, secured return transportation, conferred with Director of Office of Political Affairs, called at the offices of General Lucius D. Clay, Deputy Military Governor, Robert D. Murphy, Ambassador and U.S. Political Adviser for U.S., et al.

We met with a packed hall of 774 Saints from the Berlin District in an inspirational meeting. I released the acting mission presidency, consisting of Richard Ranglack, Paul Langheinrich, and Max Jeske, and the Saints voted a hearty vote of appreciation and enthusiastically sustained President Walter Stover.

With tear-dimmed eyes I bade a loving farewell to these devoted Saints whose conditions have improved greatly since I first met them in early March, as many of them lingered for more than an hour to shake hands, some two or three times, and expressed to me their love and blessing. I shall never forget them.

One of the most touching things was the presentation to me of a lovely hand-embroidered book cover from our refugees at Wolfsgruen.

We held a meeting with President Stover and the retiring presidency and met with the U.S. servicemen and military government LDS group. Retired at midnight. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 5, 1946:

BERLIN, GERMANY

Arose and after an hour's work in my room and breakfast, we went to the mission home for a meeting with local missionaries (twenty-seven) and district presidents for three hours. Held conferences with Dr. C. Arild Olsen, Dr. Kazenurg Libera of the Polish Military Mission, et al.

In the evening with Brother and Sister Eugene H. Merrill were dinner guests at Dr. and Mrs. Olsen's. After the dinner some twenty people came in, including President Walter Stover, Richard Ranglack, our Berlin District president, Brother Schultze, and Brother Francis Gasser of our Church, and representatives of several churches, some of whom were attached to Dr. Olsen's Religious Affairs Branch of OMGUS. Represented were Lutherans, Mennonites, Episcopalians, Methodists, Catholics, Quakers, and others.

Then, according to previous invitation, President Sonne and I for two hours told the attentive and interested group about the Church—its doctrines, organization, work in Europe, and distinctive features such as welfare work, tithing, temple work, and our missionary system. Under the blessings of the Lord it was well received.

Later in a brief personal conversation I told Dr. Olsen the story of the Restoration and the Prophet Joseph. He was not only interested, but expressed regret he had not asked us to relate this great event. We did not do so because he had asked for other things. However, Dr. Olsen invited representatives of the Church to come for another evening to meet with the group to present the account of the Restoration. I was able to arrange for our East German Mission authorities to give a series of lectures before several large groups in Berlin. Truly the Lord blessed us, and I pray that fruitful seeds were sown.

The joy of our group was increased when, as I was leaving, Dr. Olsen informed me that President Stover's request for an extension of his military permit had been approved. He also said that OMGUS, through his office, would approve his remaining in Germany for an indefinite period if the Russians would approve entrance into the Russian Zone, which I feel can be accomplished because the Lord wants him to stay. (ETB Journal.)

Today I sent the last letter to Europe that would reach my husband before he arrives home to us again. We can hardly wait. We are so happy and so very thrilled about his arrival.

We are indeed happy that he was able to complete his mission fully and so exceptionally well and stay as long as he was called to do. We rejoice greatly for the wonderful work and mission he has done and that we can enjoy his sweet presence and self again. (FAB Journal.)

FRIDAY, DECEMBER 6, 1946:

BERLIN AND FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Arose and wrote up diary and notes and a short letter to my devoted wife. Then began our conferences at the mission home, with International Red Cross officials, and with Mr. Bevier, head of the welfare work of OMGUS and two of our LDS boys with that department.

Plans were completed for the future distribution of our supplies to our members through the German Central Committee at Stuttgart for the U.S., British, and French Zones and the two German committees in Berlin for the Berlin area and the Russian Zone.

After conferences with President Walter Stover, he took us to the train for Frankfurt. President Sonne and I gave further attention to future plans as we rode toward Frankfurt. President Sonne seems well pleased with conditions found in the missions, the unusual cooperation which I have been able, with the blessings of the Lord, to establish with military authorities, and is high in his praise of my humble "pioneering work," as he calls it. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, DECEMBER 7, 1946:

FRANKFURT, GERMANY, AND AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

Arrived in Frankfurt and were met by President Max Zimmer, who drove us quickly to the airport. After waiting a bit, the flight was cancelled until tomorrow.

As we left for our car, acting on an impression, I checked with officials of American Overseas Airways (just opening offices here) and after some persuasion was given two seats to Amsterdam with the promise they'd wire for earliest space to London. The time intervening was spent in conference with President Zimmer and at the airport, where I had a most pleasant visit with my former acquaintance, Senator Lodge of Massachusetts, who rode on the same plane (DC-4 Skymaster) to Amsterdam.

On arrival we learned the earliest space was Monday, December 9. After hurried phoning, holding of KLM bus, etc., we booked passage on a Channel boat from the Hook of Holland to Harwich. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, DECEMBER 8, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Had a pleasant voyage. Arose at 4:30 A.M. and enjoyed a half hour on deck in the clear night with a full moon and a refreshing breeze. Then I did some writing before we docked.

Drove to London where I began to read and answer a large accumulation of mail, including letters from my family.

I attended and spoke at the sacrament meeting of the London Branch. Later ate supper and conferred with the Sonnes. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, DECEMBER 9, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

I'm constantly singing and walking on air in contemplation of our sweet meeting. Time is so short. I'm working almost night and day to complete the work fully. Worked until after eleven last night and started again this morning at five. (ETB to FAB.)

Darling mine, this will be my last letter before I see you. In fact, I may arrive before this unless I'm delayed or this letter makes perfect connections.

Sweetheart, from the bottom of my heart I thank the Lord for you and thank you for your undeviating loyalty and support. Your letters, next to the sustaining power of the Spirit of the Lord, have been most helpful to me during the ten-and-a-half months I've been away from you. Thanks so much, darling, for your constancy, love and encouragement. I love you so very much—more than when I left you, if such a thing is possible.

I shall always cherish you, dear, and bless the day we first met and the day you became mine for all eternity. How I adore you, dearest.

Thanks so much for your last two letters which were handed to me as I arrived in England—also thank the children for their lovely letters.

I have gone over everything with President Sonne and feel I can leave day after tomorrow confident I've done everything possible to help him get started. We've enjoyed the trip together. Will tell you all soon, darling. (ETB to FAB.)

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 10, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Further office work.

Two distributions of welfare supplies have been made to all districts in the two German missions, and some additional supplies are on hand in Geneva. One carload of cracked wheat is enroute, and today one mixed car of concentrated foods and two cars of cracked wheat were requested of the First Presidency. Some authorization was given for limited contributions of cracked wheat and powdered milk for general relief in the child-feeding program in the four zones and Berlin.

With the arrival of these supplies, a small shipment to Syria, and a little fat to Holland, plus some few purchases of fat and blankets in Switzerland, ample supplies will be available for the next six months plus a backlog for safety. Food packages have already been mailed to scattered Saints through CARE and the regular eleven-pound food packages and some welfare clothing from our stocks in Paris and Prague.

The entire program is working smoothly in Europe now and everywhere the needs of our people for food, clothing and bedding are pretty well taken care of insofar as these necessities are concerned.

The conditions throughout the missions are good and so much better than ten months ago when I arrived, when there was suffering and distress everywhere, no mission presidents anywhere in continental Europe, and the entire economy of most of the nations was badly broken down.

I can leave Europe now feeling our entire program is on a solid foundation and the conditions of the Saints much improved. Truly the Lord has blessed our efforts. (ETB Journal.)

In a very real sense the history of this eventful mission would be incomplete were deserving tribute not paid to the profound influence exerted upon our successful labors by my devoted wife, who remained at home to care for our six children.

During the ten months of our stay in Europe, she faced many perplexities and hardships. Although her own health and strength were often severely taxed, her faith and steadfastness never wavered. Never at any time did she register the slightest complaint or needless anxiety.

Within about three months after our arrival in Europe, she faced a crucial test during the critical illness of our youngest child, who was stricken with pneumonia. Because of her unswerving faith, I feel sure, the power of the priesthood and the blessings of heaven were made manifest in a marvelous manner. Though our little child lay at death's door, she was restored to us, for which we humbly express our gratitude to the Lord.

In the course of our travels in Europe, we frequently lived on very short rations, which was common throughout this stricken continent. Anxious to help us maintain our health and vigor, Sister Benson kept nutritious packages of food coming to our London office so we might supplement our otherwise meager and uninteresting diet. Often she would include a special treat which made us appreciate the more how richly blessed our own nation has been.

Invariably when we were faced with serious decisions or grave situations, a timely letter of encouragement would arrive which would completely dispel the clouds of anxiety and concern which seemed to weigh so heavily upon us at times.

It is my humble testimony that our choice helpmeets and companions contribute immeasurably to the successful completion of such a mission and deserve grateful recognition. Without them, I am sure, we would fall short of achieving fully what we are able to do with their faith and confidence in us. May the Lord bless them richly for their very real contribution to the success that has attended our efforts! (European Mission History.)

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 11, 1946:

LONDON, ENGLAND

Began work at 5:30 A.M. Completed all correspondence, transfer of inventories, finances, records, and mission affairs to President Sonne. Held further conferences with President and Sister Sonne, wrote official letters to General Joseph T. McNarney and the Allied Control Commission, and otherwise completed my work.

President Sonne expressed complete satisfaction and said I had done everything possible to acquaint him with conditions to help him get started and that he is in full agreement with all my policies in the European Mission and the instructions and suggestions made.

I feel happy with the results of the past three-and-one-half weeks together, during which period we have been fully united in all things pertaining to our work in Europe.

As I leave, it is with the assurance I have done everything possible to get him properly started and the work well established in Europe. I can't think of one single thing left undone which should have received my attention. I am so grateful to the Lord for his rich blessings.

Left for the air terminal building at twelve noon, where I had lunch with the Sonnes and Brother Babbel. I then boarded the bus for the Heathrow Airport while they followed in the car. After good-byes, clearance of customs, passport control, and snapshots at the aircraft, I boarded the Pan American Airways Constellation.

Arrived at Shannon Airport in southern Ireland, where we had dinner and were held because of adverse weather over much of the Atlantic. The reports kept shifting us from Shannon via the Azores, south of the British Islands, then via Gander, Newfoundland, direct. Finally it was decided to fly to New York City via Goose Bay and Labrador, Newfoundland.

Got some sleep in the comfortable reclining chairs. Passed through some heavy storms at about midnight making it rough and requiring the fastening of seat belts. (ETB Journal.)

I am having my hair fixed extra nice so I'll look just right when my darling husband returns. We are counting the hours for our dear husband and father to arrive home. (FAB Journal.)

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 12, 1946:

GOOSE BAY AND LABRADOR, NEWFOUNDLAND; NEW YORK CITY

Arrived Goose Bay. There was heavy snow at this outpost and the temperature was 14 degrees below zero. The runways were lined with banks of snow shoved from the runways by big snowplows. Only one boat per year comes in here, I was told, and that in late July. There are no trains. Gander, Newfoundland, airport is ordinarily used instead of Goose Bay, when weather permits, for transocean flying.

Arrived at New York City at twelve noon. Was delayed considerably clearing customs.

I called Flora and took a much appreciated bath. It was a great thrill to talk to my devoted wife and to tell her I would likely see her in the early morning.

We then went to the airport.

The ride to Chicago was very rough but otherwise uneventful. Left Chicago at 9:30 P.M. for Salt Lake. (ETB Journal.)

My wonderful husband called me from New York today. He just had arrived in the good old USA from Europe. He will fly from New York to Salt Lake City and be home with us again December 13 at 4:30 A.M.

I can hardly wait for my adorable husband to arrive. I don't believe I can sleep at all tonight. It is seven o'clock in the evening now, and if the airplane is on time, he will be here in nine-and-one-half more hours. (FAB Journal.)
