Ezra Taft Benson, Labor of Love: The 1946 European Mission of Ezra Taft Benson ( 1989)

PART 3:

HOME AGAIN

Friday, the thirteenth, has been anything but unlucky! (ETB Journal.)

FRIDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

We arrived in Salt Lake at 6:00 A.M. There, to my joy and our mutual satisfaction, I was greeted by my sweet and ever-loving and faithful wife on the very spot where we stood and said farewell exactly ten-and-a-half months ago.

She was so lovely in her red coat and black hat, and it was a soul-satisfying experience to take her in my arms again in affectionate embrace.

We rode home slowly in our lovely new Pontiac Six to greet the four lovely daughters, all in nightgowns as they had just arisen from their beds.

Then began a day of sweet reunions and loving association. In the late afternoon Reed and Mark came in from Provo, and we had a delightful evening, interrupted only by newspaper interviews and photographs at the home.

But even on retirement, Flora and I talked, planned, and dreamed until near daybreak. It is such a joy to be home and we all thank the Lord for his watchcare and the lovely reunion we all prize so much. (ETB Journal.)

SATURDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

This morning with Flora I had brief conferences with President J. Reuben Clark and President George Albert Smith separately in the way of preliminary report. They advised me to take several days away from the office, to take some much needed rest, and to see Flora safely through her operation.

The Lord, through his priesthood, has pronounced rich blessings upon her head, and while I could wish it were not necessary, I know the Lord will direct all things for our best good and will see her safely through this ordeal.

Flora is so fearless and full of love and faith. I hope and pray all will be well and she will be fully restored to health. We all love and need her so very much.

Spent the afternoon with the family and at my desk at home. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, DECEMBER 15, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

This has been a joyous day of reunion with my family. Flora and I conducted a Sunday School in our home for our children and their friends because of no Sunday School in the ward due to a breakdown in the heating plant. (ETB Journal.)

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 19, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

The past four days have been filled with conferences, greetings, and personal matters. It has been a real joy to renew acquaintance with my associates of the General Authorities, many of whom I saw for the first time since my return at the lovely Beneficial Life Insurance party.

Today I was privileged to meet with the counselors in the Presidency and the Twelve, except Stephen L Richards, who is sick, in our weekly temple meeting. It is a real joy to be again in the temple of the Lord. The prayers of the Brethren on behalf of my devoted wife, who faces a serious operation, brought tears of gratitude. (ETB Journal.)

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 25, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

This has been a glorious day from the very moment little Flora Beth led the children into our lovely living room to find what Santa had left on and under each chair. (We have followed the same custom I knew as a boy of having a chair for each child lined up in a row with a stocking hanging on each one and the larger presents placed on, under, and in front.) The children were most happy and appreciative. There has not been an unkind word all day. In fact, we seldom hear them in our home. But this day has been especially blessed, for which I am most grateful. It has been such a joy to sit with my angel wife and review the past, devoid of regrets, anticipate the future joyously, and count our many blessings gratefully.

I shall never forget this glorious Christmas. It may be several years before we're all together at Christmastime. We are planning missions for the boys—followed by more college, possibly in the east, so it was a day to bring forth gratitude.

I know of no finer family, as measured by LDS standards, in all the world. There are larger and no doubt more brilliant families but, I am sure, no children of which parents could be more proud and grateful. (ETB Journal.)

SUNDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

The past five days have largely been spent with the family and taking care of private affairs and making plans for my wife to go to the hospital. A goodly part of the time has been spent at the telephone receiving welcome-home greetings from friends and loved ones and giving counsel to welfare workers and Saints with relatives in Europe.

Drove Flora to the hospital in preparation for the major operation she is to undergo tomorrow. Mark E. Petersen joined me and we administered to Flora. There was a sweet, heavenly spirit present, and the same priceless promises were sealed upon her head as were pronounced by Brother Harold B. Lee in November when he administered to her at my request from London by telephone. We feel reassured all will be well with her. (ETB Journal.)

MONDAY, DECEMBER 30, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

My darling wife was three hours in the operating room today. I was with her and witnessed part of the operation from the balcony but later left when informed I was breaking hospital rules.

Never have I seen any person face a major operation with such faith, cheerful confidence, and assurance. She waved good-bye and smiled sweetly as she was wheeled into the room.

She struggled considerably as she came out of the anesthetic and later was in intense pain, eased only by hypos. In the evening she was more like herself but was still suffering distress. (ETB Journal.)

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1946:

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

Time today divided about equally at home, the office, and the hospital. Flora seems much improved as I make this entry at 10:15 P.M., although she has suffered much distress most of the day.

Everyone is most kind bringing food to the home, flowers to the hospital, and offering to help in any way possible. So many kind inquiries by telephone and in person have come for which we are grateful.

As I close this volume, I sit in my lovely home in the quiet of a peaceful winter's night. It is a bit lonely with Flora, my ever-faithful wife whom I love most dearly, at the hospital.

I am deeply grateful for all the Lord's rich blessings and especially for the gospel, the blessings of the holy apostleship, the glorious blessings received through the priesthood in the house of the Lord, and for my faithful wife and six choice children. For the material blessings and comforts I am also most thankful.

This has no doubt been the most eventful year of my life to date. I have traveled well over 65,000 miles, often at great natural hazards, through war-torn countries—in the air most of the way, including two air trips across the Atlantic and in most all of the nations of Europe. In it all I've been protected and richly sustained. I am grateful for it all and for the rich blessings which have attended my family during my absence.

Although I have been put to many inconveniences and hardships, so called, because of the devastation of war, yet I feel sure my ever-faithful and devoted wife has had the hardest end of the mission. She has been true blue in every respect, and I'm grateful for her, the unity in my family, and their constant support without the least murmur.

The Lord be praised for all his mercy and goodness. I hope and pray constantly I can so serve him so as to prove, in part at least, worthy of these rich blessings. (ETB Journal.)
