Ezra Taft Benson, Labor of Love: The 1946 European Mission of Ezra Taft Benson ( 1989)

APPENDIX A:

SETTING APART BLESSING

Brother Ezra Taft Benson, in the authority of the holy priesthood, we lay our hands upon your head and we set you apart to preside over the European Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

We bless you with every power and gift necessary to enable you to go to your field of labor and accomplish the work—putting the missions of Europe in order and accomplishing that which is so important to be done at this time.

Inasmuch as it was deemed advisable for you to go by air, we bless you that you may feel comfortable, that you may go safely, that you may arrive at your destination and assume the full responsibility that will be yours.

There is a great transformation going on in these nations to which you go. There are many people who will need encouragement. It will be your responsibility to counsel frequently with the men who are called upon to preside in the various nations and to keep close to the field until every organization is in satisfactory condition and you will be able to report all is well.

There are millions of our Father's children in those lands who need to know of the gospel of Jesus Christ. There are many of them who, if they understood the truth, would accept it and make preparation for eternal life in the celestial kingdom.

The responsibility on your shoulders is very great, but if you will keep close to the Lord and follow the whisperings of the still, small voice that will be with you constantly, you will see a development over there—an increase in membership and in happiness among the people.

We bless you that, inasmuch as you are leaving your family behind, you may have peace in your soul, realizing that they are in the keeping of the Master of heaven and earth and that they will be safeguarded as well while you are away as if you were at home.

You will find some of the membership of the Church in those lands that will be upset and disturbed and perhaps difficult to reach, but if you keep in mind they are the children of the Lord and it is your privilege to advise and counsel them, and if you will do so under the inspiration of his power, you will be surprised how many of these will be brought into full fellowship and service in that distressed part of the world.

We bless you that you may have health and strength, that you may have power of body and mind and the inspiration of the Almighty to carry on—that day by day you may feel his presence and feel that he knows where you are and what you need.

We bless you that you may have great influence with men of prominence, those who are in command in the various nations, that you may have ability to break down the prejudice that exists in many cases, that you may be warned of the attempt of the adversary to hedge up the way, and that you will be able to avoid the obstacles that are intended to prevent you from doing your work.

There is not anything desirable that you will not be able to do with the aid and the help of the Lord, and every gift and power will be with you to accomplish his work if you will do your full part.

We bless you now that you may have peace in your soul, that you may feel from day to day that sacred nearness to our Heavenly Father that will make you happy and give you joy.

Keep your secretary close to you in your travels. We bless you that you may be able to retain the influences that direct you both that happiness will be with you.

Do not jeopardize your life. Do not expose yourself unnecessarily to the assaults of the adversary, because he will be anxious to prevent you from doing the work that you are going to do. But remember that if it is necessary to appeal to the Lord and the circumstances justify, you can go to him with full confidence because you will be acting under his direction and under the inspiration of his Spirit and will be given strength to accomplish everything that is necessary to be done.

A great development is about to occur in that land, and the gospel will be preached in parts of it where we have not been able to go until now. It will be your responsibility to be alert and take advantage of every opportunity.

Keep us posted here at headquarters that we may counsel and advise with you, that everything that is done may be done in a pleasing way to our Heavenly Father.

Every blessing that you desire will be yours to enable you to accomplish your responsibility.

We renew upon you the promises that have been made heretofore not yet fulfilled and say to you: Go in peace. Rejoice in this great blessing that has come to you to represent our Heavenly Father in that land. Be happy and contented and satisfied in shaping the destiny of the missionary work over there as the days go by.

We say unto you: Peace, happiness, assurance, strength in every way be upon you.

We bless you to the end that you may accomplish this most important work and in the due time of our Heavenly Father return to your loved ones in peace and safety with the favor of the Lord resting upon you.

To this end we devote you to this service of the Master and set you apart for this mission and bless you that it may be a happy experience, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
