Various authors, Testimonies of Book of Mormon Witnesses

Martin Harris Strang and McLellin Years

Source: O. W. Riegal, Crown of Glory - A Life of James J. Strang (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1935), pp. 85, 102, 103, from Wayne Gunnell, "Martin Harris," p. 53.

[The following is an account of Martin Harris' mission to Great Britain during the fall of 1846:]

Another blow at Brighamism was the appointment of a mission to raid the rich proselyting field of industrial England. Moses Smith, Leicester Brooks, Hazen Aldrich, and Martin Harris, the last of whom had financed and been one of the three witnesses of Joseph Smith's Book of Mormon, were delegated to leave in the fall for the British Isles . . . .

The English mission, on which Strange had counted for reinforcements in money and souls, ended in disaster. Without the stalwart Moses Smith, who was detained at Voree to help Strange fight the schisms and apostasies which threatened to shatter the walls of Zion, the mission lacked a dependable leader. Moreover, the other two members of the mission, Martin Harris, and Leicester Brooks, had been preceded to England by Orson Hyde and John Taylor, the Brighamite Apostles and scourges of Strangism, who had prepared a hot reception for them.

The landing of Harris and Brooks at Liverpool was the signal for Hyde and Taylor to let loose a torrent of scorn. Unfortunately, both of the Strangite missionaries were vulnerable to impeachments of their honesty. The Brighamites lost no time in publishing the fact that Martin Harris had once been a follower of Anne Lee in Shakerism as well as a recidivist Mormon. "Any one can see that he must have been a wicked man, and no wonder that a man without revelation should join Anne Lee, Strang, or any other imposition or strong delusion, having rejected the truth.

Source: Orson Hyde, "Martin Harris," Millennial Star 8 (15 Nov 1846):124.

One of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, yielded to the spirit and temptation of the devil a number of years ago—turned against Joseph Smith and became his bitter enemy. He was filled with rage and madness of a demon. One day he would be one thing, and another day another thing. He soon became partially deranged or shattered, as many believed, flying from one thing to another, as if reason and common sense were thrown off their balance. In one of his fits of monomania, he went and joined the "Shakers" or followers of Anne Lee. He tarried with them a year or two, or perhaps longer, having had some flare ups while among them; but since Strang has made his entry into the apostate ranks, and hoisted his standard for the rebellious to flock to, Martin leaves the "Shakers," whom he knows to be right, and has known it for many years, as he said, and joins Strang in gathering out the tares of the field. We understand that he is appointed a mission to this country, but we do not feel to warn the Saints against him, for his own unbridled tongue will soon show out specimens of folly enough to give any person a true index to the character of the man; but if the Saints wish to know what the Lord hath said of him, they may turn to the 178th page of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and the person there called a "wicked man" is no other than Martin Harris, and he owned to it then, but probably might not now. It is not the first time the Lord chose a wicked man as a witness. Also on page 193, read the whole revelation given to him, and ask yourselves if the Lord ever talked in that way to a good man. Every one can see that he must have been a wicked man, and the Lord said that that revelation was the last he should receive; and no wonder that a man without revelation should join Anne Lee, Strang, or any other imposition or strong delusion, having rejected the truth.

Source: Orson Hyde, "Notices," Millennial Star 8 (15 Nov 1846):128.

[After the arrival of Martin Harris and Leicester Brooks in England, Elder Orson Hyde published two additional articles in the Star. One of the editorial notes pertained to their visit in Birmingham; the second was prompted by the arrival of Harris and Brooks in Liverpool.]

We stop the press to say that our letters by this morning's mail (October 31) bring cheering accounts from our elders in various parts. They are baptizing in almost all directions. We also learn, from Elder Wheelock's letter of Birmingham, that Martin Harris and his escort have paid them a visit. He introduced himself to their conference meeting and wished to speak, but on being politely informed by Elder Banks that the season of the year had come when Martin sought a more genial climate than England, he had better follow. On being rejected by the united voice of the conference, he went out into the street and began to proclaim the corruption of the Twelve; but here the officers of government honored him with their presence—two policemen came and very gently took hold of each arm and led Martin away to the Lock-up. We would insert Brother Wheelock's letter entire if we had room. Elder Wheelock will remember that evil men, like Martin Harris, out of the evil treasure of their hearts shall bring forth evil things.

Just as our paper was going to press, we learned that Martin Harris, about whom we had written in another article, had landed in Liverpool, and being afraid or ashamed of his profession as a Strangite, and we presume both, for we are confident we should be, he tells some of our brethren on whom he called, that he was of the same profession with themselves—that he had just come from America and wished to get acquainted with the Saints. But there was a strangeness about him, and about one or two who came with him, that gave them plainly to see that the frankness and honest simplicity of true hearted brethren were not with them. A lying deceptive spirit attends them, and has from the beginning. They said they were of the same profession with our brethren, when they knew they lied. If they were of our profession, why not call at our office and get their papers endorsed? Because they know that they are of their father, the devil, who was a liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. The very countenance of Harris will show to every spiritual-minded person who sees him, that the wrath of God is upon him. . . .

Source: Wayne Gunnell, "Martin Harris," p. 55.

Upon the failure of his British Mission, Martin Harris withdrew from the ranks of Strang and joined William E. McLellin, formerly one of the Twelve Apostles and who had been excommunicated from the Church in 1838. On January 23, 1847, a small group under the leadership of McLellin and Harris proceeded to organize a church. "It was moved by McLellin and seconded by Martin Harris that this following take upon them the name of `The Church of Christ,' and wear it henceforth shorn of all appendages or alterations, which motion was carried." Soon after the organization was effected, McLellin communicated with the Whitmer brothers who had remained in Missouri, and in September of 1847, he visited them.
