In October 1983 I was attending a party in Rosario, Argentina, when to my surprise, I noticed a young lady reading a book. It was not just any book—it looked exactly like the one I had been searching for. Rays of light actually seemed to be coming from it, as if it were saying, “Here I am.”

The young lady had not been introduced to me, but I overcame my shyness and approached her. I glanced at the open book but could see nothing except the word Alma at the top of the page. My heart beat with excitement. It had to be the right book.

“Excuse me,” I said, “but could you please let me see your book?”

Again to my surprise, she started asking me questions.

“This book?”

“Yes, that book.”

“Do you know what book this is?”

“No. That’s what I want to find out.”

“Why?”

“I’m interested in it.”

“Yes, but why?”

“Well—because. It’s very important to me.”

“But can’t you tell me why?”

I began to be exasperated. “If you don’t want to lend it to me, at least tell me the name of it.”

Again she said, “But tell me why! Why do you want to know what book this is?”

I realized I would have to explain. “I came to this country about two years ago,” I said. “I didn’t know a soul, so I spent a lot of time reading the Bible, reading it very conscientiously. The more I read, the more I became convinced that my church is in error. One day I fasted and prayed and asked the Lord if my church was the right one or if I should search for another.

“The Lord answered my prayer. I had a dream in which the Lord showed me a prophet named Joseph. I learned that he is somehow associated with the right church. The doctrine of that church is based on a book that is as important as the Bible. When I find it, I will find the true Church of Jesus Christ. The only thing I know about the book is its outside appearance and the one word I saw inside, the word Alma. I think it is the same book you have in your hand.”

Now the young lady was taken by surprise. She told me the book was the Book of Mormon, and understanding that my intentions were good, she at last gave the book to me. I glanced at the title. Then it was my turn to ask questions.

“Do the Mormons have this book?”

“Yes.”

“Who wrote it?”

“Several prophets who used to live on this continent.”

“Didn’t a man named Smith write this book?”

“No. By divine command he translated the writings found on gold plates.”

“Well, then! It is a real treasure!”

“It definitely is.”

My happiness was great. Even before I read the Book of Mormon, I was sure that it was true—and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was the true Church.

The young lady with the book introduced me to the missionaries. They soon gave me my own copy of the Book of Mormon.

Since I found it, the Book of Mormon has been my inseparable companion. When I read it, I feel comfort from pain. I find hope when I am discouraged, and I feel the love of God when everything seems futile.
