April 6 is a significant day in the history of the Church. On this day in 1830, the Church was organized in Fayette Township, New York, beginning with just six members. On April 6, 2025, another small group met to form the first branch of the Church in the Kakuma refugee camp, a camp consisting of approximately 300,000 refugees from over 20 countries.

Just as in the early days of the Church, seekers of truth are hearing the message of the Restoration of the gospel and are joyfully joining God’s kingdom.

The camp is located in Kalobeyei Village, in Northwest Kenya (419 km from Kitale, where the nearest organized unit of the Church was located). A few members residing at the camp had reached out multiple times to Church leaders over a period of about nine years, requesting a branch be established there. After receiving donated materials from well-wishers, such as Maak Impact (NGO), which were used to provide internet access and create a shed where members could meet, it was then possible to communicate easily with David Sturt, who was then the president of the Nairobi West Mission.

The group leader, Elias Zablon, travelled all the way to Kitale, to meet with the mission president, as well as Anthony Matende, who was the district president, which resulted in President Matende visiting the camp to assess the need. His visit was followed by a subsequent visit by President Sturt and his then-second counselor, President Munene (now Elder Munene, Area Seventy).

Finally, after getting approval to create the branch, President Sturt and his second counselor, Meshack Odunga, returned to the camp on April 6, 2025, to create the new Kakuma Branch of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with Imani Boutros called as the new branch president. This newly created branch consisted of just five men, similar to the Church’s humble beginnings back in 1830.

Speaking to these Saints, Brother Odunga stated, “It’s great to learn from you and see how things are unfolding line upon line. We are grateful for the faith of the Saints here. . . . Please remember you are true pioneers of this place. . . . Please remember the journey travelled by the early pioneers of the Church. If it wasn’t for their sacrifice and determination, we don’t know what would have happened. Sometimes suffering refines us, and we ask that you have great faith in the Lord as the author and finisher of everything, and good things will surely come. You are the pioneers in this place, and you have all [that] it takes to grow the Church here.”

In his remarks, President Sturt added, “We are grateful to all those who made this day possible, including our brothers who provided internet and this shade, which has immensely made it easier to create this branch. Today is a big day for all of us, and Kakuma Branch is now an official branch of the Church.”

Just as the early pioneers built up the Church, the Saints in Kakuma are rapidly expanding their little branch. On May 24 and 25, 2025, 26 new members were baptized and welcomed into the Kakuma Branch. Since then, others have been baptized, and about 150 people attend church on Sundays. It is a wonderful new beginning for them and a wonderful addition to the Lord’s kingdom.
