Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

Preface

The material bound within these covers has grown out of several years of private study on a subject dear to me since the days of my mission—the central and persuasive presence of Christ (and the wondrous teachings about him) that appear from first page to last throughout the Book of Mormon. Because this has been such a personal project, it is important to understand at the outset some things this book is not.

For one thing, it is not a scholarly book in the traditional sense of voluminous source material and exhaustive documentation. This work contains virtually none of that, simply because in compiling these ideas and recording these thoughts I have read almost no material of any kind—scholarly or otherwise—other than the Book of Mormon itself. Where an outside source has been used, it has been cited in an endnote, as have the scriptures. A different book (and, I am quick to acknowledge, probably a better book) would be one referencing everything anyone in or out of the Church has ever said about these passages of scripture. But that would not be this book.

I have had something more personal in mind. This volume is meant to be more like a meditation upon scripture than a work of scholarship. Wherever possible I have let the scriptures speak for themselves without commentary from me. Occasionally those passages are quite lengthy, but to include them has been a conscious decision for which I make no apology. Whenever possible I would rather have the reader focus directly on Book of Mormon language than on someone else's language about it. In saying that, I do not excuse any poor thinking or poor writing on my part. Even a work not intended to be scholarly should still be interesting in its suppositions and intelligent in its observations. I hope this effort does not fall short in either category.

This book is also not a scriptural summary of all the relevant citations in the Standard Works that might shed light on the topic at hand. From the beginning it was intended to be a study of the Book of Mormon's contribution to our understanding of Christ, not a review of the other Standard Works of the Church on that subject. As a rule I have tried to use almost no other scriptural sources, but occasionally a reference to one of the other Standard Works was essential. When it has seemed particularly needful, I have used such a passage. For the most part, however, this is a portrayal of the Book of Mormon view of Christ, and the Book of Mormon view only.

Not that anyone will find it so, but this book is emphatically not a substitute for reading the Book of Mormon itself. In fact, one could make a persuasive argument that no book should be written about the Book of Mormon, particularly if reading such a secondary work became an alternative for becoming immersed in the scripture firsthand. No person writing under the limitations of his or her own light, however aided from heaven, could ever begin to duplicate or capture the spiritual splendor of the most extensive and definitive revelation given in this dispensation. This author readily acknowledges that fact, and the shortcoming of this or any other book written about the Book of Mormon is evidence of its truth.

The only real justifications I have felt for producing this work are that the study of Christ and his teachings in the Book of Mormon was wonderfully rewarding to me and that such a book may lead someone to find his or her own insights into the magnificent characterization of the Master contained in this great latter-day witness of him. However limited this book's contri-bution may be, my prayer is that it will be of some help and encouragement toward reading the Book of Mormon itself and never any barrier to it.

Lastly, this book is not a product of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and is not a doctrinal declaration by or for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I alone am responsible for the publication of this work, and I alone am accountable for any errors and limitations it may contain. I can only hope those are relatively few and forgivable.

Jeffrey R. Holland

Salt Lake City, Utah
