Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

Acknowledgments

I wish to thank Randi Greene and Janet Morley, my secretaries over the past several years in Salt Lake City, Utah, and Solihull, England, respectively, whose talent as well as kindness went into correcting and clarifying of my own primitive word-processing efforts that produced the first drafts of this manuscript. Since then, Randi has, on her own time, been willing to see this through later drafts in which I did so much editing and rewriting. She has also skillfully orchestrated the many logistical and review procedures that are part of getting such a manuscript into the hands of the publisher in final form. I am indebted to her for her skill, her loyalty, and her encouragement to me in pursuing this project.

I am grateful to my brethren of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, who bless me with their brotherhood, teach me in our council settings, and give encouragement in sharing the doctrines of the restored gospel. President Boyd K. Packer has given particularly helpful counsel regarding this manuscript, making it better than it would have been even if it is not yet as good as it should be.

I also wish to thank my mission president, Elder Marion D. Hanks, who first introduced me to the profundity of the Book of Mormon and the majesty of Christ that lay hidden there. I know of no one who loves the Book of Mormon more than Elder Hanks, nor of anyone who has taught it with more power and conviction.

I am also grateful to a number of associates at Brigham Young University, particularly my past and present fellow deans of Religious Education there—Daniel H. Ludlow, Robert J. Matthews, and Robert L. Millet. They have encouraged this work, made invaluable suggestions, and stiffened the author's spine when it did not seem the project was progressing. Dean Millet was particularly kind in undertaking what no friend should ever be forced to endure—reading the manuscript in very early draft form. I am indebted to him for his careful reading of such an incomplete manuscript and his informed response to both its problems and its possibilities. At a later date former deans Ludlow and Matthews gave me the benefit of their singular careers spent writing and editing scriptural studies.

Professor Donald W. Parry was of invaluable assistance on the chapter on Isaiah, sharing generously with me the insights of his own research and writing on this subject. Edward Brandt offered extremely helpful background regarding the chapter on the law of Moses. To these and all others who have offered encouragement and given assistance of any kind, early or late, I express appreciation.

It is almost certain I would not have made the move from personal study project to published book without the prodding and persuasion of first Eleanor Knowles and later Sheri Dew at Deseret Book Company. To them, to Ronald A. Millett, and to their editing, design, and production associates, especially Jack Lyon and Kent Ware, I also express appreciation.

As in all things, my greatest indebtedness is to my wife, Pat, and our three children, who always are and ever have been my encouragement, my solace, and my constant inspiration. They have wanted this book to be published more than I have. I am grateful for their devotion to the Savior, to the scriptures, and to me.
