Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

ASSERTION

Chapter One

"The New Covenant, Even the Book of Mormon"

If we were to ask casual readers of the Book of Mormon to name the principal character in that book, their responses would undoubtedly vary. Obviously any record covering more than a thousand years of history—with all the persons such a history would include—is unlikely to have a single, central figure emerge over such an extended period of time. Nevertheless, after acknowledging that limitation, perhaps some might list any one of several memorable individuals. Names such as Nephi, the book's early and very recognizable young prophet, or Mormon, the abridger for whom the book is named, or Alma, to whom so many pages are devoted, or Moroni, who concluded the plates and delivered them some fourteen hundred years later to the young Joseph Smith—these would undoubtedly be among the figures mentioned.

All those responses would be provocative, but in terms of the question posed, they would also be decidedly incorrect. The principal and commanding figure in the Book of Mormon, from first chapter to last, is the Lord Jesus Christ. In its unparalleled focus on the Messianic message of the Savior of the world, the Book of Mormon is rightly referred to as God's "new covenant" with the house of Israel. [^1] It is literally a new testament or (to avoid confusion) "another testament" of Jesus Christ. As such the book centers upon that which scriptural testaments have always centered since the days of Adam and Eve—the declaration to all that through the atonement of the Son of God, "as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will." [^2]

From the title page to the book's final declaration, this testament reveals, examines, underscores, and illuminates the divine mission of Jesus Christ as recorded in the sacred accounts of two New World dispensations (Jaredite and Lehite) written for the benefit of a third dispensation, the dispensation of the fulness of times. The Book of Mormon has many purposes, but this one transcends all others. Written by prophets and preserved by angels, it was written for the fundamental and eternally essential purpose of "convincing . . . the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." In the course of coming to such conviction about Christ, all who receive this record will also be convinced of "the covenants of the Lord," including his promise that the contemporary remnants of the House of Israel are not "cast off forever."3

Thus the Book of Mormon is the preeminent statement of God's covenant with and his love for his children here on earth. It is his definitive latter-day declaration regarding the atoning sacrifice of his Son. It is his great revelation of the greatest Revelation God has ever given us.

Another Testament of Jesus Christ

But why is such a record needed? Is not the world quite aware of divine covenants and Christ's centrality to them in the Old and New Testaments? The Book of Mormon speaks to just such an issue and in so doing proclaims its own purpose.

In a remarkable vision recorded early in the Book of Mormon, the young prophet Nephi saw the eventual preparation and circulation of the Holy Bible, "a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel." [^3] But, alarmingly, he also saw the abuse and doctrinal decimation of that book as it moved down through time and passed through many hands.

This Book of Mormon vision foretold that the Bible record would be clear and untarnished in the Meridian of Time. In Jesus' day, it would contain "the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; [which] are of great worth unto the Gentiles." As part of that covenantal clarity, it would also contain and teach "the fulness of the gospel of the Lord," with both Old and New Testaments going "from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles." But over time, through innocent error as well as malicious design, many saving doctrines and pure principles, especially those emphasizing the covenantal elements of the gospel of Jesus Christ, were lost—sometimes simply willfully expunged—from "the book of the Lamb of God." [^4]

Unfortunately, these elements soon missing from the Bible were both "plain and most precious." They were plain in their simplicity and clarity, being easy to "the understanding of . . . men"; they were precious in their purity and profound worth, their saving significance and eternal importance to the children of God. Whatever the reason for the loss of these truths from the biblical record, it has resulted in "pervert[ing] the right ways of the Lord, . . . blind[ing] the eyes and harden[ing] the hearts of the children of men." [^5] In painful understatement of the consequences stemming from such a tragic loss of divine truth, Nephi saw in vision that "an exceedingly great many do stumble," honest women and men who would live out their lives less informed of gospel truths and less secure in the salvation of Christ than they deserved to be, all because of the loss of edifying gospel truths from the biblical canon as we have received it. [^6]

But in his love for all mankind and with his foreknowledge of such damage to gospel understanding, the Great Jehovah, the premortal Christ, promised Nephi (and all who have received Nephi's record):

"After the Gentiles do stumble exceedingly, because of the most plain and precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back, . . . I will be merciful unto the Gentiles in that day, insomuch that I will bring forth unto them, in mine own power, much of my gospel, which shall be plain and precious, saith the Lamb.

"For, behold, saith the Lamb: I will manifest myself unto thy seed, that they shall write many things which I shall minister unto them, which shall be plain and precious. . . .

"And in them shall be written my gospel, saith the Lamb, and my rock and my salvation." [^7]

This promised record, now known as the Book of Mormon, will "make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from [the Bible]; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved.

"And they must come according to the words which shall be established by the mouth of the Lamb; and the words of the Lamb shall be made known in the records of thy seed, as well as in [the Bible]; wherefore they both shall be established in one; for there is one God and one Shepherd over all the earth." [^8]

Surely the most plain and precious of all truths lost from the Bible, particularly the Old Testament, are the clear and unequivocal declarations of the mission of Jesus Christ, his foreordained role as Messiah and Savior of the world, and the covenantal elements of his gospel, which have been taught from Adam down through each succeeding dispensation. Thus the Book of Mormon's highest purpose is to restore to the universal family of God that crucial knowledge of Christ's role in the salvation of every man, woman, and child who now lives, has ever lived, or will yet live upon the earth. It is written to the convincing of all who read its pages with "a sincere heart, with real intent" that Jesus is the Christ. [^9]

Also lost over this same period of time and for many of the same reasons was, as Nephi noted, an understanding of the nature and fundamental role of divine covenants, sacred promises made between God and his children in prescribing the way to immortality and eternal life. The most sacred moments of man's relationship with divinity have always been marked by the making of such covenants. Soon after being expelled from the garden of Eden, Adam and Eve were taught the principles of the gospel, after which they offered their oblations and sacrifices and made sacred covenants with God, beginning with their own baptisms. Just as immediately Satan tried to blunt those divine covenants and mar the faithfulness of the first family, succeeding in part when he convinced Cain to covenant to do great evil with him, Satan, rather than righteously serving God the Father. [^10] So the world has gone ever since that first moment—forces of evil competing with the power of good for the covenantal loyalty of the children of God.

A New Covenant

To help his sons and daughters remember their promises to him—and certainly to help them remember his promises to them—God has directed that the nature and significance of those covenants be recorded. In that process, the texts and documents preserving such promises have also been called "covenants." In fact, the words testament and covenant are virtually synonymous in their theological usage, the Latin definition of testamentum being "a covenant with God, holy scripture." Thus, the Old and New Testaments, as we commonly refer to them, are written testimonies or witnesses (the Latin testis meaning "witness") of the covenants between God and man in various dispensations. Furthermore, such covenants always deal with the central issue between perfect, immortal God and imperfect, mortal man—why they are separated and how they can again unite. The Latin root for covenant is convenire, "to agree, unite, come together." In short, all covenants, all testaments, all holy witnesses since the beginning have essentially been about one thing—the atonement of Jesus Christ, the at-one-ment provided every man, woman, and child if they will but receive the witness, the testi-mony of the prophets and apostles, and honor the terms of that coming together, that convenire, or covenant, whose central feature is always the atoning sacrifice of the Son of God himself.

But even with repeated efforts to teach these truths and reaffirm these promises, God has not always seen his children turn to the gospel of his Son. In our own day he has said, "The whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin." [^11] By and large the modern world has not come unto him, has not accepted the atonement of Jesus Christ, has not received the voice of his prophets, has not made covenants or kept his commandments, has not remembered him always or claimed the promises of exaltation in the kingdom of heaven.

So he has offered us one last covenant, given us one last testament, as part of his final outreach to fallen man. He has offered us one last written witness of his love and his mercy extended for the final time, speaking dispensationally. As one Book of Mormon prophet foresaw it, God is sending laborers into the vineyard one final time, and "then cometh the season and the end." [^12] That testament and culminating witness, that "new covenant" offered to the children of men but once more, is the message of the Book of Mormon.

No record teaches more of God's promise to those in the last days. Those promises focus on his Only Begotten Son, on "the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah . . . [who] shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in him shall be saved." [^13]

The task of the children of God in these concluding days of the world's history is to proceed with "unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save," to "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men[,] . . . feasting upon the word of Christ, and endur[ing] to the end. This is the way; and there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God." [^14]

No other book helps us do this so well. No other book was ever divinely produced and protected solely for that purpose. No other book has ever been written with such a full view of the future dispensation to which that record would eventually come. As with Moroni, so too with virtually all the Book of Mormon prophets: "Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing." [^15]

The fact that most of this record comes from a period before Christ's birth, the fact that it is a record of an otherwise unknown people, the fact that it reaffirms the truthfulness and divinity of the Bible insofar as the latter has been translated correctly, the fact that the Book of Mormon reveals inspiring insights and deep doctrines about Jesus that are found nowhere in the biblical canon (or anywhere else in modern Christendom, for that matter) are just a few of the reasons the book should be considered the most remarkable and important religious text to be revealed since the writings of the New Testament were compiled nearly two millennia ago. Indeed, in its role of restoring plain and precious biblical truths that had been lost, while adding scores of new truths about Jesus Christ and preparing the way for the complete restoration of his gospel and the triumphant day of his millennial return, the Book of Mormon may be considered the most remarkable and important religious text ever given to the world. The prophet who translated the book and then gave his life for the truthfulness of its message said it "was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." [^16]

And so it is. The Book of Mormon is the keystone of our religion primarily because it is the most extended and definitive witness we have of the Lord Jesus Christ—of our Alpha and Omega, the True Vine, the Bishop and Shepherd of our Soul, he who is the Key Stone, the Chief Cornerstone of the eternal gospel. Christ is our salvation, and the Book of Mormon declares that message unequivocally to the world. In its message of faith in Christ, hope in Christ, and charity in Christ, the Book of Mormon is God's "new covenant" to his children—for the last time.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. D&C 84:57. In her book Finding Christ through the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987), Susan Easton Black calculates that some form of Christ's name is used 3,925 times in the Book of Mormon, a figure that averages out to one reference for every 1.7 verses; some 101 different names are used to describe the Only Begotten Son of God. See appendix A.
[^2] 2. Moses 5:9.
[^3] 3. Book of Mormon Title Page.
[^4] 4. 1 Nephi 13:23.
[^5] 5. 1 Nephi 13:23-28.
[^6] 6. 1 Nephi 13:26-29.
[^7] 7. 1 Nephi 13:29.
[^8] 8. 1 Nephi 13:34-36.
[^9] 9. 1 Nephi 13:40-41.
[^10] 10. Moroni 10:4.
[^11] 11. See Moses 5.
[^12] 12. D&C 84:49.
[^13] 13. Jacob 5:77.
[^14] 14. 2 Nephi 2:8-9.
[^15] 15. 2 Nephi 31:19-21.
[^16] 16. Mormon 8:35.
