Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

Chapter Five

Three Early Witnesses: Isaiah

In an effort to persuade his rebellious brothers, the family of Lehi generally, and ultimately all of the house of Israel to "remember the Lord their Redeemer," Nephi (so weary from the spiritual burden of this task that his very joints were weak) taught from the great prophets recorded on the precious plates of brass. He cited Zenock and Neum and Zenos, prophets lost from the current biblical record, and lost to the modern reader were it not for the Book of Mormon references to them. He also read to them many things from the writings of Moses contained on those plates. But most powerfully of all he taught from the prophet Isaiah. To the future reader of his record, Nephi wrote, "That I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah." [^1]

Isaiah is by every standard the messianic prophet of the Old Testament and as such is the most penetrating prophetic voice in that record. He, more than any other witness in the Old World, saw and wrote and prophesied of the Savior's coming both in the meridian of time and again in the latter days. He is quoted more often in the New Testament, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and contemporary documents such as the Dead Sea Scrolls than any other Old World prophet.

A useful footnote to 2 Nephi 12:2 in the current edition of the LDS scriptures indicates that some 433 verses of Isaiah—roughly a third of the entire book—are quoted in the Book of Mormon. [^2] One student of Isaiah documents that no less than 391 of those verses refer to the attributes, appearance, majesty, and mission of Jesus Christ. [^3] Another scholar has pointed out that Isaiah provided at least sixty-one names and titles of the Father and of the Son in his writings, most of those referring to some aspect of the mission of Christ. Those sixty-one titles are found 708 times in the Book of Isaiah, making an average appearance of once every 1.9 verses. [^4]

Surely it is because of this consuming messianic focus—messianic preoccupation, we might more properly say—that Isaiah was of such interest and importance to Nephi and the record he and his Nephite descendants were to keep. It can be said that Nephi taught to his people virtually every major messianic message given by this Old Testament witness of Christ's ministry. Isaiah's messianic record was of crucial importance not only to these Nephite children of Israel wandering in their New World wilderness but also to those who would see the covenants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob restored in the latter days.

"Wherefore, hearken, O my people, which are of the house of Israel, and give ear unto my words," wrote Nephi, "for because the words of Isaiah are not plain unto you, nevertheless they are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy. . . .

"Yea, and my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah, . . . [and] they are of worth unto the children of men, and he that supposeth that they are not, unto them will I speak particularly, . . . for I know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last days; for in that day shall they understand them; wherefore, for their good have I written them." [^5]

Certainly the words of this majestic prophet brought delight to Nephi's soul, for 352 of the Isaiah verses quoted in the Book of Mormon—more than 80 percent of the total number in the entire book—come from Nephi's two books! Even a major portion of the Isaiah material quoted by Jacob in chapters 6 through 8 in 2 Nephi were included in the record because they were, as Jacob wrote, "the words which my brother [Nephi] . . . desired that I should speak unto you." [^6]

In this admiration for Isaiah, Nephi and Jacob have sacred company. It was, after all, the Savior himself who said, after quoting to the Nephites the entire 54th chapter of Isaiah, "Ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah.

"For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel." [^7]

One of the reasons Nephi felt so strongly about Isaiah's words and the special merit of his witness has already been noted. Isaiah not only wrote of Christ, but he had also seen him and his ministry in vision:

"I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, for my soul delighteth in his words. For I will liken his words unto my people, and I will send them forth unto all my children, for he verily saw my Redeemer. . . .

"Wherefore, I will send their words forth unto my children to prove unto them that my words are true. . . .

"And now I write some of the words of Isaiah, that whoso of my people shall see these words may lift up their hearts and rejoice for all men. Now these are the words, and ye may liken them unto you and unto all men." [^8]

It would seem even from Isaiah's name ("Jehovah saves" or "The Lord is salvation") that he was prepared at birth—or, more accurately, from before birth—to testify of the Messiah, bearing witness of the divinity of Christ in anticipation of both his first and second comings. Because he did focus on the Savior so repeatedly in his writings, and because he did freely mix and interchange material relating to his own day, to the meridian of time, and to the latter days, it is important to remember that many of Isaiah's prophecies can be, have been, or will be fulfilled in more than one way and in more than one dispensation.

These parallel prophecies with application in more than one age create much of the complexity in Isaiah, but they also provide so much of the significance and meaning that his writings contain. In light of such complexity, it goes without saying that the prophecies of Isaiah are opened more widely to the eye and heart of the modern reader because of the restoration of the gospel. Latter-day scriptures, key portions of which provide crucial clarification, commentary, and dispensational distinctions not otherwise found in the Isaiah text of the Old Testament—or anywhere else, for that matter—are as unprecedented as they are invaluable in understanding his writings.

Much could be said about virtually every Isaianic verse that refers to the Savior—entire books have been written on the subject—but consider at least the teachings of Isaiah recorded in the Book of Mormon that cluster conveniently into five categories.

Christ's Birth and Mortal Ministry

In the 17th chapter of his second book, Nephi recorded the great Immanuel prophecy of Isaiah. In verses 14 and 15 he wrote, "The Lord himself shall give you a sign—Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and shall bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

"Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and to choose the good." [^9]

This sign was given to the Old Testament King Ahaz, encouraging him to take his strength from the Lord rather than the military might of Damascus, Samaria, or other militant camps. Ahaz was slow to hear that counsel, but the Lord gave it anyway, declaring one of the signs to be a virgin's conception and birth of a son whose name would be called Immanuel.

There are plural or parallel elements to this prophecy, as with so much of Isaiah's writing. The most immediate meaning was probably focused on Isaiah's wife, a pure and good woman who brought forth a son about this time, the child becoming a type and shadow of the greater, later fulfillment of the prophecy that would be realized in the birth of Jesus Christ. The symbolism in the dual prophecy acquires additional importance when we realize that Isaiah's wife may have been of royal blood, and therefore her son would have been royalty of the line of David. Here again is a type, a prefiguration of the greater Immanuel, Jesus Christ, the ultimate son of David, the royal King who would be born of a literal virgin. [^10] Indeed, his title Immanuel would be carried forward to the latter days, being applied to the Savior in section 128 verse 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

A related scripture in 2 Nephi 19 can also have multiple meanings and may be applied in several ways, including as the coronation of a king or messiah. But its most traditional and celebrated application is to Christ's birth. Everyone responds to the moving power of the lines written by Isaiah and made famous throughout the musical world by George Frideric Handel: "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.

"Of the increase of government and peace there is no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth, even forever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this." [^11]

One of the beautiful reminders in this magnificent passage, even with its splendor and royalty and sense of triumph, is the gentle declaration that through all of his power and majesty, Christ is still "the Son"—the Son as taught by Abinadi and other Book of Mormon prophets—humble, obedient, submissive, willing to yield to the demands of mortality, doing all this that he might ultimately order the government of temporal beings (the flesh) after the higher laws of divine transcendence (the spirit). We are reminded here that he is, gloriously, the Son of God, a child of heaven.

The fact that the government would eventually be upon his shoulders affirms what all the world will one day acknowledge—that he is Lord of lords and King of kings and will one day rule over the earth and his Church in person, with all the majesty and sacred vestments belonging to a holy sovereign and a high priest. All can take comfort from the fact that because the government—and the burdens thereof—will be upon his shoulders, they will be lifted in great measure from our own. This is yet another reference in Isaiah to the Atonement, the bearing away of our sins (or at very least in this reference, our temporal burdens) on the shoulders of Christ.

As "Wonderful Counselor," he will be our mediator, our intercessor, defending our cause in the courts of heaven. "The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people," Isaiah (and Nephi) reminded earlier. [^12] Note the wonderful compassion of our counselor and spokesman in this passage of latter-day scripture:

"Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—

"Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified;

"Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." [^13]

Of course, as noted by Isaiah, Christ is not only a mediator but also a judge. [^14] It is in that role of judge that we may find even greater meaning in Abinadi's repeated expression that "God himself" will come down to redeem his people. [^15] It is as if the judge in that great courtroom in heaven, unwilling to ask anyone but himself to bear the burdens of the guilty people standing in the dock, takes off his judicial robes and comes down to earth to bear their stripes personally. Christ as merciful judge is as beautiful and wonderful a concept as that of Christ as counselor, mediator, and advocate.

"Mighty God" conveys something of the power of God, his strength, omnipotence, and unconquerable influence. Isaiah sees him as always able to overcome the effects of sin and transgression in his people and to triumph forever over the would-be oppressors of the children of Israel.

"Everlasting Father" underscores the fundamental doctrine that Christ is a Father—Creator of worlds without number, the Father of restored physical life through the Resurrection, the Father of eternal life for his spiritually begotten sons and daughters, and the One acting for the Father (Elohim) through divine investiture of authority. All should seek to be born of him and become his sons and his daughters. [^16]

Lastly, with the phrase "Prince of Peace," we rejoice that when the King shall come, there will be no more war in the human heart or among the nations of the world. This is a peaceful king, the king of Salem, the city that would later become Jeru-Salem. Christ will bring peace to those who accept him in mortality in whatever era they live, and he will bring peace to all those in his millennial and postmillennial realms of glory.

Christ Visits the Spirits in Prison

In the 21st chapter of 1 Nephi, verses 6-9, we read this passage:

"I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the ends of the earth.

"Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nations abhorreth, to servant of rulers: Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful.

"Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable time have I heard thee, O isles of the sea, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee my servant for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;

"That thou mayest say to the prisoners: Go forth; to them that sit in darkness: Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places." [^17]

Christ brought freedom to mortal beings imprisoned by ignorance, sin, apostasy, and death. He also brought deliverance to those on the other side of the veil who had not heard the gospel but would receive it in their spirit prison. Peter taught this clearly, [^18] and the whole of section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants is devoted to this glorious doctrine.

In teaching this to his people, Nephi might well have included the only other major messianic passage from Isaiah that is not recorded in the Book of Mormon—Isaiah 61.

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;

"To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

"To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified." [^19]

On both sides of the veil, the captives rejoice and praise their God as Christ throws wide the prison doors.

Christ Shows Kindness to and Preserves Zion in the Last Days

1 Nephi 21:13-16 contains a beautiful passage from the first two of Isaiah's chapters quoted in the Book of Mormon, the two chapters Nephi chose to read to his belligerent brothers that he "might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer." [^20] This poetic and moving language underscores Christ's redeeming, atoning care for the children of Israel, both ancient and modern:

"Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; for the feet of those who are in the east shall be established; and break forth into singing, O mountains; for they shall be smitten no more; for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.

"But, behold, Zion hath said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me—but he will show that he hath not.

"For can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, O house of Israel.

"Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me." [^21]

This poetic passage provides yet another reminder of Christ's saving role, that of protective, redeeming parent to Zion's children. He comforts his people and shows mercy when they are afflicted, as any loving father or mother would toward a child, but, as Nephi here reminds us through Isaiah, much more than any mortal father and mother could do. Although a mother may forget her sucking child (as unlikely as any parent might think that could be), Christ will not forget the children he has redeemed or the covenant he has made with them for salvation in Zion. The painful reminders of that watch care and covenant are the marks of the Roman nails graven upon the palms of his hands, a sign to his disciples in the Old World, his Nephite congregation in the New World, and to us in latter-day Zion that he is the Savior of the world and was wounded in the house of his friends. [^22]

This protective, redemptive relationship of a loving Father is carried over to 2 Nephi 7, where Christ speaks to the children of Israel as children:

"Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever? For thus saith the Lord: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement? To whom have I put thee away, or to which of my creditors have I sold you? Yea, to whom have I sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.

"Wherefore, when I came, there was no man; when I called, yea, there was none to answer. O house of Israel, is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem, or have I no power to deliver?" [^23]

These children will have a happy home and sealed parents yet. In the last days that bill of divorcement against their mother will be set aside, and so will the demands of any creditors. The Lord is in debt to no one, so neither will his children be. He alone can pay the price for the salvation of Israel and the establishment of Zion. His wrath is turned away, and he will not cast off his bride or allow her children to be sold into slavery.

As for the shortening of his hands, the scriptures repeatedly testify that the reach of God's arm is more than adequate, the extent of his grace entirely sufficient. He can always claim and embrace the Israel that he loves. In spite of their unfaithfulness, his hand remains constant, not shortened or slackened or withheld.

The Savior himself would say to the Nephites, quoting Isaiah, "In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer." [^24]

The Millennial Christ

On the subject of Christ's role in the fullness of times and his millennial reign, Isaiah provided one of the most important passages in the entire Old Testament, a favorite for Latter-day Saints, a chapter rich with Restoration meaning—Isaiah 11.

"There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots.

"And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

"And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears.

"But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

"And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins." [^25]

It is clear from the Book of Mormon [^26] and the Doctrine and Covenants [^27] that the principal character in this passage is Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith, recalling the visit of the angel Moroni on the night of September 21, 1823, wrote that Moroni "quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled." [^28]

The imagery of the tree in this passage is a natural continuation of the figure used in relationship to Christ and the children of Israel throughout the scriptures and discussed in several portions of this book. Heaven's Forester carefully trims his trees (consider Zenos' allegory quoted by Jacob) and in this manner cleans out the evil of his forest. With God's cleansing of Israel—cutting down boughs here, leveling thickets there, especially the lofty and arrogant ones—all that remains of the people of covenant at this reading is a stump. This prepares the way for flourishing new shoots to come out of the heritage of Jesse. [^29]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie said this about the "branch" in this passage: "The king who shall reign personally upon the earth during the millennium shall be the Branch who grew out of the house of David. He shall execute judgment and justice in all the earth because he is the Lord Jehovah, even him whom we call Christ.

"Through Zechariah the Lord spoke similarly: 'Thus saith the Lord of Hosts[:] . . . I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH. . . . I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.' [^30] Of that glorious millennial day the Lord says also: 'Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord: Even he shall build the temple of the Lord; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne.' [^31]"

Elder McConkie concluded: "That the branch of David is Christ is perfectly clear. . . . He is a new David, an Eternal David, who shall reign forever on the throne of his ancient ancestor. . . . David's temporal throne fell long centuries before our Lord was born, and that portion of Israel which had not been scattered to the ends of the earth was in bondage to the iron yoke of Rome. But the promises remain. The eternal throne shall be restored in due course with a new David sitting thereon, and he shall reign forever and ever. . . .

"How glorious shall be the coming day when the second David, who is Christ, reigns on the throne of the first David; when all men shall dwell safely; when the earth shall be dotted with temples; and when the gospel covenant shall have full force and validity in all the earth!" [^32]

There is warning for all in the language here that speaks of God smiting the earth with the rod of his mouth and the very breath of his lips slaying the wicked. Nephi, near the end of his life, quoted this verse again when he warned, "With righteousness shall the Lord God judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked." [^33] In that day the Word will come with power, and there will be incomparable power in his words. In those last days Christ's judgment will be the truth he speaks and an acknowledgment of that truth from all who hear him.

In that millennial moment the Messiah will usher in the peace for which all the righteous have wished, worked, and waited:

"The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

"And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

"And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den.

"They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

"And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek; and his rest shall be glorious. . . .

"And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth." [^34]

In equally triumphant language and comparable latter-day importance, Nephi reminds us (through Isaiah) of temples being built in the tops of the mountains near the headquarters of the kingdom of God on earth, where Christ will rule and reign as Lord of lords and King of kings:

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, when the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.

"And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

"And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks—nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

"O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord; yea, come, for ye have all gone astray, every one to his wicked ways." [^35]

The Crucifixion and Atonement

Perhaps no more beautiful passages have ever been written about the Savior's atonement and crucifixion than those written by Isaiah. We have already noted the first three verses of the 61st chapter of Isaiah, the passages with which Christ announced his Messiahship to what must surely have been a startled synagogue in the tranquil village of Nazareth. [^36] Those verses would rank among the most moving and meaningful ever written, particularly in light of their true Messianic meaning and the use that the Savior himself made of them.

There are other passages from Isaiah that add greatly to our understanding of the Master's mission. For example, something of the scorn and vilification of Christ's arrest and trial was taught in this passage written by Isaiah more than seven centuries before the event and recorded by Nephi on his plates nearly six centuries before those fateful days:

"The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back.

"I gave my back to the smiter, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair. I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

"For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded. Therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed." [^37]

But surely the most sublime, the lengthiest and most lyrical declaration of the life, death, and atoning sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ is that found in the 53rd chapter of Isaiah, quoted in its entirety in the Book of Mormon by Abinadi as he stood in chains before King Noah. [^38] Abinadi was, of course, a prefiguration, a type and shadow of the Savior, a fact that makes his moving tribute to Christ even more powerful and poignant (if that is possible) than when Isaiah wrote it. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have been invited to seek everything that is "virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy," a fitting description of the Holy One of Israel as declared by Isaiah and Abinadi in their testimonials of him. Consider these elements of his life, love, and gift to all:

"For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground." [^39] Sometimes we forget that Christ was born into mortality not only to die for us but also to live like us. He experienced his infancy, childhood, teenage years, and adulthood so that he might more fully understand the challenges associated with life spent in a world that is not our home. Under the watchful eye of his Heavenly Father, he was "tender" in at least two ways—he was young, pure, innocent, and particularly vulnerable to the pain of sin all around him, and he was caring, thoughtful, sensitive, and kind—in short, tender. In his childhood and youthful years with Joseph and Mary, at which time he was only a plant, he was to anchor himself and become a mighty root; [^40] then he would grow to become the Tree of Life. (The tree of life as a symbol includes the tree on which he would be slain for the sins of the world.) [^41] This would all be accomplished within a few square miles of dry and rocky terrain in ancient Palestine, and in a climate of dry and sterile Judaic legalism that had long since choked out the lifegiving strength of earlier gospel dispensations.

"He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him." [^42] We have no reason to believe that Christ was unattractive physically, but this verse may suggest that he was plain—as in "plain and precious." In any case we know that his power was an inner, spiritual gift, and that as the son of a mortal mother, he did not stand out in any distinctive physical way, leading his surprised and offended contemporaries of the day to say of him and his messianic announcement, "Is not this Joseph's son?" [^43] He certainly did not come to them in a way that filled the people's traditional hopes and views of a Messiah who would be striking in visage or powerful in politics.

"He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted." [^44] Ultimately Christ was rejected by the people to whom he had come, with even some of his closest disciples growing fearful and (at least temporarily) abandoning him in the end. When he was cursed, vilified, mocked, and spat upon, no one stepped forward to protect or defend him. This was, of course, according to divine decree that the full weight of the Atonement would be borne by Christ and Christ alone. Certainly as he bore the sins and sadness, the heartbreak and hurt of every man, woman, and child from Adam to the end of the world, it is an understatement to say he was "a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief."

Part of the pain here is the fact that some thought this man of Galilee was getting what he deserved, being "smitten of God." The Savior's most piercing cry may have added to that misunderstanding: "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" [^45] Then, as today, many thought that if there is suffering, there surely must be guilt. Indeed, there was plenty of guilt here—a whole world of it—but it fell upon the only utterly sinless and totally innocent man who had ever lived.

"But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all." [^46] In a way that is as monumentally merciful as it is beyond our ability to comprehend, in a way that fills us with as much wonder as it does gratitude, Christ personally took upon himself, beginning in the garden of Gethsemane and continuing on to the cross at Calvary, both the spiritual and physical burden of the transgressions and iniquities of everyone in the human family, for all "like sheep have gone astray." Every accountable person who ever lived—except Jesus—has sinned "and come short of the glory of God." [^47] Furthermore, we know that Christ took upon himself other lesser but still painful burdens as well—sicknesses and afflictions, sorrows and discouragements and infirmities of every kind—that these sufferings might be lifted along with the suffering for sin and disobedience. [^48]

He who most deserved peace and was the Prince of Peace had peace taken from him. He who deserved no rebuke, let alone physical abuse, went under the lash that his taking of such stripes might spare us such pain if only we would repent. The total cost of such combined spiritual and physical suffering is incalculable. Yet the iniquities, including the sorrows and sadness, of every mortal being who ever has lived or will live in this world were laid across one lonely set of shoulders. In the most magnificent display of strength ever known in the world of human endeavor, they were carried until full payment had been made.

"He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth." [^49] Here the image of wayward sheep in verse 6 (the human family) is shifted in verse 7 to that of an innocent sheep (Christ), who goes to the slaughter without utterance. When confronted by the high priest Caiaphas, Jesus "held his peace." [^50] Later Herod "questioned with him in many words; but he answered him nothing." [^51] Finally with Pilate, the one man who could have spared his life, Jesus "gave him no answer." [^52] He was the Lamb of God prepared from before the foundation of the world for this ultimate and infinite sacrifice. In his sacrifice he was giving millennia of meaning to the untold number of lambs that had been offered on an untold number of altars in anticipation and similitude of this final blood offering of God's Firstborn. Here was at long last the Holy Lamb without spot or blemish that would again (and in a much more universal way) permit the destroying angels to pass over those of the covenant. [^53]

"He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth." [^54] Christ was taken prisoner by soldiers who entered the garden of Gethsemane expressly to seize him, and he spent the rest of his remaining hours in bondage and judgment at the hands of Pilate. He was then "cut off out of the land of the living." He died with the wicked, crucified between two thieves, and found a burial place at the hand of the wealthy Joseph of Arimathea. Christ was the embodiment of truth, with no deceit of any kind ever having passed his lips. Nor would he do evil (even in word) in his time of greatest injustice, praying in the last hours of his life that his Father would forgive those involved, "for they know not what they do." [^55]

"Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." [^56] Certainly it did not "please" the Father to bruise his Son, as we currently understand and use that word. Modern translations of Isaiah render these opening lines "it was the will of the Lord" rather than "it pleased the Lord." That gives a clearer meaning of what was meant by the word pleased when Joseph Smith translated this passage early in the nineteenth century. Furthermore, acknowledging Christ's submission to the will of the Father in Mosiah 14 is consistent with and sets the stage for the very teaching Abinadi was about to give to King Noah and his people in Mosiah 15. Indeed, Abinadi would give a succinct definition of those who are Christ's seed. They are those whose sins he has borne and for whom he has died. [^57] His soul truly was "an offering for sin," bringing the joy of a glorious heavenly reunion with "his seed," a reunion nowhere more movingly described than in President Joseph F. Smith's vision of the righteous dead. [^58] All of this is, indeed, a "pleasure" to the Lord.

"He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors." [^59] Christ certainly did know and feel the "travail of his soul," an anguish commencing in the garden of Gethsemane, where he "began to be sorrowful and very heavy . . . even unto death." [^60] He prayed so earnestly through the depths of that agony that his sweat became "as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." [^61] Later he would describe the experience of that suffering: "[It] caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." [^62]

But he was faithful to the end, "satisfied" in its most literal, legal sense, having made reparation and restitution sufficient to appease the demands of justice. Because he "poured out his soul unto death" bearing the "sin of many," he received the inheritance of the great, sitting on the right hand of God, where all that the Father has was given him. [^63] True to his nature and true to his covenant, Christ will share that divine inheritance with all others who will be strong in keeping the commandments, thus making them "heirs of the kingdom of God" in precisely the way Abinadi declared this doctrine to King Noah. [^64]

For such merciful protection and glorious promises we must never again "hide our faces from him and esteem him not."

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Alma 34:2.
[^2] 1 Nephi 19:18-21.
[^3] See 2 Nephi 10:3; 25:19.
[^4] 2 Nephi 25:19.
[^5] Jacob 4:4-6.
[^6] Jacob 6:8.
[^7] Jacob 7:2.
[^8] Jacob 7:3-4, 6-7.
[^9] Jacob 7:10-11.
[^10] Jacob 7:17, 19.
[^11] Enos 1:8.
[^12] Jarom 1:11.
[^13] Omni 1:25-26.
[^14] Mosiah 3:1.
[^15] Mosiah 3:5.
[^16] Mosiah 3:5-6.
[^17] Mosiah 3:7.
[^18] See Mosiah 3:7.
[^19] See Mosiah 3:8.
[^20] See Mosiah 3:8.
[^21] See Mosiah 3:9.
[^22] Mosiah 3:10.
[^23] Mosiah 3:10.
[^24] Mosiah 3:11.
[^25] Mosiah 3:12.
[^26] Mosiah 3:15.
[^27] Mosiah 3:17.
[^28] Mosiah 3:18.
[^29] Mosiah 3:19-21.
[^30] Mosiah 3:13.
[^31] Mosiah 4:2-3. As noted throughout the Book of Mormon, the timeless, infinite, eternal nature of the Atonement provides promise of a remission of sins to the faithful, whether they live before Christ's advent, during his earthly ministry, or after his death and resurrection. This is a reminder of the eternal reach of the Atonement, each dispensation (including those before Christ's advent) making their covenants, obtaining their blessings, and working out their salvation. These prophets, priests, and teachers labored to teach people the intent for which the Law of Moses had been given, "persuading them to look forward unto the Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was." (Jarom 1:11.)
[^32] Mosiah 5:2, 5.
[^33] Mosiah 5:7.
[^34] Mosiah 5:8, 12, 15.
[^35] Mosiah 6:1-2.
[^36] Mosiah 13:33-35.
[^37] Mosiah 13:28; see also Mosiah 13:34; 15:1; 17:8; Alma 42:15.
[^38] See Mosiah 15:2-7.
[^39] See Mosiah 13:31; 16:14.
[^40] See Mosiah 15:5.
[^41] See Mosiah 15:5.
[^42] Mosiah 15:6-7.
[^43] Mosiah 15:8-9.
[^44] See Mosiah 15:9.
[^45] Mosiah 15:11-12.
[^46] See Mosiah 15:19.
[^47] Mosiah 15:21-25.
[^48] See Mosiah 15:26.
[^49] Mosiah 15:11.
[^50] Mosiah 16:6-9, 15.
[^51] See Mosiah 18:8.
[^52] See Mosiah 18:8.
[^53] See Mosiah 18:8.
[^54] See Mosiah 18:9.
[^55] See Mosiah 18:9.
[^56] See Mosiah 18:9.
[^57] See Mosiah 18:10.
[^58] See Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, 3rd ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1988), pp. 157-66; Mosiah 25:21-23; 18:17.
[^59] Mosiah 18:20-29.
[^60] Mosiah 26:18, 22-24, 26.
[^61] Mosiah 27:20.
[^62] Mosiah 27:24-31.
[^63] Alma 36:12, 14-15.
[^64] Alma 36:17-18.
