Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

Chapter Six

"We Knew of Christ"

The testimonies of Nephi, Jacob, and Isaiah have been given as the three great early witnesses who stand at the gateway to the Book of Mormon, declaring their testimony of Christ. However, the coming of Christ and the beauty of his message were "taught . . . bountifully" through the entire course of the Book of Mormon. [^1] Indeed, Nephi, Jacob, and Isaiah had their own testimonies bolstered by the declaration of other prophets before them. Obviously, prophets coming later had their affirmations strengthened by these three, and so the reinforcing, prophetic declarations of Christ unfold throughout the Book of Mormon.

In fact, the theme "Jesus is the Christ," which runs throughout the Book of Mormon, suggests that one way of reading and remembering this sacred record is to move, in effect, from one teaching about the Savior to the next. Those discourses come with such regularity, like a series of mountaintop sightings to a needy traveler, that they elevatingly lead the reader through the Book of Mormon from beginning to end. Having already introduced that idea with the teachings of four major prophets, it seems useful to combine here in one summary section the remaining teachings and sermons, large or small, which speak of the Savior up to the time of his appearance in the New World, stressing just how widely the ancient prophets knew "the doctrine of Christ" and how very broadly it was taught. The title for this coalescing chapter—"We Knew of Christ"—is taken from the testimony of these witnesses themselves, with the sermons or subsections identified by the priests and teachers who gave them to us—the prophets of the small plates, King Benjamin, Abinadi, Alma the Elder, Alma the Younger, Amulek, the Sons of Mosiah, Captain Moroni, the later Nephi and Lehi, and Samuel the Lamanite.

The Prophets of the Small Plates

As already noted in great detail in chapter three of this book, Nephi's writings document the shared purpose and common practice of Book of Mormon prophets who bore testimony of Christ and his ministry. He recorded the Savior's ministry, including the painful details of the crucifixion, for the express purpose that his people might know fully of Christ and accept his teachings: "I, Nephi, have written these things unto my people, that perhaps I might persuade them that they would remember the Lord their Redeemer. . . .

"For behold, I have workings in the spirit, which doth weary me even that all my joints are weak, for those who are at Jerusalem; for had not the Lord been merciful, to show unto me concerning them, even as he had prophets of old, I should have perished also.

"And he surely did show unto the prophets of old all things concerning them." [^2]

Jacob and Nephi—in that order—spoke of the name the Messiah would carry, [^3] but Nephi was quick to acknowledge that other ancient prophets knew the name as well: "According to the words of the prophets, the Messiah cometh in six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem; and according to the words of the prophets, and also the word of the angel of God, his name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God." [^4]

Nephi's brother Jacob—whose teachings of the Savior have been thoroughly reviewed in chapter four—followed that acknowledgment with a testimony of the breadth of revelation and widespread knowledge of Christ that had been given to these ancient prophets. He wrote, "For this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us.

"Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name. And for this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to him. . . .

"Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea." [^5]

In that bold and persuasive spirit Jacob pleaded with his brethren, "Behold, will ye reject these words? Will ye reject the words of the prophets; and will ye reject all the words which have been spoken concerning Christ, after so many have spoken concerning him; and deny the good word of Christ, and the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and quench the Holy Spirit, and make a mock of the great plan of redemption, which hath been laid for you?" [^6]

But soon enough one came doing exactly those things. Sherem, the first of the anti-Christs noted in the Book of Mormon, came declaring "that there should be no Christ" and in every way attempted to "overthrow the doctrine of Christ." [^7] Knowing that Jacob "had faith in Christ who should come," Sherem made a particularly perverse effort to confront and challenge him about the practice of what Sherem called his "preaching that which ye call the gospel, or the doctrine of Christ." With "a perfect knowledge of the language of the people," including flattery and distinctly powerful speech, Sherem based his argument on the tediously predictable reasoning of all the anti-Christs in the Book of Mormon that "no man knoweth of such things; for he cannot tell of things to come." [^8]

In picking up that gauntlet, Jacob asked, "Believest thou the scriptures?"

Sherem answered, "Yea."

"Then ye do not understand them," Jacob replied, "for they truly testify of Christ. Behold, I say unto you that none of the prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ. [^9]

It is some tribute to him that Sherem ultimately acknowledged his fatal dishonesty. Literally on his deathbed he "denied the things which he had taught . . . and confessed the Christ, and the power of the Holy Ghost, and the ministering of angels. . . .

"And he said: I fear lest I have committed the unpardonable sin, for I have lied unto God; for I denied the Christ, and said that I believed the scriptures; and they truly testify of him." [^10]

Shortly thereafter, Jacob's son Enos had a memorable spiritual experience because of his faith in Christ, a being, the heavenly voice told him, "whom thou hast never before heard nor seen." [^11] Likewise Enos's son Jarom noted that the prophets (plural) of the Lord labored at "persuading them to look forward unto the Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was." [^12] Jarom's great-great nephew Amaleki delivered his record to King Benjamin, "exhorting all men to come unto . . . Christ, who is the Holy One of Israel, and partake of his salvation, and the power of his redemption. Yea, come unto him, and offer your whole souls as an offering unto him." [^13]

These passages mark the conclusion of the small plates of Nephi, completed some 130 years before the birth of Christ. As the transition is made to Mormon's abridgment of the large plates of Nephi, the emphasis on Christ, his doctrines, his teachings, and the certainty of his mortal ministry continues unabated, though in a more temporal context and a more highly edited format.

King Benjamin

In the first of the sermons recorded by Mormon (in the Book of Mormon as we now have it), King Benjamin gave a magnificent discourse on Christ's suffering and atonement, the role of justice and mercy, and the need to take upon ourselves the name of Christ in a covenantal relationship—truths delivered to him "by an angel from God." [^14] He also stressed again that all the holy prophets have taught this, and that they, like Jarom, taught the "eternal present" of the Savior's life.

Consider these truths from King Benjamin's singular sermon:

Â Christ, who reigns "from all eternity to all eternity" would "come down from heaven among the children of men, and . . . dwell in a tabernacle of clay." [^15]

Â Christ would work "mighty miracles," including healing the sick and raising the dead; causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear; and curing all manner of diseases and casting out the evil spirits that "dwell in the hearts of the children of men." [^16]

Â The Savior would suffer temptations, hunger, thirst, fatigue, and "pain of body"—more than a man can suffer "except it be unto death." [^17]

Â In his atoning anguish, blood would come from every pore, so great would be his anguish over the sins and suffering of mankind. [^18]

Â He would be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the creator of all things from the beginning. [^19]

Â His mother would be called Mary. [^20]

Â His own people would reject him, considering him only "a man." They would accuse him of having an evil spirit, a devil, and would scourge and crucify him. [^21]

Â He would rise from the dead on the third day. [^22]

Â He would stand to judge the world with a righteous judgment, for which "all . . . things are done." [^23]

Â Christ's blood would atone for those who sin and are ignorant of "the will of God concerning them." [^24]

Â Repentance is required of all others who sin knowingly and "rebelleth against God." [^25]

Â Many "signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows" would be given to the house of Israel, including the law of Moses, pointing the people toward Christ's coming. Nevertheless, they would harden their hearts and stiffen their necks, failing to understand that the law of Moses "availeth nothing except it were through the atonement of [Christ's] blood." [^26]

Â There would be "no other name given nor any other way nor means" by which salvation could come. It comes only in and through "the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." [^27]

As revelatory and detailed as these teachings are, King Benjamin linked his strongest doctrinal application of Christ's teaching to the state and circumstance of little children, those who served as such ideal objects of Christ's love and such pure examples of his humility.

Little children are not capable of sinning, King Benjamin taught, but they suffer the effects of the fall of Adam along with the rest of the mortal family. Nevertheless, Christ atones for that fall and overcomes death in their behalf: "The infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy," King Benjamin said. Indeed, adults will be punished unless they humble themselves and become as little children, believing that "salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." [^28]

Then King Benjamin declared in a memorable passage the childlike humility and trust required of every disciple of Christ: "The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father.

"And moreover, I say unto you, that the time shall come when the knowledge of the Savior shall spread throughout every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.

"And behold, when that time cometh, none shall be found blameless before God, except it be little children, only through repentance and faith on the name of the Lord God Omnipotent." [^29]

King Benjamin reminded his listeners that these were not new truths, even in the second century before Christ. "The Lord God hath sent his holy prophets among all the children of men," the prophet said, "to declare these things to every kindred, nation, and tongue, that thereby whosoever should believe that Christ should come, the same might receive remission of their sins, and rejoice with exceedingly great joy, even as though he had already come among them." [^30]

It is little wonder that those hearing the king's candid message fell to the earth and cried, "O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things; who shall come down among the children of men." Their earnest prayer was heard and they were filled with joy, received a remission of their sins, and found peace of conscience "because of the exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ who should come." [^31]

As is always the case with the honest in heart, such a powerful witness of Christ evoked an honest response, and these believers sought to establish a covenant with their Savior. Expressing a "mighty change" in their hearts, they had "no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." They were willing, they declared, "to enter into a covenant with our God to do his will, and to be obedient to his commandments in all things that he shall command us, all the remainder of our days." [^32]

King Benjamin was delighted with this response from the congregation and informed them that in this covenant-making process, they had become "children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters." "For behold," he told them, "this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters." [^33]

More will be said later of Christ's role as "Father," but this is one way in which that title is appropriately applied to him who is customarily referred to as "Son." He is the Father of redeemed, restored, spiritual life—in short, eternal life. The faithful are born again—of Christ and by Christ and through Christ—when this mighty change wrought by him comes into their hearts. As is appropriate at the time of a new birth, a name is given, and the name the redeemed take upon themselves is "the name of Christ," evidence that all such have entered into a covenant with God that they would be obedient to the gospel to the end of their lives.

King Benjamin said of this new life and identity, "I would that ye should remember to retain the name written always in your hearts, . . . that ye hear and know the voice by which ye shall be called, and also, the name by which he shall call you." That such a name would have binding power in eternity through covenants made in mortality is made clear in this final declaration by the worthy king:

"Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all." [^34]

That this sermon carried a spiritual power beyond the clarity of the written word is undeniable, for following the close of the discourse and wishing to take "the names of all those who had entered into a covenant," this mighty servant of God realized "there was not one soul, except it were little children, but who had entered into the covenant and had taken upon them the name of Christ." [^35] Oh that we might have more such sermons, and, even more important, that all who hear them might make such honest and binding covenants as a result.

Abinadi

Abinadi, that prophetic prefiguration of Christ whose sermon will be addressed in detail later, underscored the fact that in his ministry he was doing only what his predecessors and contemporaries had done:

"For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began—have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?

"Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?

"Yea, and have they not said also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that he, himself, should be oppressed and afflicted?" [^36]

In another of those consummate sermons on the Savior laced throughout the Book of Mormon, Abinadi made these declarations about the Son of God:

Â "God himself" would atone for the sins and iniquities of his people. [^37]

Â Christ would play mortal roles as Father and as Son. [^38]

Â The law of Moses was to be a type and shadow, a prefiguration of Christ who would come. [^39]

Â Christ would dwell in the flesh and suffer temptation but not yield to it. [^40]

Â The Savior would suffer himself to be mocked, scourged, cast out, and disowned by his own people. [^41]

Â He would work "many mighty miracles" only to be led without resistance to the crucifixion. [^42]

Â His "intercession for the children of men" reflecting his mercy and compassion would allow him to stand "betwixt" these people and the demands of justice. [^43]

Â In this atoning process he would break the bands of death, take upon himself the the transgressions of all, satisfy the demands of justice, and redeem his people. [^44]

Â Christ's "seed" (the "children of Christ" spoken of by King Benjamin) would be those who have believed the prophets and looked forward to Christ for a redemption of their sins. These are they whose sins Christ would bear and for whom his death would be wholly efficacious. [^45]

Â Were it not for this redemption and resurrection, all mankind would perish. [^46]

Â Christ would bring a "first resurrection" that would include the faithful who lived and died before Christ's death, including little children and those in their maturity who died without any saving knowledge of the gospel. [^47]

Â There would be no resurrection of the willfully rebellious at the time of Christ's (or "the first") resurrection. [^48]

These truths, he testified, have constituted "the words of the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied concerning the coming of the Lord." [^49] Abinadi then concluded his masterful sermon with this declaration: "If Christ had not come into the world, speaking of things to come as though they had already come, there could have been no redemption.

"And if Christ had not risen from the dead, or have broken the bands of death that the grave should have no victory, and that death should have no sting, there could have been no resurrection.

"But there is a resurrection, therefore the grave hath no victory, and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ.

"He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death. . . .

"Teach . . . that redemption cometh through Christ the Lord." [^50]

Alma the Elder

Out of Abinadi's heroic—and ultimately fatal—declaration to the wicked King Noah came one crucial convert, a young priest in the king's court named Alma. Hearing Abinadi's witness of Christ and fleeing into the wilderness to record the message and repent of his sins, Alma began baptizing all who wished to make a covenant with Christ. He asked that they "serve [God] and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly" upon them. These new disciples would also demonstrate their faith by:

Â Coming into the fold of God. [^51]

Â Being called his people. [^52]

Â Bearing one another's burdens. [^53]

Â Mourning with those that mourn. [^54]

Â Comforting those who stand in need of comfort. [^55]

Â Standing as witnesses of God at all times and in all things and in all places. [^56]

Â Entering into a covenant to serve God and keep his commandments. [^57]

This declaration by Alma at the Waters of Mormon still stands as the most complete scriptural statement on record as to what the newly baptized commit to do and be.

This baptismal experience for such a large group led to the formation of a church in the wilderness, known from that time forward as "the church of Christ." These early organizations were known among the ancients as "churches of anticipation" when they arose (as they regularly did) before the mortal ministry of Christ. Before long there were several branches of the church in the land, with as many as seven in the immediate area of Zarahemla. These multiple congregations "did assemble themselves together in different bodies, being called churches; every church having their priests and their teachers, and every priest preaching the word according as it was delivered to him by the mouth of Alma." Regardless of the number of branches established, they "were all one church, yea, even the church of God; for there was nothing preached in all the churches except it were repentance and faith in God." Those who joined were to "take upon them the name of Christ, or of God" [^58]

The doctrine taught was, as noted, centered on "repentance and faith on the Lord, who had redeemed his people." They were to be united in their hearts, with no contention in their sociality or their doctrine, "having their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another." They were to keep the Sabbath day holy and give thanks to the Lord every day. Their priests were to labor with their own hands for their support, and the whole church was to gather together to worship at least one day a week. The people were to impart of their substance "every one according to that which he had; if he have more abundantly he should impart more abundantly; and of him that had but little, but little should be required; and to him that had not should be given. And thus they should impart of their substance of their own free will and good desires towards God." In this manner they were to walk "uprightly before God, imparting to one another both temporally and spiritually according to their needs and their wants." [^59]

Alma the Younger

As this Nephite "church of anticipation" began to flourish, Alma's son Alma and his associates, the sons of Mosiah, were disrupting the work of the prophets. In that circumstance a great revelation came to the distraught father from "the voice of the Lord," clearly the voice of the premortal Christ. Of the church and those who are baptized into it, the voice said: "Blessed is this people who are willing to bear my name; for in my name shall they be called; and they are mine. . . .

"For behold, this is my church. . . . And whomsoever ye receive shall believe in my name; and him will I freely forgive.

"For it is I that taketh upon me the sins of the world; for it is I that hath created them; and it is I that granteth unto him that believeth unto the end a place at my right hand.

"For behold, in my name are they called. . . .

"And then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, that I am their Redeemer." [^60]

The conversion that then came to Alma the Younger in this period of the church's development in Zarahemla is one of the most dramatic and influential in all of the Book of Mormon.

Being confronted and ultimately confounded by an angel of the Lord, Alma fell to the earth and was speechless and helpless for three days and three nights. For two of those days and nights, his high priest father and the other faithful of Zarahemla fasted and prayed that strength would return to this young man, for his father "knew that it was the power of God" that had overcome him. [^61] When his strength returned, he stood and spoke of the mighty change that had come to him through Christ. He said to those gathered around him:

"I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit.

"And the Lord said unto me: Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters;

"And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. . . .

"After wading through much tribulation, repenting nigh unto death, the Lord in mercy hath seen fit to snatch me out of an everlasting burning, and I am born of God."

The personal pain of that repentance and rebirth was further described by this newly converted son: "My soul hath been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. I was in the darkest abyss; but now I behold the marvelous light of God. My soul was racked with eternal torment; but I am snatched, and my soul is pained no more.

"I rejected my Redeemer, and denied that which had been spoken of by our fathers; but now that they may foresee that he will come, and that he remembereth every creature of his creating, he will make himself manifest unto all.

"Yea, every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess before him. Yea, even at the last day, when all men shall stand to be judged of him, then shall they confess that he is God; then shall they confess, who live without God in the world, that the judgment of an everlasting punishment is just upon them; and they shall quake, and tremble, and shrink beneath the glance of his all-searching eye." [^62]

Years later, recounting this dramatic event for the benefit and caution of his son Helaman, Alma said. "My soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins," he explained. Remembering every sin and iniquity left him feeling the torments and pains of hell. Feeling that he had spiritually "murdered" many of the faithful followers of Christ whom he had led away from the church, Alma confessed, "The very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror."

"Oh," thought he for three tormented days, "that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds." [^63]

It was while racked with such torment, harrowed up by the memory of his many sins, that Alma remembered that his father had prophesied to the people "concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world."

"Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought," he said, "I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death." [^64]

When Alma thought of Christ—simply had the thought of Christ—his torment was lifted and his pains were eased. He was harrowed up by the memory of his sins no more, and his physical strength returned.

Of this marvelous example of the mercy of Christ and the power of clinging to his atonement even if only in thought, Alma said to Helaman: "What joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain! . . .

"Yea, and from that time even until now, I have labored without ceasing, that I might bring souls unto repentance; that I might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did taste; that they might also be born of God, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. . . .

"For because of the word which he has imparted unto me, behold, many have been born of God, and have tasted as I have tasted, and have seen eye to eye as I have seen; therefore they do know of these things of which I have spoken, as I do know; and the knowledge which I have is of God." [^65]

Perhaps only those who have known such anguish can fully appreciate the merciful redemption of which Alma spoke. But everyone has had such fearful and harrowing moments; everyone has had hours of affliction and "inexpressible horror." To all such—the "vilest of sinners" or the everyday disciple who wishes only to get through life's journey—Alma speaks to the heart.

At the beginning of his teaching to Helaman he said, "I do know that whosoever shall put their trust in God shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and shall be lifted up at the last day." [^66]

In conclusion, he ended as he began: "And I have been supported under trials and troubles of every kind, yea, and in all manner of afflictions; yea, God has delivered me from prison, and from bonds, and from death; yea, and I do put my trust in him, and he will still deliver me." [^67]

Of course Alma the Younger's troubles had begun when he denied what had been so bountifully taught by his own father, and what was always so bountifully taught throughout the Book of Mormon era. "I rejected my Redeemer," he said, "and denied that which had been spoken of by our fathers; but now that they may foresee that he will come, and that he remembereth every creature of his creating, he will make himself manifest unto all." [^68]

At his father's death, the newly converted Alma assumed the prophetic mantle, and, it is instructive to note, preached Christ to members of his own congregation as well as to those who were not members of the Church. Pleading for "a mighty change" to come to his baptized brethren in Zarahemla, Alma warned of the unconverted life: "I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?

"Do ye exercise faith in the redemption of him who created you? . . .

"There can no man be saved except his garments are washed white; yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain, through the blood of him of whom it has been spoken by our fathers, who should come to redeem his people from their sins. . . .

"Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd. . . .

"I say unto you, that I know that Jesus Christ shall come, yea, the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, and mercy, and truth. And behold, it is he that cometh to take away the sins of the world, yea, the sins of every man who steadfastly believeth on his name." [^69]

In the same spirit Alma went to preach to the church that had been established in the valley of Gideon, "according to the revelation of the truth of the word which had been spoken by his fathers, and according to the spirit of prophecy which was in him, according to the testimony of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who should come to redeem his people from their sins, and the holy order by which he was called." [^70]

Alma taught these people that of the many things to come, there was "one thing . . . of more importance than they all." "For behold," he said, "the time is not far distant that the Redeemer liveth and cometh among his people." [^71]

Alma acknowledged with prophetic candor that he did not know exactly when Christ's appearance in the New World would be, but the Spirit instructed him to "cry unto this people, saying—Repent ye, and prepare the way of the Lord, and walk in his paths, which are straight; for behold, the kingdom of heaven is at hand, and the Son of God cometh upon the face of the earth." [^72]

Reaffirming not only the virgin birth but also that that virgin's name would be Mary, Alma gave one of the book's most revealing and encouraging statements about the breadth of the Atonement and the range of ills and heartaches it would cover.

Of this divine Son of Mary, Alma said, "He shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people.

"And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities. . . .

"The Son of God suffereth according to the flesh that he might take upon him the sins of his people, that he might blot out their transgressions according to the power of his deliverance." [^73]

This doctrine led Alma to invite his audience to lay claim to these blessings by being baptized unto repentance "that ye may be washed from your sins, that ye may have faith on the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sins of the world, who is mighty to save and to cleanse from all unrighteousness." [^74]

Note the kinds of problems Alma said the Atonement would remedy—pain, affliction, sickness, sorrow, temptation, and infirmities of every kind, as well as spiritual sin and physical death. This doctrine is central to the full meaning of the mission and ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ. Most Christians believe that, based upon repentance, the atonement of Christ will redeem humankind from the final consequences of sin and death. But only those who receive the restored gospel, including the Book of Mormon, know how thoroughly the Atonement heals and helps with so many more categories of disappointment and heartache here and now, in time as well as in eternity. In this life as well as the next, Christ "restoreth my soul" and administers "goodness and mercy . . . all the days of my life." [^75]

Alma and Amulek (Part 1)

From a marvelous missionary companionship who are likened unto "two lions," we learn a great deal about the Savior in their words to the people of Ammonihah. Picking up the elements of their missionary discussions—particularly those directed to the adversarial Zeezrom—we are taught the following:

Â The Savior will come in his glory, the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, in "not many days" (this prophecy was given in approximately 82 b.c.). [^76]

Â He would be full of grace, equity, and truth; full of patience, mercy, and longsuffering. He would be quick to hear the cries of his people and to answer their prayers. [^77]

Â He would redeem those who would be baptized unto repentance, through faith on his name. [^78]

Â Christ cannot save people "in their sins," although he can save them "from their sins," for no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven. [^79]

Â Christ can rightfully be called "the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are." He is "the beginning and the end, the first and the last." [^80]

Â He would come into the world to redeem his people, the only ones for whom the Atonement can have full effect being those "who believe on his name." [^81]

Â Except for the universal gift of resurrection, the wicked remain "as though there had been no redemption made." [^82]

Â In the Resurrection, the spirit and body will be reunited "in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame." Not so much as "a hair of their heads [will] be lost." [^83]

Â At the time of judgment, we will have a "bright recollection of all our guilt." [^84]

Â We will never die again physically after the Resurrection. The spirit and body will be forever united, "never to be divided." [^85]

Â At the day of judgment, our words, our works, and our thoughts will condemn us. [^86]

Â The wicked will experience a "second death," a spiritual death pertaining unto things of righteousness, and will be under the power and captivity of Satan, tormented as if in a lake of fire and brimstone. [^87]

Â Their circumstances will be painful, for they will not be able to be redeemed in their sins, and they will not be able to die, for their spirits and bodies will be forever reunited. [^88]

Â After the fall of Adam, this life became "a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God." [^89]

Â Death is a necessary step in full repentance, redemption, and the joy of the Resurrection, for if Adam and Eve had partaken of the fruit of the tree of life after their transgression, "they would have been forever miserable, having no preparatory state." [^90]

Â Because all need to know these things, God has "conversed with men" from the beginning, according to their faith, repentance, and holy works, making known unto them the plan of redemption prepared from the foundation of the world. [^91]

Â After having made known the plan of redemption, God gave commandments whereby the blessings of the plan could be obtained. [^92]

Â God calls on his children yet, "in the name of his Son," to repent and claim the promises available only through his "Only Begotten Son." [^93]

Â If people continue to transgress and thus provoke God, the result will be [a second] death, just as it was "in the first provocation." [^94]

Â God has ordained priests "after the order of his Son" to teach these things to the people. They have been ordained in a way that serves as a type and shadow of Christ, letting the people know in what manner they may look forward to the Son of God for redemption. [^95]

Â The gospel is taught in "plain terms" so there can be no misunderstanding or reason for error. [^96]

Â Angels are employed to spread these glad tidings, including the declaration of Christ's coming. [^97]

This is a significant amount of information about the Savior's ministry, especially when we realize it was given in very hostile circumstances and to a very threatening audience. Indeed, following these teachings, Alma and Amulek were forced to watch innocent women and children, followers of Christ, cast to a fiery death. Furthermore, they themselves were confined in prison, bound with strong cords, denied food and water, spat upon, and mocked by their assailants. In that cruel and violent circumstance, it was faith in Christ that gave Alma and Amulek their strength: "Alma cried, saying: How long shall we suffer these great afflictions, O Lord? O Lord, give us strength according to our faith which is in Christ, even unto deliverance."

At that declaration their bonds were broken and the walls of the prison were rent in two, with Alma and Amulek coming out of the prison unhurt, "for the Lord had granted unto them power, according to their faith which was in Christ. And they straightway came forth out of the prison; and they were loosed from their bands; and the prison had fallen to the earth, and every soul within the walls thereof, save it were Alma and Amulek, was slain." [^98]

To new convert Zeezrom, devastated by feverish guilt for his resistance to the truth and his implicit guilt in the deaths of so many innocent people, Alma said: "Believest thou in the power of Christ unto salvation?"

Zeezrom said that he did. Alma continued: "If thou believest in the redemption of Christ thou canst be healed."

Zeezrom affirmed that belief as well.

"And then Alma cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord our God, have mercy on this man, and heal him according to his faith which is in Christ.

"And when Alma had said these words, Zeezrom leaped upon his feet, and began to walk; and this was done to the great astonishment of all the people; and the knowledge of this went forth throughout all the land of Sidom.

"And Alma baptized Zeezrom unto the Lord; and he began from that time forth to preach unto the people." [^99]

With such dramatic manifestations of both good and evil, time was quickly moving toward the coming of Christ: "The Lord did pour out his Spirit on all the face of the land to prepare the minds of the children of men, or to prepare their hearts to receive the word which should be taught among them at the time of his coming." They were taught about "holding forth" to the people the safety of the gospel—"things which must shortly come; yea, . . . the coming of the Son of God, his sufferings and death, and also the resurrection of the dead.

"And many of the people did inquire concerning the place where the Son of God should come; and they were taught that he would appear unto them after his resurrection; and this the people did hear with great joy and gladness." [^100]

The Sons of Mosiah

Even as Alma and Amulek were having such success with the Nephites, the sons of Mosiah were teaching the same truths about Christ to the Lamanites. In a dramatic exchange with King Lamoni and his people, Ammon taught "the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world; and he also made known unto them concerning the coming of Christ, and all the works of the Lord did he make known unto them." [^101]

It is in response to this testimony of Christ that King Lamoni cried out in much the same manner that the converted young Alma did: "O Lord, have mercy; according to thy abundant mercy which thou hast had upon the people of Nephi, have upon me, and my people." [^102] Sinking to the earth as if dead, Lamoni was unconscious for two days and nights until Ammon restored him by the power of the priesthood. From that experience King Lamoni arose saying, "Behold, I have seen my Redeemer; and he shall come forth, and be born of a woman, and he shall redeem all mankind who believe on his name." [^103] His wife, the queen, arose from her spiritual experience crying, "O blessed Jesus, who has saved me from an awful hell! O blessed God, have mercy on this people!" [^104]

Ammon delighted in this experience because he knew "the dark veil of unbelief" had been cast away from these prominent but now deeply humble Lamanite leaders. The light coming to their minds was that which always overcomes darkness—"the light of the glory of God, which was a marvelous light of his goodness." This illumination infuses such joy into the souls of men and women that every cloud of darkness is dispelled and the promise of everlasting life prevails in the human heart. [^105]

It is unfortunate that during this mission the wearisome theme of the anti-Christs—that one cannot know of things to come—was presented by those of the order of Nehor formed among the Amalekites and the Amulonites, apostate Nephites who lived among the Lamanites to whom the Sons of Mosiah had been preaching.

"Now Aaron said unto [one of the Amalekites]: Believest thou that the Son of God shall come to redeem mankind from their sins?

"And the man said unto him: We do not believe that thou knowest any such thing. We do not believe in these foolish traditions. We do not believe that thou knowest of things to come, neither do we believe that thy fathers and also that our fathers did know concerning the things which they spake, of that which is to come.

"Now Aaron began to open the scriptures unto them concerning the coming of Christ, and also concerning the resurrection of the dead, and that there could be no redemption for mankind save it were through the death and sufferings of Christ, and the atonement of his blood." [^106]

The scriptures Aaron was using are still from an "Old Testament" era, yet the sacred writings speak clearly of Christ's coming, his atonement and resurrection—further evidence of the loss of plain and precious truths from our present Bible. To king Lamoni's father "Aaron did expound . . . the scriptures from the creation of Adam, laying the fall of man before him, and their carnal state and also the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all whosoever would believe on his name.

"And since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance, and so forth." [^107]

Even a group such as the Anti-Nephi-Lehies—so wicked in their past and so newly introduced to the truth—understood the doctrine of Christ and his atonement. Following his conversion King Anti-Nephi-Lehi said to his people, "I . . . thank my God, yea, my great God, that he hath granted unto us that we might repent of these things, and also that he hath forgiven us of those our many sins and murders which we have committed, and taken away the guilt from our hearts, through the merits of his Son." [^108]

Fearful that the stain of more blood upon their weapons might place them beyond the redeeming "blood of the Son of our great God," which was to be shed for the atonement of their sins, these faithful converts refused to take up arms again. [^109]

These Anti-Nephi-Lehies, once a hardened and bloodthirsty people, accepted the gospel totally and became "distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things; and they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end.

" . . . And they never did look upon death with any degree of terror, for their hope and views of Christ and the resurrection; therefore, death was swallowed up to them by the victory of Christ over it." [^110]

Alma and Amulek (Part 2)

In the meantime Alma had met Korihor, the most diabolical of all the anti-Christs in the Book of Mormon, who "began to preach unto the people against the prophecies which had been spoken by the prophets, concerning the coming of Christ. . . .

"And this Anti-Christ . . . began to preach unto the people that there should be no Christ. And after this manner did he preach, saying:

"O ye that are bound down under a foolish and a vain hope, why do ye yoke yourselves with such foolish things? Why do ye look for a Christ? For no man can know of anything which is to come. . . .

"Behold, ye cannot know of things which ye do not see; therefore ye cannot know that there shall be a Christ." [^111] Korihor taught that such a deranged quest for a remission of sins was "the effect of a frenzied mind." There could be "no atonement made for the sins of men," he taught, but rather "every man fared in this life according to the management of the creature." Every person prospered according to his own cleverness and conquered according to his own strength. Then moving beyond the realm of either civil or moral law into anarchy, Korihor concluded that "whatsoever a man did was no crime." Thus with "great swelling words" Korihor ridiculed the "foolish . . . [and] silly traditions" of believing in a Christ who should come. [^112]

Korihor's arguments sound very contemporary to the modern reader, but Alma used a timeless and ultimately undeniable weapon in response—the power of personal testimony. Angry that Korihor and his like were essentially against happiness, Alma asked, "Why do you teach this people that there shall be no Christ, to interrupt their rejoicings." [^113] "I know there is a God," he declared, "and also that Christ shall come. . . . I have all things as a testimony that these things are true." The unequivocal reference to "all things" in this prophetic reply is surely an intentional echo by Alma of that doctrine taught throughout the Book of Mormon that "all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of [Christ]." [^114] The forces of nature and of history, as well as of spirit, are ultimately always on the side of the disciple of Christ.

Korihor was overcome by Alma's testimony of Christ and finally smitten by the very power of the God he had denied. Nevertheless, his brand of teaching inevitably had its influence among some of the less faithful who, like the neighboring Zoramites, were already given to "perverting the ways of the Lord."

Zoram and his followers are one of the most memorable apostate groups mentioned in the Book of Mormon primarily because they considered themselves so unusually righteous and anything but unfavored of God. Once a week they stood atop a prayer tower called a Rameumptom and, using always "the selfsame prayer," thanked God that they were better than everyone else, "a chosen and a holy" people "elected" by God to be saved while all around them were equally "elected" to be cast down to hell. In the reassuring safety of all this, they were also spared any belief in such "foolish traditions" (evidence of Korihor's legacy emerging here) as a belief in a Savior, for it had been "made known" to them there should be no Christ.

After that unabashed public performance once every seven days, the Zoramites returned to their homes, "never speaking of their God again" until they ascended the Rameumptom the next week. Little wonder that when Alma and his missionary brethren witnessed this self-righteous spectacle they were "astonished beyond all measure." [^115]

Alma lost little time in countering such unholy prayer and its equally unholy theology with his own prayer for divine assistance against this form of self-serving iniquity that made him literally sick at heart.

"O Lord, wilt thou give me strength, that I may bear with mine infirmities," he prayed. "For I am infirm, and such wickedness among this people doth pain my soul.

"O Lord, my heart is exceedingly sorrowful; wilt thou comfort my soul in Christ . . . and give unto me success, and also my fellow laborers . . . that they may have strength, that they may bear their afflictions."

"Wilt thou comfort their souls in Christ . . . [and] grant unto us that we may have success in bringing [the Zoramites] again unto thee in Christ." [^116]

In response to such a selfless prayer—the pure antithesis of the Zoramite offering—"the Lord provided for them that they should hunger not, neither should they thirst; yea, and he also gave them strength, that they should suffer no manner of afflictions, save it were swallowed up in the joy of Christ." [^117]

To those of the Zoramites who responded to his message, Alma quoted the previously mentioned but otherwise unknown prophets Zenos and Zenock. Indeed, he quoted an unknown sermon on prayer by Zenos, who said, "Thou didst hear me because of mine afflictions and my sincerity; and it is because of thy Son that thou hast been thus merciful unto me, therefore I will cry unto thee in all mine afflictions, for in thee is my joy; for thou hast turned thy judgments away from me, because of thy Son." [^118]

With that prayerful phrasing in mind, Alma said, "Now behold, my brethren, I would ask if ye have read the scriptures? If ye have, how can ye disbelieve on the Son of God?

"For it is not written that Zenos alone spake of these things, but Zenock also spake of these things—

"For behold, he said: Thou art angry, O Lord, with this people, because they will not understand thy mercies which thou hast bestowed upon them because of thy Son."

Alma continued, "And now, my brethren, ye see that a second prophet of old has testified of the Son of God. . . .

"But behold, this is not all; these are not the only ones who have spoken concerning the Son of God.

"Behold, he was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behold a type was raised up in the wilderness. . . .

"Cast about your eyes and begin to believe in the Son of God, that he will come to redeem his people, and that he shall suffer and die to atone for their sins; and that he shall rise again from the dead, which shall bring to pass the resurrection, that all men shall stand before him, to be judged at the last and judgment day, according to their works. . . .

"Then may God grant unto you that your burdens may be light, through the joy of his Son." [^119]

Amulek immediately added his testimony as one newly called to the work: "My brethren, I think that it is impossible that ye should be ignorant of the things which have been spoken concerning the coming of Christ, who is taught by us to be the Son of God; yea, I know that these things were taught unto you bountifully before your dissension from among us. . . .

"The great question which is in your minds is whether the word be in the Son of God, or whether there shall be no Christ.

"And ye also beheld that my brother has proved unto you, in many instances, that the word is in Christ unto salvation." [^120]

Amulek, even though a new missionary, had a stunning grasp of theology, for he had been tutored by an angel, [^121] had the influence of the Holy Spirit, and had labored at the side of Alma. Taking his lead from Alma's marvelous sermon on "the word" being likened to a seed—a metaphor Alma continued through the staff (tree) Moses raised in the wilderness on to the "tree" springing up to everlasting life—Amulek asked the people of Zoram to have enough faith to "plant the word in [their] hearts, that [they might] try the experiment of its goodness." [^122]

After hearing the testimony of Alma, Zenos, Zenock, and Moses, Amulek said, "And now, behold, I will testify unto you of myself that these things are true." [^123] From such a forthright testimony of a new convert we are taught that:

Â Christ shall come among the children of men, taking upon himself the transgressions of his people and atoning for the sins of the world. [^124]

Â Because all are hardened, fallen, and lost, all mankind "must unavoidably perish" except for the atonement of Christ. [^125]

Â The Atonement must be a "great" sacrifice as well as a "last" sacrifice. It cannot be a sacrifice of fowl or beast. It must be "infinite and eternal." [^126]

Â No mortal can sacrifice his or her own blood and have it redemptively atone for the sins of another. Thus the Atonement must be infinite not only in its scope but also in the godly being of the one making it. [^127]

Â This great and last sacrifice would be divine. It would be the Son of God who, like his sacrifice, would himself be "infinite and eternal." [^128]

Â With this sacrifice the law of Moses would be fulfilled, and symbolic blood sacrifice would end. [^129]

Â The whole meaning of the law of Moses was to point toward Christ, "that great and last sacrifice." [^130]

Â The intent of this last sacrifice would be to "bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice," providing a way for mortals to have "faith unto repentance." [^131]

Â Prayer is the way we begin to exercise faith unto repentance. We begin by calling upon God to have mercy upon us. [^132]

Â That prayer for mercy from God will be in vain if we "do not remember to be charitable" to those who need mercy from us—the needy, the naked, the sick, and the afflicted. [^133]

Â Those who do not procrastinate the day of their repentance will have "their garments . . . made white through the blood of the Lamb." [^134]

Â The holy scriptures testify of these things, providing "so many witnesses." [^135]

Amulek concluded his testimony declaring to non-believers that they should work out their salvation with fear before God, no more denying the coming of the Savior. They should, he said, "contend no more against the Holy Ghost, but . . . receive it, and take upon you the name of Christ." [^136]

Alma to His Sons

Most of Alma's commission to his sons is included in material examined elsewhere in this book, but in addition, Alma did direct Helaman to "preach unto [the people] repentance, and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ; teach them to humble themselves and to be meek and lowly in heart; teach them to withstand every temptation of the devil, with their faith on the Lord Jesus Christ." [^137]

To Shiblon he said, "I was three days and three nights in the most bitter pain and anguish of soul; and never, until I did cry out unto the Lord Jesus Christ for mercy, did I receive a remission of my sins. But behold, I did cry unto him and I did find peace to my soul. . . .

"Ye may learn of me that there is no other way or means whereby man can be saved, only in and through Christ. Behold, he is the life and the light of the world. Behold, he is the word of truth and righteousness." [^138]

And to Corianton he stressed, "I would say somewhat unto you concerning the coming of Christ. Behold, I say unto you, that it is he that surely shall come to take away the sins of the world; yea, he cometh to declare glad tidings of salvation unto his people. . . .

"And now I will ease your mind somewhat on this subject. Behold, you marvel why these things should be known so long beforehand. Behold, I say unto you, is not a soul at this time as precious unto God as a soul will be at the time of his coming?

"Is it not as necessary that the plan of redemption should be made known unto this people as well as unto their children?

"Is it not as easy at this time for the Lord to send his angel to declare these glad tidings unto us as unto our children, or as after the time of his coming?" [^139]

Whatever else the Book of Mormon makes clear, it makes clear that every soul in every dispensation is precious to God, and therefore no age or era was—or is—left without its witness of Christ. Surely it is "necessary that the plan of redemption should be made known to [all] people."

Captain Moroni

Following the departure of Alma, problems increased in Nephite society, and the adversary's influence became more and more manifest prior to Christ's advent among them. As a military leader, Captain Moroni built an entire military philosophy around his unwavering commitment to Christ. To his dissenting antagonist Amalickiah, Moroni said, "Ye behold that the Lord is with us; and ye behold that he has delivered you into our hands. And now I would that ye should understand that this is done unto us because of our religion and our faith in Christ. And now ye see that ye cannot destroy this our faith.

"Now ye see that this is the true faith of God; yea, ye see that God will support, and keep, and preserve us, so long as we are faithful unto him, and unto our faith, and our religion; and never will the Lord suffer that we shall be destroyed except we should fall into transgression and deny our faith." [^140]

In faithful response to his religious belief and military duty, Captain Moroni prayed mightily unto his God for the bless-ings of liberty to rest upon his brethren, so long as a band of Christians should remain to possess the land—

"For thus were all the true believers of Christ, who belonged to the church of God, called by those who did not belong to the church.

"And those who did belong to the church were faithful; yea, all those who were true believers in Christ took upon them, gladly, the name of Christ, or Christians as they were called, because of their belief in Christ who should come."

Of these Moroni said, "Surely God shall not suffer that we, who are despised because we take upon us the name of Christ, shall be trodden down and destroyed, until we bring it upon us by our own transgressions. . . .

"Rending their garments in token, or as a covenant, that they would not forsake the Lord their God; or, in other words, if they should transgress the commandments of God, or fall into transgression, and be ashamed to take upon them the name of Christ, the Lord should rend them even as they had rent their garments."

As in other battles in other lands, many of these men died and "went out of the world rejoicing," [^141] knowing firmly that their souls had been redeemed by the Lord Jesus Christ, whose name they had taken upon themselves and whose gospel they had tried to defend.

Nephi and Lehi

Soon two marvelous brothers—great-grandsons of Alma the Younger—introduced an era of tremendous growth in faith prior to Christ's birth, a period when "tens of thousands" joined the church. Reading as he did of Nephi and Lehi's success, Mormon editorialized regarding the resolute "man [or woman] of Christ," they who grasp the iron rod and safely walk the way of life, triumphing over Lucifer's deception and efforts to destroy, claiming in the end the principalities and powers promised to the heirs of the covenant.

In this stirring passage he wrote, "Thus we see that the gate of heaven is open unto all, even to those who will believe on the name of Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God.

"Yea, we see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—

"And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out." [^142]

Although others were lifted up in pride and the great success of the church began to falter, nevertheless Nephi and Lehi "did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God." [^143]

As a constant reminder and guide for their actions, these brothers had in their hearts the words of their father, Helaman, who, in the spirit of the "man of Christ" declaration, had reminded them that "there is no other means whereby man can be saved, only through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, who shall come; yea remember that he cometh to redeem the world. . . .

"Remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." [^144]

As the advent of Christ approached, social disorder increased, with burgeoning warfare, murder, and political disarray. To counter this trend and give hope, Nephi invoked the ancient teachings his people knew so well, testifying of these problems and the coming of the Messiah who would resolve them.

To the corrupt judges who were steadily destroying Nephite society, Nephi gave an overview and summary of just how extensively the early prophets "knew of Christ." He said, "Ye not only deny my words, but ye also deny all the words which have been spoken by our fathers, and also the words which were spoken by this man, Moses, who had such great power given unto him, yea, the words which he hath spoken concerning the coming of the Messiah.

"Yea, did he not bear record that the Son of God should come? And as he lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come.

"And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal.

"And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things, but also all the holy prophets, from his days even to the days of Abraham.

"Yea, and behold, Abraham saw of his coming, and was filled with gladness and did rejoice.

"Yea, and behold I say unto you, that Abraham not only knew of these things, but there were many before the days of Abraham who were called by the order of God; yea, even after the order of his Son; and this that it should be shown unto the people, a great many thousand years before his coming, that even redemption should come unto them.

"And now I would that ye should know, that even since the days of Abraham there have been many prophets that have testified these things; yea, behold, the prophet Zenos did testify boldly; for the which he was slain.

"And behold, also Zenock, and also Ezias, and also Isaiah, and Jeremiah. . . .

"Our father Lehi was driven out of Jerusalem because he testified of these things. Nephi also testified of these things, and also almost all of our fathers, even down to this time; yea, they have testified of the coming of Christ, and have looked forward, and have rejoiced in his day which is to come." [^145]

Samuel the Lamanite

The degree to which social and religious disorder had come to the Nephites is evidenced by the appearance of a Lamanite—traditionally the people who had been the object, not the source, of such preaching—to call the Nephite people to repentance. Openly rejected in the land of Zarahemla, Samuel responded to the voice of the Lord, climbed upon the wall surrounding the city, and "prophesied unto the people whatsoever things the Lord put into his heart." [^146]

One of the things the Lord put into his heart was to warn the people of a "heavy destruction" that awaited them if they did not change their ways. "Nothing can save this people," Samuel shouted from his place upon the wall, "save it be repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, who surely shall come into the world, and shall suffer many things and shall be slain for his people." [^147]

Of this coming—then just five years away—Samuel prophesied of signs and wonders to attend the event, signs and wonders that would be a matter of life and death for the faithful Nephites who would, at the peril of their life, watch for the fulfillment of these promises. [^148]

Samuel prophesied that at the time of Christ's birth a new star would appear in the heavens over the New World, just as it would in the Old, but that there would be additional signs and wonders for these Nephites. "There shall be great lights in heaven," Samuel said, "insomuch that in the night before he cometh there shall be no darkness, insomuch that it shall appear unto man as if it was day." This would be so vivid, Samuel promised, that the people would watch the rising and the setting of the sun but "the night [would] not be darkened," so that a day, a night, and a second day would be uninterrupted by any dimming of the light. This was to be the principal manifestation in a time of "many signs and wonders in heaven" that the Light of the World, the Bright and Morning Star, he whose glory is above the brightness of the sun, had been born into mortality. [^149]

Although the unbelieving Nephites did not take kindly to this bold Lamanite, nevertheless Samuel continued with his message, a message with even more portent for the wicked. Having prophesied of the wonders of Christ's birth and the opportunity "Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and of earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning" would bring for a remission of sins "through his merits," Samuel spoke more ominously of Christ's death.

That death would be necessary so that "salvation [might] come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the Lord[,] . . . redeem[ing] all mankind from the first death—that spiritual death . . . the fall of Adam." [^150]

Lest a second, spiritual death then come after the Resurrection, a final judgment upon the unrepentant that would see them "cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness," [^151] Samuel pleaded for a change of heart among the people. If there was no change, he warned, then the signs and wonders of Christ's death would have even more fateful meaning for them than the signs and wonders of his birth.

As the Light and Life of the world was extinguished, Samuel prophesied, "the sun [would] be darkened and refuse to give his light." [^152] So too would the moon and the stars be hidden. For the three days of the Savior's death and entombment, there would be no light upon the face of the New World. At the actual moment of his death, there would be thunderings and lightnings for the space of many hours. The earth would shake and tremble. Rocks above and beneath the earth—even those formations considered to be a solid mass—would be fractured.

Mountains would be laid low like valleys, and valleys would become mountains of great height. Highways would be broken up and cities be made desolate. Women with child would find no place of refuge; they would "be heavy and cannot flee; therefore, they [would] be trodden down and . . . left to perish." [^153] As the prophet Zenos had said of such destruction in his own prophecy long before Samuel's, "The God of nature suffers." [^154]

Some few Nephites believed Samuel's words (at least partly because they could not seem to hit him with their stones and arrows) and slipped away to be baptized by Nephi, who was still busy "baptizing, and prophesying, and preaching, crying repentance unto the people, showing signs and wonders, working miracles among the people, that they might know that the Christ must shortly come." [^155] But the greater part of the people in Zarahemla rejected the prophet and his message, and there was, in a marvelous line from Mormon, "but little alteration in the affairs of the people." [^156]

So in the shadow of Christ's advent, the mission that was to bring One to do what no living man, woman, or child could do for themselves, the rebellious among the Nephites and Lamanites began to do exactly what the atonement of Christ declared they should not do—they "began to depend upon their own strength and upon their own wisdom. . . .

"And they began to reason and to contend among themselves, saying . . . it is not reasonable that such a being as a Christ shall come." [^157]

Worse than not being "reasonable" (which, by definition, miracles never can be), the prophecy of Christ's coming struck at an even more painful part of the Nephite psyche—their vanity. "This is a wicked tradition," they said, "which has been handed down unto us by our fathers, to cause us that we should believe in some great and marvelous thing which should come to pass, but not among us, but in a land which is far distant, a land which we know not; therefore they can keep us in ignorance, for we cannot witness with our own eyes that they are true." [^158]

This was all a plot, a scheme by a group of unpatriotic renegades who "may have guessed right" on a few miracles, they said. These prophetic enemies of reason and local pride wanted to work "some great mystery" that they could not understand, that would keep them in bondage and ignorance and dependence upon them forever, they said. "And many more things did the people imagine up in their hearts, which were foolish and vain." [^159]

Imaginations? Foolishness? Vanity? And so the pre-advent of Christ closes in the Book of Mormon with the realization of Father Lehi's dream that began it. In an endless sequence of prophetic declarations of Christ—declarations of "all the holy prophets" for "a great many thousand years before his coming" [^160]—the Book of Mormon makes the repeated and divine assertion that Jesus is the Christ, that he is the way of salvation and no other, that his gospel "is the most desirable above all things . . . yea, and the most joyous to the soul." "We knew of Christ," all these ancient prophets said, and yet, from 600 b.c. and Lehi's flight from Jerusalem to the very eve of the birth of Christ 406 pages later, the challenge to safety and salvation, to faith and righteousness and the fruit of the tree of life is the same:

"The multitude of the earth was gathered together; and I beheld that they were in a large and spacious building. . . . And the angel of the Lord spake unto me again, saying: Behold the world and the wisdom thereof. . . . I saw and bear record, that the great and spacious building was the pride of the world[,] . . . vain imaginations and the pride of the children of men." [^161]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Alma 34:2.
[^2] 1 Nephi 19:18-21.
[^3] See 2 Nephi 10:3; 25:19.
[^4] 2 Nephi 25:19.
[^5] Jacob 4:4-6.
[^6] Jacob 6:8.
[^7] Jacob 7:2.
[^8] Jacob 7:3-4, 6-7.
[^9] Jacob 7:10-11.
[^10] Jacob 7:17, 19.
[^11] Enos 1:8.
[^12] Jarom 1:11.
[^13] Omni 1:25-26.
[^14] Mosiah 3:1.
[^15] Mosiah 3:5.
[^16] Mosiah 3:5-6.
[^17] Mosiah 3:7.
[^18] See Mosiah 3:7.
[^19] See Mosiah 3:8.
[^20] See Mosiah 3:8.
[^21] See Mosiah 3:9.
[^22] Mosiah 3:10.
[^23] Mosiah 3:10.
[^24] Mosiah 3:11.
[^25] Mosiah 3:12.
[^26] Mosiah 3:15.
[^27] Mosiah 3:17.
[^28] Mosiah 3:18.
[^29] Mosiah 3:19-21.
[^30] Mosiah 3:13.
[^31] Mosiah 4:2-3. As noted throughout the Book of Mormon, the timeless, infinite, eternal nature of the Atonement provides promise of a remission of sins to the faithful, whether they live before Christ's advent, during his earthly ministry, or after his death and resurrection. This is a reminder of the eternal reach of the Atonement, each dispensation (including those before Christ's advent) making their covenants, obtaining their blessings, and working out their salvation. These prophets, priests, and teachers labored to teach people the intent for which the Law of Moses had been given, "persuading them to look forward unto the Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was." (Jarom 1:11.)
[^32] Mosiah 5:2, 5.
[^33] Mosiah 5:7.
[^34] Mosiah 5:8, 12, 15.
[^35] Mosiah 6:1-2.
[^36] Mosiah 13:33-35.
[^37] Mosiah 13:28; see also Mosiah 13:34; 15:1; 17:8; Alma 42:15.
[^38] See Mosiah 15:2-7.
[^39] See Mosiah 13:31; 16:14.
[^40] See Mosiah 15:5.
[^41] See Mosiah 15:5.
[^42] Mosiah 15:6-7.
[^43] Mosiah 15:8-9.
[^44] See Mosiah 15:9.
[^45] Mosiah 15:11-12.
[^46] See Mosiah 15:19.
[^47] Mosiah 15:21-25.
[^48] See Mosiah 15:26.
[^49] Mosiah 15:11.
[^50] Mosiah 16:6-9, 15.
[^51] See Mosiah 18:8.
[^52] See Mosiah 18:8.
[^53] See Mosiah 18:8.
[^54] See Mosiah 18:9.
[^55] See Mosiah 18:9.
[^56] See Mosiah 18:9.
[^57] See Mosiah 18:10.
[^58] See Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, 3rd ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1988), pp. 157-66; Mosiah 25:21-23; 18:17.
[^59] Mosiah 18:20-29.
[^60] Mosiah 26:18, 22-24, 26.
[^61] Mosiah 27:20.
[^62] Mosiah 27:24-31.
[^63] Alma 36:12, 14-15.
[^64] Alma 36:17-18.
[^65] Alma 36:20-21, 24-26.
[^66] Alma 36:3.
[^67] Alma 36:27.
[^68] Mosiah 27:30.
[^69] Alma 5:14-15, 21, 27, 38, 44, 48.
[^70] Alma 6:8.
[^71] Alma 7:7.
[^72] Alma 7:9.
[^73] Alma 7:11-13.
[^74] Alma 7:14-15.
[^75] Psalm 23:3, 6.
[^76] Alma 9:26.
[^77] See Alma 9:26.
[^78] See Alma 9:27.
[^79] Alma 11:37; Helaman 5:10.
[^80] Alma 11:39.
[^81] Alma 11:40.
[^82] Alma 11:41.
[^83] Alma 11:43-44.
[^84] Alma 11:43.
[^85] Alma 11:45.
[^86] See Alma 12:14.
[^87] Alma 12:16-17.
[^88] See Alma 12:18.
[^89] Alma 12:24; see also v. 22.
[^90] Alma 12:26.
[^91] Alma 12:30.
[^92] See Alma 12:32.
[^93] Alma 12:33.
[^94] Alma 12:36-37.
[^95] Alma 13:1; see also vv. 2-3, 7-11, 16-18.
[^96] Alma 13:23.
[^97] See Alma 13:24-26.
[^98] Alma 14:26, 28.
[^99] Alma 15:6-12.
[^100] Alma 16:16, 19-20.
[^101] 101. Alma 18:39.
[^102] 102. Alma 18:41.
[^103] 103. Alma 19:13.
[^104] 104. Alma 19:29.
[^105] 105. Alma 19:6.
[^106] 106. Alma 21:7-9.
[^107] 107. Alma 22:13-14.
[^108] 108. Alma 24:10.
[^109] 109. Alma 24:13.
[^110] 110. Alma 27:27-28.
[^111] 111. Alma 30:6, 12-13, 15.
[^112] 112. Alma 30:16-17; 30:31, 27; see also vv. 28-30.
[^113] 113. Alma 30:22.
[^114] 114. Alma 30:39, 41; 2 Nephi 11:4.
[^115] 115. Alma 31:1, 22, 18, 17, 23, 19.
[^116] 116. Alma 31:30-34.
[^117] 117. Alma 31:38.
[^118] 118. Alma 33:11.
[^119] 119. Alma 33:14-19, 22-23.
[^120] 120. Alma 34:2, 5-6.
[^121] 121. See Alma 8:20, 27; 10:6-10.
[^122] 122. Alma 34:4; see also 32:28-43; 33:19, 23.
[^123] 123. Alma 34:8.
[^124] 124. See Alma 34:8.
[^125] 125. Alma 34:9.
[^126] 126. Alma 34:10.
[^127] 127. See Alma 34:11.
[^128] 128. Alma 34:14.
[^129] 129. See Alma 34:13.
[^130] 130. Alma 34:14.
[^131] 131. Alma 34:15-16.
[^132] 132. See Alma 34:17.
[^133] 133. Alma 34:28-29.
[^134] 134. Alma 34:36.
[^135] 135. Alma 34:30.
[^136] 136. Alma 34:37-38.
[^137] 137. Alma 37:33.
[^138] 138. Alma 38:8-9.
[^139] 139. Alma 39:15-19.
[^140] 140. Alma 44:3-4.
[^141] 141. Alma 46:13-16, 18, 21, 39.
[^142] 142. Helaman 3:28-30.
[^143] 143. Helaman 3:35.
[^144] 144. Helaman 5:12; see also v. 9.
[^145] 145. Helaman 8:13-20, 22-23.
[^146] 146. Helaman 13:4.
[^147] 147. Helaman 13:6.
[^148] 148. See 3 Nephi 1:4-21.
[^149] 149. Helaman 14:3-6.
[^150] 150. Helaman 14:12-13, 15-16.
[^151] 151. Helaman 14:18.
[^152] 152. Helaman 14:20.
[^153] 153. Helaman 15:2; see also 14:20-31.
[^154] 154. 1 Nephi 19:12.
[^155] 155. Helaman 16:4.
[^156] 156. Helaman 16:12.
[^157] 157. Helaman 16:15, 17-18.
[^158] 158. Helaman 16:20.
[^159] 159. Helaman 16:16, 21-22.
[^160] 160. Jacob 4:4; Helaman 8:18.
[^161] 161. 1 Nephi 11:22-23; Jacob 4:4; 1 Nephi 11:35, 36; 12:18.
