Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

Chapter Seven

Types and Shadows: The Law of Moses

In an early declaration of his prophetic purpose, Nephi wrote, "We did observe to keep the judgments, and the statutes, and the commandments of the Lord in all things, according to the law of Moses. . . . Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him." [^1]

Later, when Nephi was moving toward his final testimony with its majestic declaration of "the doctrine of Christ," he emphasized the fundamental role the law of Moses had among his people and the commitment they had made to live it, even though they knew the gospel of Christ in great detail and taught it to their children unceasingly.

"Notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses," he said, "and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled.

"For, for this end was the law given; wherefore the law hath become dead unto us, and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith; yet we keep the law because of the commandments.

"And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins.

"Wherefore, we speak concerning the law that our children may know the deadness of the law; and they, by knowing the deadness of the law, may look forward unto that life which is in Christ, and know for what end the law was given. And after the law is fulfilled in Christ, that they need not harden their hearts against him when the law ought to be done away. . . .

"And, inasmuch as it shall be expedient, ye must keep the performances and ordinances of God until the law shall be fulfilled which was given unto Moses.

"And after Christ shall have risen from the dead he shall show himself unto you, my children, and my beloved brethren; and [then] the words which he shall speak unto you shall be the law which ye shall do." [^2]

There is neither time nor space in a study of Christ's influence, teachings, and presence in the Book of Mormon to make an exhaustive study of the law of Moses. Nevertheless, it is important to understand that for six hundred years the descendants of Lehi observed the law of Moses and recognized the purposes for which it had been given. In that sense one cannot fully understand the Nephite record or the majesty of Christ and the new covenant it celebrates without at least a passing acknowledgment of the earlier system of laws and observances that led to it.

The law of Moses was, for the rebellious children of Israel, an Elias, a forerunner, a "schoolmaster" to Christ. [^3] And just as John the Baptist (a living Elias and forerunner of Christ) said, "He [Christ and the gospel] must increase, but I [John and the law of Moses] must decrease," [^4] so also is an increase of gospel understanding and a decrease in the significance of the law of Moses seen in the pages of the Book of Mormon.

The modern reader should not see the Mosaic code— anciently or in modern times—as simply a tedious set of religious rituals slavishly (and sometimes militantly) followed by a stiffnecked people who did not accept the Christ and his gospel. This historic covenant, given by the hand of God himself and second only to the fulness of the gospel as an avenue to righteousness, should be seen rather as the unparalleled collection of types, shadows, symbols, and prefigurations of Christ that it is. For that reason it was once (and still is, in its essence and purity) a guide to spirituality, a gateway to Christ, a path of strict commandment-keeping that would, through laws of duty and decency, lead to higher laws of holiness on the way to immortality and eternal life.

Old Testament Similitudes

In teaching this way of statutes and commandments, Jehovah used an abundance of archetypes and symbols. Indeed, these have always been a conspicuous characteristic of the Lord's instruction to his children. Examples of those figures—especially prefigurations of Christ—are present throughout the pre-Messianic record. To Hosea the Lord declared what he had repeatedly done through his chosen oracles on earth: "I have . . . spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets." [^5]

In no ministry did he use similitudes more than in that of Moses, whose law was to serve as the ultimate "shadow of heavenly things" that the precious son of Mary would bring to earth. [^6] Furthermore, Moses (like Isaac, Joseph, and so many others in the Old Testament) was himself a prophetic symbol of the Christ who was to come. As the Father said to him, speaking through Jehovah, "I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth." [^7] We know from the opening pages of the Creation story that all people are created in the image of God. [^8] But from other scriptural sources, especially the following passage from the book of Deuteronomy, we learn there was something special in the similarity between Moses and Christ. As the children of Israel were fleeing Egypt and making their way to the promised land (note the Messianic prefiguration of delivering, of saving, of rescuing a covenant people from the sins and evils of the unbelieving world), Moses told them:

"The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken. . . .

"And the Lord said unto me, . . .

"I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.

"And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him." [^9]

This Prophet—note the upper case P in the text—who would be raised up like unto Moses is, of course, Jesus Christ. As the footnotes in the LDS edition of the scriptures indicate, this passage from Deuteronomy is quoted, with some variation, twice in the New Testament, twice in the Book of Mormon, and once in the Pearl of Great Price. In every instance, those references make it clear that Christ is the future prophet to whom they refer. The earliest of those declarations comes from Nephi, who said, "This prophet of whom Moses spake was the Holy One of Israel; wherefore, he shall execute judgment in righteousness." [^10] Not surprisingly, the most authoritative declaration of this truth also comes in the Book of Mormon from the lips of the resurrected Savior himself. To the Nephites gathered at his feet, Christ said,

"Behold, I am he of whom Moses spake, saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people." [^11]

Surely that is one of the reasons Jesus was so disappointed, not only that his Jewish audience did not recognize him, but also that they used their distorted interpretations of the law of Moses against him in denying his Messianic ministry. With great regret he said to them, "Search the scriptures [including and especially the writings of Moses]; . . . they are they which testify of me. . . . I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not. . . . Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" [^12]

Nephi taught the same lesson to his own "stiffnecked people." Speaking so plainly "that [they could not] misunderstand," he said to these Israelites in the New World, "The right way is to believe in Christ and deny him not; for by denying him ye also deny the prophets and the law." [^13]

That underscores yet another divine purpose served by the Book of Mormon. It is a second witness from the Old Testament period of the true worth and original intent of the law of Moses and the positive influence it can have on a people who obey it. Nephi and his fellow prophets knew that salvation was not in the law, but they also understood the importance of obeying it in order to realize the full benefit of Christ's earthly mission to fulfill it, wherein salvation did come. The first law of heaven is obedience, and every dispensation of truth has required such. Certainly the fulness of the gospel requires commandment-keeping every bit as much as the lesser law of Moses, so notwithstanding their greater understanding of the gospel, the Nephite prophets and parents were determined to "keep the law because of the commandments" if only out of sheer loyalty to the principles of obedience and integrity. [^14]

In fact, the Book of Mormon does more to bridge dispensations and put the law of Moses in its true perspective—that is, to clarify and emphasize its relationship to the gospel of Jesus Christ—than any other book available, linking in one document a people who understood and loyally obeyed the many codes and covenants traditionally seen as "Old Testament" even as they taught and lived with great devotion those higher teachings of Christ usually identified as "New Testament" in their orientation.

Elements of the Law

The law of Moses consists generally of the material contained in the first five books of the Old Testament, known to the Jews as the Torah and to the rest of the world as the Pentateuch, material that was available to the Nephite writers because they were included on the brass plates obtained from Laban before Lehi and his family left the Old World. [^15] But this is not always a useful definition.

For one thing, the book of Genesis precedes the Mosaic period and therefore the Mosaic commandments. It documents several dispensations that lived by the light of the higher teachings of the gospel and that do not historically or theologically fit within the "very strict law . . . of performances and of ordinances" traditionally associated with the law of Moses. [^16]

Second, the law of Moses as it is known today consists of a rather loose and sometimes seemingly unrelated collection of prescriptions, proscriptions, observations, and rituals that are not structured in the coherent and codified way that we think of "law" in the modern sense.

Finally, a great deal of material, primarily rabbinic refinement and commentary on the original Mosaic writings, has been added to the original law of Moses. In fact, so much was added in the first millennium of its existence, and so obscure became its original requirements even in that relatively brief period of time, that while living in mortality he who had given the law in its purity was repeatedly accused of breaking some minute aspect of it. This complexity in and occasional confusion about the development of the Mosaic code as presently taught poses challenges for the student of the testaments—Old, New, and Nephite—even today.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie outlined the dilemma this way:

"We cannot always tell . . . whether specific sacrificial rites performed in Israel were part of the Mosaic system or whether they were the same ordinances performed by Adam and Abraham as part of the gospel law itself. Further, it appears that some of the ritualistic performances varied from time to time, according to the special needs of the people and the changing circumstances in which they found themselves. Even the Book of Mormon does not help us in these respects. We know the Nephites offered sacrifices and kept the law of Moses. Since they held the Melchizedek Priesthood and there were no Levites among them, we suppose their sacrifices were those that antedated the ministry of Moses and that, since they had the fulness of the gospel itself, they kept the law of Moses in the sense that they conformed to its myriad moral principles and its endless ethical restrictions. We suppose this would be one of the reasons Nephi was able to say, 'The law hath become dead unto us.' [^17] There is, at least, no intimation in the Book of Mormon that the Nephites offered the daily sacrifices required by the law or that they held the various feasts that were part of the religious life of their Old World kinsmen." [^18]

In any case, the original writings of Moses are seen rabbinically to contain some 613 commandments—roughly falling into two broad categories of moral and ethical laws, plus ceremonial and regulatory statutes—covering topics ranging from the role of the priesthood to the specifications for the Tabernacle to the prohibition against certain foods to the management of agricultural endeavors, ad infinitum. These laws and directives provided the religious, civil, and criminal code for virtually all Jewish people at least until the Dispersion in the first century after Christ and for the orthodox portion of that people for two millennia since then. Furthermore, this ancient code and the Old Testament in which it is recorded has had a profound effect upon the social, cultural, and religious life of virtually all people living in the larger Western (Judeo-Christian) world for more than three thousand years. Its influence and significance can scarcely be overstated.

Melchizedek Priesthood

Latter-day revelation makes it clear that Moses and the prophets before him had Melchizedek Priesthood power and participated in the higher, gospel-related, temple-linked ordinances that attend it. Section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants, one of the greatest declarations on priesthood ever given, records that "Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek," noting that such priesthood had come down to Melchizedek from Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah, and the lineage of the "fathers":

"And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

"Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

"And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

"For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." [^19]

Then the revelation notes that "this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God." [^20] Clearly these people had access to the ordinances and authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood, with its gospel orientation, in order to pursue such sanctification.

"But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

"Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

"And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

"Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb." [^21]

This marvelously revealing passage of scripture notes that something was taken from the children of Israel (the Melchizedek Priesthood with its higher, gospel-oriented, temple-linked principles and privileges), while the essential elements of what we often call the law of Moses continued with them under the keys and guidance of the Aaronic or "lesser" priesthood, which is basic to the "preparatory gospel." This preparation for the fulness of the gospel includes having faith, showing repentance, and submitting to baptism—principles and ordinances taught by and performed under the Aaronic Priesthood. Through their disobedience and hardheartedness the children of Israel lost the higher gospel and were left with a lesser portion of it that would prepare them to receive again the greater good and the higher law their forebears had enjoyed.

Regarding this loss, most readers are familiar with Moses' visit to the summit of Sinai, where he received the first set of stone tablets written by the very finger of God. It is important to realize, particularly in light of the passages above, that there was considerably more on those tablets than the Ten Commandments. When Moses descended the mountain and found some of his people in naked, riotous activity worshiping a golden calf, he was furious. The contrast between what he had just seen, heard, and felt in the presence of the Lord compared with the debauchery and idol worship he now witnessed must have been devastating in the extreme. Furthermore, such an extreme difference between what was and what could have been helps us understand the severity of the penalty the Israelites paid in losing for well over a thousand years the priesthood, gospel, and temple blessings they could have enjoyed in abundance.

Shattering the stone tablets at his feet, Moses disciplined the openly rebellious Israelites in some severity. Sometime later, he hewed out two new tables of stone "like unto the first" and returned to the summit of Sinai to receive new instructions of the Lord. There Jehovah gave Moses the same commandments recorded on the first tablets—but with a crucial element omitted. For the clearest delineation of this loss, we are indebted to Joseph Smith's translation of Exodus 34. [^22] Note the comparison:

Joseph Smith Translation (JST) 1. And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them.King James 1. And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.2. But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage. Therefore do as I have commanded thee, and be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me, in the top of the mount.2. And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

Clearly some of what was originally contained on the first set of tablets was written again on the second (the Ten Commandments, for example.) But it is much more important to note that vital doctrines upon the first set—specifically, the ordinances of the higher priesthood—were omitted from the second. Such a contribution from the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible is further acknowledged in this passage from Deuteronomy 10:2:

JST 2. And I will write on the tables the words that were on the first tables, which thou breakest, save the words of the everlasting covenant of the holy priesthood, and thou shalt put them in the ark.King James 2. And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.

Performances and Ordinances

Even with the loss of such vital information, it is important to see the remaining covenant, what survived the wrath of Sinai as the law of Moses (variously described as Mosaic, Aaronic, lesser, preparatory, carnal, or outward) in the true light it deserves and the strict obedience with which the Nephites observed it.

This "law of Moses" under which the Israelites continued from Moses' day onward included faith, repentance, and baptism, along with a host of other "performances and ordinances" such as sacrifices and offerings that were directly linked with the future atonement of Christ and were meant to be in every way "a similitude of him."

To get his sometimes disobedient children to understand the Atonement and the fundamental importance of first principles, Jehovah added to the standard gospel message (taught from the days of Adam down to Moses) what is now spoken of as "carnal commandments." [^23] These were added as reminders, exercises, preparations stressing a return to first principles of the gospel. This basic code that remained with the children of Israel, this preparatory gospel built upon a law of carnal commandments, is what is now called the law of Moses. Principles of the truth that had been with the Israelites before the addition of the carnal commandments and that continued after these were added included the principles of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, the Ten Commandments, various offerings symbolic of Christ's atonement, and the law of the covenant. Elements added or amplified included other "performances and ordinances" such as dietary restrictions, purification rituals, and additional offerings. Other additions included the preparation of clothing, the planting of crops, and additional social obligations. These were all intended to reinforce self-control and create greater self-discipline (obedience) in the lives of the children of Israel so they could reclaim the higher promises, principles, and priesthood that had been enjoyed by their forebears.

Thus it is crucial to understand that the law of Moses was overlaid upon, and thereby included, many basic parts of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which had existed before it. It was never intended to be something apart or separated from, and certainly not something antagonistic to, the gospel of Jesus Christ. It was more elementary than the full gospel—thus its schoolmaster's role in bringing people to the gospel—but its purpose was never to have been different from the higher law. Both were to bring people to Christ.

In this spirit it is equally important to note what the law of Moses was not. We can be certain that Jesus was perfectly obedient to the spirit and the letter of the law of Moses. It was the law of the "church" and the law of his people during his lifetime. It was spiritually based, it had fundamental elements of the gospel, and in its purity it was to lead to the holier law and the higher priesthood. But he did not feel obliged to abide by the myriad additions, addendums, commentaries, and ultimately false insertions into the law that had been added in more than a thousand years of what was at best uninspired argument and at worst flagrant apostasy. The Torah, or five books of Moses, would have been perfectly known and accepted by Christ, at least in their pure and original form. What would give him grief would be the instructions and traditions added to the Torah. These instructions and traditions came, in time, to be known as the Talmud (authoritative traditions comprising the Mishnah and Gemara) and even what would become the haggadic midrash (rabbinic commentary) of later periods. When Jesus was in conflict with the scribes and Pharisees of his day—as he so frequently was—it was over these additions and embellishments of the law of Moses, not the law itself.

Perhaps one reason the Nephites kept the spirit and purpose of the law of Moses was that they had priesthood and prophets who safegaurded the doctrines. But in Book of Mormon times there were also those who misunderstood and distorted the law of Moses. We have noted earlier that in the first generation of Nephite experience, Sherem, the first of the anti-Christs in the Book of Mormon, used the law of Moses (as he erroneously viewed it) to strike out against Jacob and his prophetic teachings of Christ.

To Jacob, Sherem said, "Ye have led away much of this people that they pervert the right way of God, and keep not the law of Moses which is the right way; and convert the law of Moses into the worship of a being which ye say shall come many hundred years hence." [^24]

Unfortunately, the dishonest Sherem knew that Moses and the other prophets had spoken of Christ and that their teachings were not only consistent with the gospel but also pointed people toward its future fulness. On his deathbed he "confessed the Christ" and lamented, "I fear lest I have committed the unpardonable sin, for I have lied unto God; for I denied the Christ, and said that I believed the scriptures; and they truly testify of him." [^25]

And it was Jacob's grandson, Jarom, who noted that "the prophets, and the priests, and the teachers, did labor diligently, exhorting with all long-suffering the people to diligence; teaching the law of Moses, and the intent for which it was given; persuading them to look forward unto the Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was." [^26]

Preceding chapters of this book note the degree to which the Nephite prophets knew and taught the life and mission of Christ. For Israelites in both the Old and New Worlds the law of Moses was given to overcome the stiffnecked obstinance of people like the anti-Christ Sherem.

"And many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows showed he unto them, concerning his coming," King Benjamin said of Jehovah's use of the law of Moses and other divine declarations. "And yet they hardened their hearts, and understood not that the law of Moses availeth nothing except it were through the atonement of his blood." [^27]

Abinadi and the Law

It is in the brief but compelling ministry of Abinadi that the relationship between the law of Moses and the gospel of Christ is most thoroughly and tellingly explained. A prophet of unknown origin and background, Abinadi stepped forward in response to God's call and confronted the apostate, profligate King Noah. Abinadi was fearless and true, without artifice or concern for the personal danger his boldness might generate.

Standing captive before the king and his court, Abinadi defied their attempts to confuse and contradict him, thereby avoiding their effort to find grounds whereby they could condemn him: "He answered them boldly, and withstood all their questions, yea, to their astonishment; for he did withstand them in all their questions, and did confound them in all their words." [^28] He confounded them by teaching the law of Moses as they should have understood it:

"Ye have not applied your hearts to understanding; therefore, ye have not been wise. Therefore, what teach ye this people?

"And they said: We teach the law of Moses.

"And again he said unto them: If ye teach the law of Moses why do ye not keep it? . . .

"And it shall come to pass that ye shall be smitten for your iniquities, for ye have said that ye teach the law of Moses. And what know ye concerning the law of Moses? Doth salvation come by the law of Moses? What say ye?

"And they answered and said that salvation did come by the law of Moses." [^29]

Obviously that is an erroneous answer and could have drawn a sharp, immediate denial from Abinadi. But he did something much more fascinating and subtle. He appeared almost to agree with them, a tactic that both elevated the stature of the law and trapped them in their abominations. In answer to their reply that salvation did come by the law, Abinadi replied that they were partially correct—that ultimately salvation is in obedience to the laws and commandments God gives, inasmuch as only the obedient shall eat the fruit of salvation in the last days: "Abinadi said unto them: I know if ye keep the commandments of God ye shall be saved; yea, if ye keep the commandments which the Lord delivered unto Moses in the mount of Sinai." [^30]

He then reviewed the Ten Commandments with genuine power and authority, including the manifestation of the Spirit of the Lord, which strengthened him physically and shone radiantly upon his face, just as it had the face of Moses when he received those same commandments. [^31]

After rehearsing the decalogue in detail, Abinadi asked King Noah, "Have ye taught this people that they should observe to do all these things for to keep these commandments?" Then he answered his own question: "I say unto you, Nay; for if ye had, the Lord would not have caused me to come forth and to prophesy evil concerning this people." [^32]

It is as if to say that while the law of Moses (or the Ten Commandments, which are central to it and the gospel) are not sufficient to save, they can lead toward salvation and later recognition of the greater truths of which they are an essential part. If King Noah or his people had sufficiently kept the law of Moses, it would have been enough—or at least acceptable—for that day and time, and probably no divine reprimand would have been forthcoming. But they failed even in this lesser portion of the divine decree and did not lay claim even to that preliminary path to salvation for which the law of Moses was given.

To those holding him captive Abinadi said, "Ye have said that salvation cometh by the law of Moses. I say unto you that it is expedient that ye should keep the law of Moses as yet; but I say unto you, that the time shall come when it shall no more be expedient to keep the law of Moses.

"And moreover, I say unto you, that salvation doth not come by the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people, that they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses.

"And now I say unto you that it was expedient that there should be a law given to the children of Israel, yea, even a very strict law; for they were a stiffnecked people, quick to do iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their God;

"Therefore there was a law given them, yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him.

"But behold, I say unto you, that all these things were types of things to come." [^33]

At that point Abinadi noted just how prescriptive—and descriptive—the law of Moses had been, reminding them that "Moses . . . and . . . all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began—have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?"—specifically that "God should redeem his people," that "God himself" would come down from heaven, take upon himself by birth the form of a man, and "go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth." [^34]

To reinforce that declaration Abinadi quoted the 53rd chapter of Isaiah—surely the most powerful and extended passage regarding Christ in all the Old Testament—developing the symbolism of the Savior not so much as a shepherd but as a sheep. [^35]

At that point Abinadi declared deep doctrine no longer found in the Old Testament or traditionally linked with the law of Moses in present times. He spoke of Christ's role as both Father and Son, of the Son's atoning intercession with the Father on behalf of the human family, of Christ's ability to insert mercy between the people and the demands of justice, of the "seed" of Christ as those for whom the Atonement is fully efficacious, and of the Resurrection, including those entitled to the first resurrection. With great power and authority he spoke of the need to declare these truths to "every nation, kindred, tongue, and people" by the watchmen of God who would sing the song of redeeming love and whose feet would be so beautiful upon the mountain of the Lord. [^36]

At that crescendo of doctrine and testimony on the Atonement, Resurrection, and Final Judgment, Abinadi closed his remarkable theological discourse.

Noting that many in that final day would go according to their "own carnal wills and desires," repenting not and resisting the arms of divine mercy that were extended to them, he said:

"And now, ought ye not to tremble and repent of your sins, and remember that only in and through Christ ye can be saved?

"Therefore, if ye teach the law of Moses, also teach that it is a shadow of those things which are to come—

"Teach them that redemption cometh through Christ the Lord, who is the very Eternal Father. Amen." [^37]

In the ultimate offering any prophet of God is capable of making, Abinadi then offered himself to his captors, becoming a type and shadow, a prophetic prefiguration of Christ's sacrifice, to which he had just testified. [^38]

Later, when a large group of Lamanites were converted, they remembered the type and teachings of Abinadi, and immediately "they did keep the law of Moses; for it was expedient that they should keep the law of Moses as yet, for it was not all fulfilled. But notwithstanding the law of Moses, they did look forward to the coming of Christ, considering that the law of Moses was a type of his coming, and believing that they must keep those outward performances until the time that he should be revealed unto them.

"Now they did not suppose that salvation came by the law of Moses; but the law of Moses did serve to strengthen their faith in Christ." [^39]

"In Me Is the Law of Moses Fulfilled"

At approximately the same time these Lamanites were hearing the gospel, Alma and Amulek were teaching the Nephites of the Atonement. In doing so, Alma taught that "redemption cometh through the Son of God, and . . . [he] appealed unto Moses, to prove that these things are true." [^40] Amulek immediately joined in to declare that the significance and symbolism of sacrifice, so central to the law of Moses, are centered in Christ. As a fulfillment of the ancient pattern of sacrifice, Amulek taught, there must be "a great and last sacrifice," following which there should be a "stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away.

"And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice." [^41]

Of course, the adversary, ever anxious to confuse a principle of the gospel, encouraged the Nephites to believe that the law of Moses was fulfilled simply by the birth of Christ rather than by his consummate, fulfilling, atoning sacrifice at the end of his life.

After the day and night and day in which there was no darkness, the sign Samuel the Lamanite had promised, the record says "there were no contentions, save it were a few that began to preach, endeavoring to prove by the scriptures that it was no more expedient to observe the law of Moses. Now in this thing they did err, having not understood the scriptures.

"But it came to pass that they soon became converted, and were convinced of the error which they were in, for it was made known unto them that the law was not yet fulfilled, and that it must be fulfilled in every whit; yea, the word came unto them that it must be fulfilled; yea, that one jot or tittle should not pass away till it should all be fulfilled." [^42]

When the crucifixion, death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ was completed in the Old World, his appearance to the Nephites in the New World was introduced with this declaration from his own lips:

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name.

"I came unto my own, and my own received me not. And the scriptures concerning my coming are fulfilled.

"And as many as have received me, to them have I given to become the sons of God; and even so will I to as many as shall believe on my name, for behold, by me redemption cometh, and in me is the law of Moses fulfilled.

"I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

"And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings.

"And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost." [^43]

Unlike the Israelites in the Old World, the faithful Nephites of the New World found it easier to recognize the return of the higher gospel and thereby let go of the ancient law of Moses. For one thing, they seemed to grasp more readily that Christ had not destroyed the law but fulfilled it—given it breadth, dimension, meaning, and reality, just as a prophecy is spoken of as being "fulfilled." During his first day of teaching the Nephites in the New World, the resurrected Christ was able to teach this doctrine in more detail than he had taught (or at least than it was preserved) among the people of Jerusalem:

"Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets," he said. "I am not come to destroy but to fulfil; for verily I say unto you, one jot nor one tittle hath not passed away from the law, but in me it hath all been fulfilled. And behold, I have given you the law and the commandments of my Father, that ye shall believe in me, and that ye shall repent of your sins, and come unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Behold, ye have the commandments before you, and the law is fulfilled. . . . Therefore those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled. Old things are done away, and all things have become new." [^44]

Following this "sermon at the temple," the Savior gave even more commentary on this crucial transition from old covenant to new. Perceiving that some in the congregation "marveled, and wondered" about Christ's relationship to the law of Moses, "for they understood not the saying that old things had passed away, and that all things had become new," he said, making a distinction between "the law" and "the covenant":

"Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses. Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end. Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be fulfilled. And because I said unto you that old things have passed away, I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things which are to come. For behold, the covenant which I have made with my people is not all fulfilled; but the law which was given unto Moses hath an end in me. Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life. Behold, I have given unto you the commandments; therefore keep my commandments. And this is the law and the prophets, for they truly testified of me." [^45]

Clearly the Nephite congregation understood this more readily than did the Jewish world, partly because the Nephite prophets had been so careful to teach the transitional nature of the law. Abinadi had said, "It is expedient that ye should keep the law of Moses as yet; but I say unto you, that the time shall come when it shall no more be expedient to keep the law of Moses." [^46] In that same spirit Nephi emphasized, "We speak concerning the law that our children may know the deadness of the law; and they, by knowing the deadness of the law, may look forward unto that life which is in Christ, and know for what end the law was given. And after the law is fulfilled in Christ, that they need not harden their hearts against him when the law ought to be done away." [^47]

That kind of teaching—a caution against hardening one's heart against Christ in ignorant defense of the law of Moses—could have served (and saved) so many living in the Old World then and living throughout the world now. Or if, as is probable, this clear doctrine was taught emphatically in the Old World, then more is the pity that such "plain and precious things" were lost or taken from the pristine teachings of the Old Testament.

In light of the profound insight the Book of Mormon brings to an understanding of the law of Moses, it is significant that Paul's great statement that the law was to serve as a "schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ" is recorded in the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible as "the law was our schoolmaster until Christ." [^48] (And, of course, the Joseph Smith Translation was greatly influenced by the doctrinal education Joseph Smith received while translating the Book of Mormon.)

That this role for the law of Moses was clearly understood by the Nephite nation is best noted in the fourth book of Nephi, virtually the last reference to the law of Moses in the Book of Mormon. There the record says with finality as well as with a spirit of some success, "And they did not walk any more after the performances and ordinances of the law of Moses; but they did walk after the commandments which they had received from their Lord and their God. . . . And it came to pass that there was no contention among all the people, in all the land; but there were mighty miracles wrought among the disciples of Jesus." [^49]

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 5:10; 11:4. 2 Nephi 11:4.
[^2] 2 Nephi 25:24-27, 30; 26:1. Bruce W. Jorgensen was among the first to give serious typological consideration to the Book of Mormon generally and the Tree of Life image specifically. See his "The Dark Way to the Tree: Typological Unity in the Book of Mormon," Encyclia, vol. 54, part 2, 1977, pp. 16-24.
[^3] See Galatians 3:24. 1 Nephi 8:11-12.
[^4] John 3:30. 1 Nephi 11:7.
[^5] Hosea 12:10. 1 Nephi 11:21.
[^6] Hebrews 8:5. 1 Nephi 11:8; see also vv. 7, 9, 21-22.
[^7] Moses 1:6. 1 Nephi 11:25.
[^8] See Genesis 1:26-27. John 3:16; see also Ether 12:33.
[^9] Deuteronomy 18:15, 17-19. 1 Nephi 8:22-23.
[^10] 1 Nephi 22:21. 1 Nephi 8:24-25, 28.
[^11] 3 Nephi 20:23. See McConkie, The Promised Messiah, pp. 445-48, for an extended discussion of the similitude between Moses and Christ. 1 Nephi 8:30.
[^12] John 5:39, 43, 45-47. 1 Nephi 10:14.
[^13] 2 Nephi 25:28. 1 Nephi 15:14.
[^14] 2 Nephi 25:25. Truman Madsen, "The Olive Press: A Symbol of Christ," in The Allegory of the Olive Tree, ed. Stephen D. Ricks and John W. Welch (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1994), p. 2. Professor Madsen's essay provides useful background and context for the observations that follow.
[^15] See 1 Nephi 5:11. See Jacob 4:14-18.
[^16] Mosiah 13:29-30. Jacob 5:61, 74; see also 1 Nephi 8:12; 11:22; 15:36.
[^17] 2 Nephi 25:25. See M. Catherine Thomas, "Jacob's Allegory: The Mystery of Christ," in The Allegory of the Olive Tree, pp. 11-20.
[^18] McConkie, The Promised Messiah, p. 427. John S. Tanner, "Jacob and His Descendants as Authors," in Rediscovering the Book of Mormon, edited by John L. Sorenson and Melvin J. Thorne (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1991), p. 61.
[^19] D&C 84:14-15, 19-22. Jacob 5:73-74.
[^20] D&C 84:23. Jacob 6:4-5, 8.
[^21] D&C 84:24-27. See 1 Nephi 17:41.
[^22] For the definitive work on the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, see Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, a History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1995). See Numbers 21:8.
[^23] See Galatians 3:17-25. 2 Nephi 25:20.
[^24] Jacob 7:7. Helaman 8:13-15.
[^25] Jacob 7:19. 1 Nephi 8:11.
[^26] Jarom 1:11. Alma 32:28, 30, 34.
[^27] Mosiah 3:15; see also vv. 5-14. Alma 32:37-43.
[^28] Mosiah 12:19. Alma 32:42.
[^29] Mosiah 12:27-29, 31-32. Alma 33:19, 21-23.
[^30] Mosiah 12:33. Alma 34:2, 4.
[^31] Compare Mosiah 13:5 with Exodus 34:29, 35. In a discussion of types, the parallel to Moses' story, including the riotous behavior of King Noah's court, is not coincidental. Acts 5:30; see also 10:39.
[^32] Mosiah 13:25-26. 3 Nephi 27:14-15.
[^33] Mosiah 13:27-31. Mosiah 13:10.
[^34] Mosiah 13:33-34. Mosiah 13:31.
[^35] See chapter 5 for an examination of these passages from Isaiah. Mosiah 16:14; see chapter 7.
[^36] See Mosiah 15:15-18; compare Mosiah 12:21-24 and Isaiah 52:7-10. D&C 107:3.
[^37] Mosiah 16:12-15. Alma 13:7; see also D&C 84:17.
[^38] See chapter 8. See Hebrews 4:5.
[^39] Alma 25:15-16. Alma 13:9.
[^40] Alma 34:7. Alma 13:1-2, 16.
[^41] Alma 34:13-14. See Alma 13:3.
[^42] 3 Nephi 1:24-25. See Alma 13:3.
[^43] 3 Nephi 9:15-20. See Alma 13:3.
[^44] 3 Nephi 12:17-19, 46-47; compare Matthew 5. See Alma 13:4.
[^45] 3 Nephi 15:2, 4-10. See Alma 13:3.
[^46] Mosiah 13:27. See Alma 13:6.
[^47] 2 Nephi 25:27. See Alma 13:8.
[^48] JST Galatians 3:24. See Alma 13:9.
[^49] 4 Nephi 1:12-13. See Alma 13:11.
