Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

ATONEMENT

Chapter Ten

The Atonement

The central fact, the crucial foundation, the chief doctrine, and the greatest expression of divine love in the eternal plan of salvation—truly a "plan of happiness," as Alma called it [^1]—is the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ. Much goes before it and much comes after, but without that pivotal act, that moment of triumph whereby we are made free from the spiritual bondage of sin and the physical chains of the grave, both of which are undeniable deaths, there would be no meaning to the plan of life, and certainly no ultimate happiness in it or after it.

The atonement of Jesus Christ, with its many doctrinal ramifications, constitutes the principal theme of the Book of Mormon. Not surprisingly, the Prophet Joseph Smith, who translated the Book of Mormon and declared it the keystone of our religion, stated that "all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages" to the atonement of Jesus Christ. [^2]

The literal meaning of the word atonement is self-evident: at-one-ment, the act of unifying or bringing together what has been separated or estranged. The atonement of Christ was indispensable because of the separating transgression, or fall, of Adam, which brought death into the world. In the words of Moroni, "By Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ . . . ; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man. And because of the redemption of man, . . . they are brought back into the presence of the Lord." [^3]

Near the beginning of the Book of Mormon story, Lehi referred to his son Jacob's difficult life (he was the firstborn child during Lehi's "tribulation in the wilderness") as a metaphor for humankind's suffering and affliction (the Fall, the consequence of sin, mortality) prior to redemption and salvation (the Atonement, resurrection, immortality, and eternal life). [^4] Such a journey is the basic theme that runs throughout this testament of Jesus Christ. For the temporal challenges of life and the spiritual significance that flows from them, Lehi reassured his son that "the way is prepared from the fall of man, and salvation is free." [^5] This echoes the precious doctrine he had earlier communicated to Nephi following Lehi's great vision of Christ's future advent. [^6] What follows here is "the way" that was prepared.

The Premortal Plan

The scriptural reassurance that such a sequence of fall and atonement was known and prepared for from before the foundation of this world reinforces the inseparable doctrinal relationship between the role of Adam and that of the Lord Jesus Christ. In the great premortal council in heaven, God the Father presided and presented his plan for the mortality and eventual immortality of his children. In this his two principal associates were the premortal Jesus (then known as Jehovah) and the premortal Adam (then known as Michael). The roles of these two were related from the beginning, each having a crucial part to play in providing life to all other children of God—temporal life through Adam and eternal life through Christ.

The fact that their roles are so intertwined led the Apostle Paul to see them as counterparts to one another, calling them both by the same name: "The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit," [^7] an echo of his teaching to the Romans that Adam was "the figure of [Christ] that was to come." [^8]

That this understood and agreed-upon fall of man would lead to the equally understood and agreed-upon atonement of Christ is one of the major contributions the Book of Mormon makes to our understanding of the plan of salvation. Threads remaining in the Bible show how clearly this was understood in ancient times. Peter spoke of Christ as "foreordained before the foundation of the world," [^9] and John described him as "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." [^10] Nevertheless, much of this doctrine has been lost or expunged from the biblical records. It is therefore of great consequence that the Book of Mormon prophets taught that doctrine in detail and with clarity.

For example, King Benjamin, in his majestic discourse on the Savior, noted that the benefits of the Atonement were "prepared from the foundation of the world for all mankind, which ever were since the fall of Adam, or who are, or who ever shall be, even unto the end of the world." [^11]

Later Alma noted, "If it had not been for the plan of redemption, which was laid from the foundation of the world, there could have been no resurrection of the dead; but there was a plan of redemption laid." [^12] Aaron, teaching King Lamoni's father, "did expound unto him the scriptures from the creation of Adam, laying the fall of man before him, . . . and also the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all whosoever would believe on his name." [^13]

Of course, the ultimate declaration of the eternal beginnings of the redemptive plan was given by Christ himself, who, when appearing to the brother of Jared, said, "Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people." [^14]

All of that provides doctrinal background and context for what Lehi gave as one of the most important and oft-quoted lines of Book of Mormon doctrine, summarizing succinctly the relationship of Adam to Christ, of the Fall to the Atonement: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall." [^15]

Moral Agency

Basic to the great eternal plan of how we might come into a mortal world marked by death and still come out of it "alive," so to speak, was the quest for godhood, the search for eternal possibility, promise, and peace. God's premortal children could not become like him and enjoy his breadth of blessings unless they obtained both a physical body and temporal experience in an arena where both good and evil were present. Lehi stressed that for this to be possible, such a temporal experience must be predicated upon moral agency, which includes the moral and intellectual ability to distinguish right from wrong and the attendant freedom to make choices based on that knowledge.

Crucial to a full and effective exercise of moral agency in such a complex world of good and evil is having basic knowledge of the plan of salvation and the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which are fundamental and essential to it. Such knowledge provides at least two things: a standard—eternal verities, if you will—for determining what is right and what is wrong, and an understanding of the consequences, including the eternal consequences, of our actions when such choices are made. Thus Lehi said that for moral agency to be fully efficacious, accountable men, women, and children must be "instructed sufficiently that they know good from evil." [^16] Because such knowledge of the way of godliness is so fundamental to the plan of salvation, he cried out for all who know the truth to answer the unending call to teach and bear witness of gospel principles, to receive the joy that comes from making wise choices consistent with them, and to avoid the sorrow that most assuredly awaits all who act in defiance of them:

"How great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise.

"Wherefore, he is the firstfruits unto God, inasmuch as he shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in him shall be saved.

"And because of the intercession for all, all men come unto God; wherefore, they stand in the presence of him, to be judged of him according to the truth and holiness which is in him." [^17]

This agency, which was preserved for humankind in the premortal war in heaven [^18] provided that "man . . . should act for himself. . . . The children of men . . . have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon. . . . They are free to choose liberty and eternal life . . . or to choose captivity and death." [^19] Clearly this freedom cannot be fully exercised or made efficacious without sufficient instruction in the consequences of such choices and a knowledge of the redeeming, forgiving atonement of Christ. The Atonement ransoms all who, in making such choices, err and fall short of the glory of God but repent of those errors and cry for the mercy of the Holy Messiah to come upon them. How great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth, indeed.

Opposition in All Things

A related principle Lehi introduced as another backdrop to the eternal drama of the Fall and the Atonement is that of opposition, of contending enticements, a concept closely linked with choice and agency. If choice is to exist and agency is to have any meaning, alternatives must be presented. As Lehi phrased it, "It must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." [^20] His reasoning and his vocabulary are clear and to the point. Righteousness has no meaning without the possibility of wickedness. Holiness would hold no delight unless we realized the pain of misery. Good could have no moral meaning if nothing could be considered bad. Even life—the nature and eternal possibilities of which are the subject of the plan of salvation and Lehi's discourse about it—would have no meaning if we knew nothing of the nature and limitations of death.

In short, without opposites and alternatives, "there would have been no purpose in the . . . creation [of human life]." [^21] All experiences in time and eternity would have been common, lifeless, indistinguishable—"a compound in one." [^22] At the end of this sequence would be the worst realization of all. There could be no happiness because there was no sorrow, and there could be no righteousness because there was no sin. But fortunately, there are happiness, righteousness, eternal life, and God, even as Lehi stresses that those blessings come only at the risk of confronting misery, wickedness, death, and the devil.

The Fall

These terrible risks of sorrow and death were facts Adam and Eve were willing to face in order that "men might be." But they—like us—were able and willing to venture these only with the knowledge that there would be safety at the end of the day for those who wanted it and lived for it. They were willing to transgress knowingly and consciously (the only way they could "fall" into the consequences of mortality, inasmuch as Elohim certainly could not force innocent parties out of the garden and still be a just God) only because they had a full knowledge of the plan of salvation, which would provide for them a way back from their struggle with death and hell. As Adam would later say, "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." [^23]

On that same occasion Eve said even more poignantly, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have . . . known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." [^24]

So Adam and Eve willingly made a choice, choosing the path toward growth and godhood inherent in the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil over the potentially meaningless (at least at that point in their development) tree of life. With the enticement of Lucifer, "that old serpent that did beguile our first parents, which was the cause of their fall," as Abinadi phrased it, [^25] they consciously chose to step out of the garden of Eden—a magnificent, terrestrial-like, paradisiacal world—into a fallen, telestial one, a world filled with very unparadisiacal thistles and thorns, sorrow and sin, disease and death.

In doing so, Adam and Eve answered forever the plaintive question that is so often heard: "If there is a God, why is there so much suffering in the world?" The answer to that is we now live in a fallen world filled with opposites, a world in which God is the most powerful but decidedly not the only spiritual influence. As part of the doctrine of opposition, Satan is also at work in the world, and we knew before we came here that he would bring grief and anguish with him. Nevertheless, we (through Adam and Eve) made the conscious choice to live in and endure this mortal sphere of opposition in all things, for only through such an experience was godly progress possible. Adam and Eve—and we—knowingly and lovingly absolved God of the responsibility for the "thorns and thistles" of a fallen world that was personally chosen by us, not capriciously imposed by him. We wanted the chance to become like our heavenly parents, to face suffering and overcome it, to endure sorrow and still live rejoicingly, to confront good and evil and be strong enough to choose the good. In this telestial, mortal world filled with competing voices, enticements, and experiences, we get a lifetime of opportunity to refine and strengthen these virtues.

Understanding this doctrine, Lehi noted that for Adam and Eve to have remained in the garden of Eden would have kept all things "in the same state in which they were after they were created," a situation in which they would have "remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin."

But Adam and Eve made their choice for an even more generous reason than those of godly knowledge and personal progress. They did it for the one overriding and commanding reason basic to the entire plan of salvation and all the discussions ever held in all the councils of heaven. They did it "that men might be." Had Adam and Eve never left the garden, Lehi noted, "they would have had no children." [^26]

There were, of course, these other benefits just mentioned stemming from the Fall, benefits that are essential and eternal. But they would have been shallow privileges indeed if they had come only to Adam and Eve. No, even the significant blessings of a physical body and the refinement of growth experiences leading to godhood would be pathetic promises if they were not also extended to all of God's spirit children. The privilege of mortality granted to the rest of us is the principal gift given by the fall of Adam and Eve.

Thus, and only with this knowledge, can a student of the gospel of Jesus Christ grasp the full import of the magnificent line already cited: "Adam fell that men might be." That doctrine, fully understood and thoroughly taught only in the restored gospel, is as important as any taught in the entire Book of Mormon. Without it the world would be ignorant of the true nature of the fall of Adam and Eve, ignorant of their life-giving decision, and ignorant of the unspeakable love they demonstrated for all of God's sons and daughters.

In summation Lehi said, "After Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit they were driven out of the garden of Eden, to till the earth.

"And they have brought forth children; yea, even the family of all the earth." [^27]

Natural Man

Many things happened in the process of the Fall, including changes that came to the physical bodies of Adam and Eve. For one thing, they fell into "nature," the word becoming something of a synonym for the Adamic process. King Benjamin would say of little children, "As in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins." [^28]

Part of the natural world Adam and Eve entered included the addition to their bodies of blood—a corruptible ingredient—in what had been to that point an uncorrupted body of bloodless flesh and bone. But even more important than such physical changes were the temptations of and threats to the spirit. Spiritual as well as physical separation from God came with the Fall. Humankind was cut off from the immediate personal companionship with God that Adam and Eve had enjoyed in the garden of Eden. As a result, they were distanced from the Holy Spirit and became less responsive to many of the things of righteousness. King Benjamin made that issue one of the central tasks for men and women to deal with in their fallen, or natural, state.

"The natural man is an enemy to God," he taught, "and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." [^29]

More extreme language than that of "natural man" or even "enemy to God" is Abinadi's pronouncement that as a result of the Fall and the increased influence of Satan in the fallen world, "all mankind [became] carnal, sensual, devilish, knowing evil from good, subjecting themselves to the devil.

"Thus all mankind were lost; and behold, they would have been endlessly lost were it not that God redeemed his people from their lost and fallen state.

"But remember that he that persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against God, remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him. Therefore he is as though there was no redemption made, being an enemy to God; and also is the devil an enemy to God." [^30]

The brother of Jared made reference to that mortal alienation between man and God when he plaintively cried to the Lord, "O Lord, . . . do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil continually." [^31]

Because this doctrine is so basic to the plan of salvation and also because it is so susceptible to misunderstanding, we must note that these references to "natural" evil emphatically do not mean that men and women are "inherently" evil. There is a crucial difference. As spiritual sons and daughters of God, all mortal men and women are divine in origin and divine in their potential destiny. As Doctrine and Covenants 93:38-39 teaches, the spirit of every man, woman, and child "was innocent in the beginning." But it is also true that as a result of the Fall they are now in a "natural" (fallen) world where the devil "taketh away light" and where some elements of nature—including temporal human nature—need discipline, restraint, and refinement. It is as if men and women are given, as part of their next step in development along the path to godhood, raw physical and spiritual ingredients—"natural" resources, if you will. Those resources are not to run rampant but are to be harnessed and focused so that their power and potential (as is sometimes done with a "natural" river or a "natural" waterfall) can be channeled and thereby made even more productive and beneficial.

Natural man, with all of his new and wonderful but as yet unbridled and unregenerated potential, must be made "submissive" to the Holy Spirit, a spirit that still entices and lifts us upward. The brother of Jared acknowledged the inherent goodness of the soul when he said that our mortal transgressions and temporal natures can be overcome when we call upon God and from him "receive according to our desires." [^32] Our deepest desires, our premortal yearnings, are still divine in their origins, and they are still deep in our souls. The echoes of our earlier innocence still reverberate, and the light that forsakes the evil one still shines. Our hearts can—and in their purity, do—desire that which is spiritual and holy rather than that which is "carnal, sensual, and devilish." If that were not so, we would be in a hopeless condition indeed, and the idea of real choice would be jeopardized forever. We praise God our Father that our true heritage is of him and that by yielding and submitting to his eternal influence we can overcome the enmity which separated us from him and turn those gifts from nature to our blessing rather than our cursing.

Probationary State

God's justice demanded that death accompany the violation of his command to Adam and Eve not to eat the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. [^33] But his mercy (and certainly his knowledge of the plan, for all things were done "in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" [^34]) dictated that he delay the imposition of that penalty and that he put Adam and Eve on probation. In doing so, he allowed them time in mortality to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ, accept it, repent of their transgression, and make claim upon the promised atonement of Jesus for the remission of their sins before the hour of their mandated death. "The days of the children of men were prolonged, according to the will of God, that they might repent while in the flesh; wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their time was lengthened, according to the commandments which the Lord God gave unto the children of men," [^35] Lehi taught.

As the word comes to us in English, probation is derived from the Latin probare, which means "to prove" or "to test." So the Eternal Judge was willing to provide a period of testing, a proving ground to allow for the demonstration of "good behavior" before imposing the final penalty against Adam, Eve, and each of their descendants. Of course, what ultimately saves all of us in this court scene is the good behavior—and determined advocacy in our behalf—of Christ, but our own good behavior is also important. Our desire, willingness, and effort to keep God's commandments, which are the terms of our probation, are essential to Christ's willingness to take our case and to the Father's merciful judgment in the end.

Alma gave a succinct summary of this probationary period granted to men and women in mortality: "We see that death comes upon mankind . . . which is the temporal death; nevertheless there was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; . . .

"And after God had appointed that these things should come unto man, behold, then he saw that it was expedient that man should know concerning the things whereof he had appointed unto them;

"Therefore he sent angels to converse with them, who caused men to behold of his glory.

"And they began from that time forth to call on his name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works. . . .

"Therefore God gave unto them commandments, after having made known unto them the plan of redemption, that they should not do evil. . . .

"[Thus] God did call on men, in the name of his Son, (this being the plan of redemption which was laid) saying: If ye will repent, and harden not your hearts, then will I have mercy upon you, through mine Only Begotten Son." [^36]

The word probation is found only ten times in the Standard Works, and nine of those references are in the Book of Mormon. What an essential doctrine in understanding the Fall and the Atonement, a doctrine of prolonged opportunity for mortal men and women in which the gospel can be taught to and accepted by them, a doctrine gleaned almost exclusively from the Book of Mormon!

With the choice offered through moral agency and sufficient instruction in the elements of the plan of redemption, Adam and Eve and all their children on this earth were free "to act for themselves and not to be acted upon . . . and all things [necessary for this exercise] are given them." In this term of mortal probation (whatever period that may be after eight years of age until the day of death), we have the teachings of the gospel and the commandments of God to guide our time of testing, a time in which we are "free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil." [^37]

In short, for each accountable person, transgression against eternal law has been committed, and the subsequent judgment has been passed. We, like our parents before us, have "sinned, and come short of the glory of God." [^38] But we have a merciful judge and a compassionate, sacrificing Mediator. They have given us time to repent and thereby alter our sentence. Our judge and our advocate are doing everything possible, within the allowable limits of justice, to give us a way out of our plight. If we truly wish to sidestep the spiritual death penalty, we may. In this, his greatest sermon uttered just days before his death, Lehi pleaded with his own family—and all of us—to do just that: "I would that ye should look to the great Mediator, and hearken unto his great commandments; and be faithful unto his words, and choose eternal life, according to the will of his Holy Spirit;

"And not choose eternal death, according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that he may reign over you in his own kingdom. . . .

"For he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." [^39]

Then, with a poignancy that must be known only to those who realize they are about to die, Lehi brought forward to his own moment the link with Adam's sentence in the divine courtroom. "I have spoken these few words unto you all," he said, "in the last days of my probation; and I have chosen the good part, according to the words of the prophet. And I have none other object save it be the everlasting welfare of your souls." [^40]

An Infinite Atonement

That touching testimony—and indeed the entire sermon given us by Lehi—becomes more immediate when we realize that a general doctrine of probation for all mankind is reduced to a specific probationary period for each of us personally. Lehi skillfully brought what could be a rather abstract doctrine right down to the "three score and ten years" (or whatever we may be given) of a brief lifetime in which we must learn the gospel, exercise our agency in claiming its promises, and thereby take advantage of "the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah." [^41]

What Lehi's "good part" consists of and what the "words of the prophet[s]" taught him is that Christ would be born "with healing in his wings" to overcome the effects of the Fall and to offer to every human soul the privilege of exaltation. That Lehi taught this so well to his children is perhaps best evidenced in the discourse his son Jacob gave to the Nephites at the request of his other son Nephi. Continuing these same doctrinal insights taught by his father on the relationship of the Fall to the Atonement, Jacob said of Christ's coming: "I know that ye know that in the body he shall show himself unto those at Jerusalem, from whence we came; for it is expedient that it should be among them; for it behooveth the great Creator that he suffereth himself to become subject unto man in the flesh, and die for all men, that all men might become subject unto him.

"For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

"Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more." [^42]

Clearly teaching that Christ died for "all men," Jacob was the first in the Book of Mormon to use the phrase infinite atonement, one of the truly essential characteristics of the doctrine of the Atonement as taught in this volume of scripture. Amulek reinforced that doctrine later with his own witness of the scope and breadth of Christ's sacrifice. Because the sins, transgressions, and heartaches of mankind are so universal, he said, "I do know that Christ shall come among the children of men, to take upon him the transgressions of his people, and that he shall atone for the sins of the world; for the Lord God hath spoken it.

"For it is expedient that an atonement should be made; for according to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, all are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made.

"For it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice. . . .

"Therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world." [^43]

Because the Fall was universal, with spiritual and physical death coming to all of God's children, so too must the Atonement be universal. Jacob taught that its unconditional aspects would cover all mankind—non-Christians as well as Christians, the godless as well as the God-fearing, the untaught infant as well as the fully converted and knowledgeable adult: "He cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam.

"And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day." [^44]

Unconditional Gifts

The universal, infinite, and unconditional aspects of the atonement of Jesus Christ are several. They include his ransom for Adam's original transgression so that no member of the human family is held responsible for it. [^45] Another unconditional, universal gift is the resurrection from the dead of every man, woman, and child who lives, has ever lived, or will ever live on the earth. Thus, the Atonement is universal in that it saves the entire human family from the bondage of physical death. It is also infinite in its impact and efficacy in making redemption possible for all, reaching back to the beginning of time and forward throughout eternity.

In his great sermon on this subject Jacob gives telling commentary on what would have been some of the universal spiritual consequences linked to a universal physical death:

"O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

"And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

"O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit." [^46]

As Lucifer will suffer an unembodied, unhopeful, unhappy future, so too, without the Resurrection, would we be unembodied, unhopeful, and unhappy, thus bringing triumph to the devil, who seeks that all men and women "might be miserable like unto himself." [^47] Further, there would have been some terrible form of subjection in addition to personal sorrow and pain, a subjection that would have made us "devils, angels to a devil." [^48]

Jacob continued his characteristic exclamations (as an evidence of distinct literary style, note how often his declarations begin with "O") about the unconditional blessings of the Atonement:

"O how great the plan of our God . . . [for through the Atonement] all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh. . . .

"O the greatness of the mercy of our God, the Holy One of Israel! For he delivereth his saints from that awful monster the devil, and death, and hell, and that lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment.

"O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it.

"And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam." [^49]

In the broad reach of the Atonement, generous provision is made for those who die without a knowledge of the gospel or the opportunity to embrace it, including children under the age of accountability, the mentally impaired, those who never came in contact with the gospel, and so forth. Regarding such people Jacob declared:

"Where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him.

"For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them." [^50]

One of the strongest teachings of the Book of Mormon is that children under that age of accountability, later revealed to be eight years of age, are included with those who are not susceptible of temptation and are universally and unconditionally redeemed by the atonement of Christ. [^51] Indeed, when so much depraved behavior came among the Nephites by the book's end, Mormon was incensed that such depravity would also include the theological abuse of this doctrine of the Atonement. Upon hearing that little children were being baptized, Mormon veritably shouted this instruction to his son Moroni, that he in turn could decry the apostate behavior of those few remaining Nephites. The fervor and occasional flame with which Mormon spoke justifies quoting his declaration at some length.

Citing the revelation he received from the Savior on this subject, Mormon wrote,

"Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me." [^52]

Mormon then counseled his people through Moroni, "My beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children.

"Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach— repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children.

"And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins.

"But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons; for how many little children have died without baptism! . . .

"Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity. . . .

"Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy. . . .

"For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing—

"But it is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of his Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead works." [^53]

The doctrine of the salvation of little children being saved in Christ had been taught early in the Book of Mormon as well as at the end of it. King Benjamin taught in his great sermon, "Even if it were possible that little children could sin they could not be saved; but I say unto you they are blessed; for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins. . . .

"And the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy; but men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. . . .

"And behold, when that time cometh, none shall be found blameless before God, except it be little children, only through repentance and faith on the name of the Lord God Omnipotent." [^54]

In the pattern set by the Savior's own teachings, it is telling that both of these declarations invite adults—Mormon said specifically "parents"—to become more like little children, not the other way around. An infant's purity and innocence, a baby's sense of wonder, a little one's willingness to believe, a toddler's inherent trust in a Father and Mother, a child's ability to almost instantly forgive and forget, to laugh again and see the very best in the world—these are just a few of the ways adults need to be more like children. Truly "of such is the kingdom of heaven." [^55]

Conditional Gifts

Even as there are these unrestricted blessings flowing from Christ's sacrifice, King Benjamin's concluding lines above indicate that other aspects of the Atonement are conditional, requiring such effort as "repentance and faith on the name of the Lord God Omnipotent." The conditional blessings of the gospel, in both time and eternity, are predicated upon the moral agency and personal discipline of the individual before they can be fully efficacious. For example, while all members of the human family are freely and universally given reprieve from Adam's transgression through no effort of their own, they are not given reprieve from their own sins unless they follow the commandments of Christ. Indeed, the Book of Mormon prophets regularly give stern warning to those who, unlike little children, are accountable before the law and upon whom the full blessings of the Atonement are not so automatic. Jacob warned, "He commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God.

"And if they will not repent and believe in his name, and be baptized in his name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, has spoken it. . . .

"Wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state!" [^56]

There are principles of the gospel that the accountable must follow and ordinances of the gospel that they must obtain. Mormon stresses this commitment to fundamental requirements: "The first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins;

"And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God." [^57]

Spiritually Born of God

The significance of these symbolic steps, these first principles and ordinances of the gospel here emphasized, was developed by King Benjamin in his counsel that one must put "off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord." [^58] As that fallen, dead, unregenerate man is "an enemy to God," so one overcomes that enmity by being reborn, a new birth that transcends spiritual death. This spiritual rebirth is symbolized by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, all followed by the faithful living of other gospel requirements thereafter. The elements of death, burial, and resurrection, symbolically represented by immersion in and emergence from the waters of baptism, signify the new birth by which we declare ourselves for Christ and lay claim to the gift of eternal life that comes through the Atonement.

As noted earlier in this book, when King Benjamin had concluded his masterful sermon on the life and mission of the Savior, his people were profoundly moved by that message and desired to claim the blessings of the gospel. They saw themselves as yet being "natural" and unregenerated, viewing themselves "in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth." [^59] With one voice these people cried, "O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things; who shall come down among the children of men." [^60]

Inspired by their resolve, King Benjamin replied:

"I say unto you, if ye have come to a knowledge of the goodness of God, and his matchless power, and his wisdom, and his patience, and his long-suffering towards the children of men; and also, the atonement which has been prepared from the foundation of the world, that thereby salvation might come to him that should put his trust in the Lord, and should be diligent in keeping his commandments, and continue in the faith even unto the end of his life, I mean the life of the mortal body—

"I say, that this is the man who receiveth salvation, through the atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the world for all mankind, which ever were since the fall of Adam, or who are, or who ever shall be, even unto the end of the world.

"And this is the means whereby salvation cometh. And there is none other salvation save this which hath been spoken of; neither are there any conditions whereby man can be saved except the conditions which I have told you." [^61]

With a great shout from the people and their unanimous desire to enter into a covenant that would enable them to escape the effects of the physical and spiritual deaths awaiting them, King Benjamin taught the blessings of rebirth—birth into eternal life through Christ—including taking upon themselves his name as evidence of their new life, their new covenant, their new identity:

"And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters.

"And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives.

"And it shall come to pass that whosoever doeth this shall be found at the right hand of God, for he shall know the name by which he is called; for he shall be called by the name of Christ." [^62]

Later, when Alma was trying to stir up the hearts of the members of the Church in Zarahemla, he appealed to this same covenant and declaration of new birth that all were to have experienced. To those who were slacking, he recalled that they had been "encircled about by the bands of death, and the chains of hell" with "an everlasting destruction" awaiting them. But those bands of death were broken and the chains of hell were loosed through "the light of the everlasting word" of Christ. [^63]

Noting the "mighty change" that had come to his father Alma, who in turn had brought a "mighty change" to the earlier generations in Zarahemla, Alma asked the question that must be asked of all: "Have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? . . .

"Could ye say, if ye were called to die at this time . . . [t]hat your garments have been cleansed and made white through the blood of Christ, who will come to redeem his people from their sins? . . .

"Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd. . . .

"I know that Jesus Christ shall come, yea, the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, and mercy, and truth. And behold, it is he that cometh to take away the sins of the world, yea, the sins of every man who steadfastly believeth on his name." [^64]

We have already noted the most dramatic Book of Mormon example of such a person being reborn in Christ. After a youthful life devoted to destroying the Church, Alma the Younger was struck down by the power of a heavenly angel sent by God in response to the prayers of the Nephite faithful. In response to two days of fasting and prayer by his father and the other believers gathered around him, Alma stood and declared:

"I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit.

"And the Lord said unto me: Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters;

"And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. . . .

"After wading through much tribulation, repenting nigh unto death, the Lord in mercy hath seen fit to snatch me out of an everlasting burning, and I am born of God." [^65]

That a whole new world of learning opened up to Alma (and to all who lay claim on the blessings of the Atonement and are born anew) is evidenced in his recounting of that experience to his son Helaman some twenty years after it happened. Teaching his son to trust in God through all manner of trials, troubles, and afflictions, Alma said,

"If I had not been born of God I should not have known these things; but God has, by the mouth of his holy angel, made these things known unto me, not of any worthiness of myself." And then, as so appropriately happens, the converted became the converter: "Yea, and from that time even until now, I have labored without ceasing, that I might bring souls unto repentance; that I might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did taste; that they might also be born of God, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. . . .

"For because of the word which he has imparted unto me, behold, many have been born of God, and have tasted as I have tasted, and have seen eye to eye as I have seen." [^66]

As a result of such personal experience, Alma would be able to stress, "The Son of God suffereth according to the flesh that he might take upon him the sins of his people, that he might blot out their transgressions according to the power of his deliverance. . . .

"Ye must repent, and be born again; for the Spirit saith if ye are not born again ye cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore come and be baptized unto repentance, that ye may be washed from your sins, that ye may have faith on the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sins of the world, who is mighty to save and to cleanse from all unrighteousness." [^67]

Relief for the Reborn

Virtually all Christian churches teach some kind of doctrine regarding the atonement of Christ and the expiation of our sins that comes through it. But the Book of Mormon teaches that and much more. It teaches that Christ also provides relief of a more temporal sort, taking upon himself our mortal sicknesses and infirmities, our earthly trials and tribulations, our personal heartaches and loneliness and sorrows—all done in addition to taking upon himself the burden of our sins.

Alma, who had experienced the joyous impact of Christ's redemption, taught that the Savior would "go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people.

"And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." [^68]

Christ walked the path every mortal is called to walk so that he would know how to succor and strengthen us in our most difficult times. He knows the deepest and most personal burdens we carry. He knows the most public and poignant pains we bear. He descended below all such grief in order that he might lift us above it. There is no anguish or sorrow or sadness in life that he has not suffered in our behalf and borne away upon his own valiant and compassionate shoulders. [^69] In so doing he "giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. . . . [Thus] they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." [^70]

That aspect of the Atonement brings an additional kind of rebirth, something of immediate renewal, help, and hope that allow us to rise above sorrows and sickness, misfortunes and mistakes of every kind. With his mighty arm around us and lifting us, we face life more joyfully even as we face death more triumphantly.

Only on the strong shoulders of the Master can we "fear not." Only in his embrace is there safety. Only in covenant with him is there freedom from death and "every sin, which easily doth beset you." [^71] Only in him is there peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. Some of the most reassuring counsel ever given to the children of men includes these words from the Master:

"He that ascended up on high . . . also descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth . . . the light which is in all things which giveth life to all things." [^72]

"In all their afflictions he was afflicted. And the angel of his presence saved them; and in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed them, and bore them, and carried them all the days of old." [^73]

"Therefore, hold on thy way. . . . Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever." [^74]

Justice and Mercy

This loving, charitable, and merciful generosity of the Savior raises the inevitable question of the place of justice in his working out of the Atonement. The balance between seemingly contradictory principles is examined in the Book of Mormon most skillfully and—because it is a father speaking to his own transgressing son—most sensitively by Alma the Younger when instructing his son Corianton.

Obviously the demands of justice require that penalties must be paid for violation of the law. Adam transgressed and so have all of us; thus the judgment of death (physically) and the consequences of hell (spiritually) is pronounced as a just reward. Furthermore, once guilty, none of us could personally do anything to overcome that fate. We do not have in us the seeds of immortality allowing us to conquer death physically, and we have not been perfect in our behavior, thus forfeiting the purity that would let us return to the presence of God spiritually. Furthermore, God cannot simply turn a blind eye to the breaking of divine law, because in so doing he would dishonor justice and would "cease to be God," [^75] which thing he would never do. The sorry truth for mortal men and women was, then, that "there was no means to reclaim [them] from this fallen state which man had brought upon himself because of his own disobedience.

"Thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence." [^76]

The claims of justice must be honored. The absence of law or the lack of any penalty for breaking it would leave the world in amoral chaos. Alma asked rhetorically, "If there was no law given—if a man murdered he should die—would he be afraid he would die if he should murder? And also, if there was no law given against sin men would not be afraid to sin." [^77] Clearly one of the purposes of law and the firm demands of justice behind it is its preventive impact.

But what happens when all have sinned and come short of the glory of God? How do we overcome the infinite impact of Adam's transgression? How is the price to be paid for every sin and sorrow and selfish thought that men and women have experienced from Adam to the end of the world? The number of transgressors is as vast as the punishment is ominous. "Do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice?" Alma asked. "I say unto you, Nay; not one whit." [^78]

King Benjamin had earlier reminded his people: "After ye have known and have been taught all these things, if ye should transgress and go contrary to that which has been spoken, that ye do withdraw yourselves from the Spirit of the Lord, that it may have no place in you to guide you in wisdom's paths that ye may be blessed, prospered, and preserved—

"I say unto you, that the man that doeth this, the same cometh out in open rebellion against God. . . . If that man repenteth not, and remaineth and dieth an enemy to God, the demands of divine justice do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt, which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill his breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever.

"And now I say unto you, that mercy hath no claim on that man; therefore his final doom is to endure a never-ending torment." [^79]

Usually when we speak of the atonement of Christ, we emphasize (or find ourselves hoping for) the merciful aspects of that gift. But we must always remember that the Atonement carries with it the unfailing elements of justice as well. Justice is the gulf separating the wicked from the righteous, and "justice cannot be denied." [^80] Christ did all that he did so that "a righteous judgment might come upon the children of men." It is a righteous judgment, but it is a judgment.

To the resistant congregation at Ammonihah, Amulek powerfully taught the justice of the Resurrection—that "the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death," and they shall be "arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil." [^81] Upon hearing that doctrine, Zeezrom, the chief antagonist in that setting, "began to tremble under a consciousness of his guilt." When Alma stepped in to reinforce the words of Amulek on this doctrine, Zeezrom "began to tremble more exceedingly, for he was convinced more and more of the [justice] of God." [^82]

An earlier prophet also thought someone in his audience should be alarmed at the justice of God. Abinadi asked King Noah (who displayed much the same spirit Zeezrom had initially shown), "Ought ye not to tremble? For salvation cometh to none such; for the Lord hath redeemed none such; yea, neither can the Lord redeem such; for he cannot deny himself; for he cannot deny justice when it has its claim." [^83]

It is Book of Mormon doctrine that God must be just. [^84] Furthermore, the guilty will, even in everlasting shame, acknowledge that "all his judgments are just; that he is just in all his works." [^85] But God is a merciful God also, and so is the Son of God. Therefore, God devised a "plan of mercy" [^86] that would satisfy the demands of justice and free those held hostage to sin. It would require that a God himself come to earth to atone for the sins of the world, a point that Abinadi made not once but three times in declaring the Atonement to King Noah and his wicked priests. [^87]

No mere mortal could work such a miracle or bear such a weighty load. As Amulek taught, "There is not any man that can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sins of another." [^88] In such an earthly accounting, any mortals, however good they might wish to be, would have their own sins to account for, so they would hardly be in a position to take care of another's. And regarding death, no mortals, however strong they might be otherwise, carry in themselves the seeds of life whereby they can raise themselves—let alone others—from the tomb.

No, only a God (the Son) could meet these demands and thereby help another God (the Father) "be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also." [^89] Only a God himself would bear the seeds of divinity, the seeds of eternal life, that would allow a triumph over death. And only a person qualifying to be a God could live in a world of temptation and be subject to all the ills of the flesh but never yield to them.

So Christ came to earth, lived his thirty-three years, then fulfilled the ultimate purpose for his birth into mortality. In a spiritual agony that began in Gethsemane and a physical payment that was consummated on the cross of Calvary, he took upon himself every sin and sorrow, every heartache and infirmity, every sickness, sadness, trial, and tribulation experienced by the children of God from Adam to the end of the world. How he did that is a stunning mystery, but he did it. He broke the bands of physical death and gained victory over the grasp of spiritual hell. A God himself came down and made merciful intercession for all the children of men. [^90]

Through his personal experience Alma came to appreciate that only with such mercy included could the great plan of redemption function. As he later taught his son Corianton, "According to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, [except] on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God. And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence. . . .

"But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance, mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God.

"But God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice.

"For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved." [^91]

As he ascended into heaven, Christ did so "having the bowels of mercy; being filled with compassion towards the children of men; standing betwixt them and justice; having broken the bands of death, taken upon himself their iniquity and their transgressions, having redeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice." [^92] It is a matter of surpassing wonder that the voluntary and merciful sacrifice of a single being could satisfy the infinite and eternal demands of justice, atone for every human transgression and misdeed ever committed in the history of the world, and provide for the sweeping of all mankind into the encompassing arms of God's compassionate embrace—but that is what happened.

President John Taylor wrote, "In some mysterious, incomprehensible way, Jesus assumed the responsibility which naturally would have devolved upon Adam; but which could only be accomplished through the mediation of Himself, and by taking upon Himself their sorrows, assuming their responsibilities, and bearing their transgression or sins. In a manner to us incomprehensible and inexplicable, he bore the weight of the sins of the whole world; not only of Adam, but of his posterity; and in doing that, opened the kingdom of heaven, not only to all believers and all who obeyed the law of God, but to more than one-half of the human family who die before they come to years of maturity, as well as to the heathen, who, having died without law, will, through His mediation, be resurrected without law, and be judged without law, and thus participate . . . in the blessings of His atonement." [^93]

Because Christ was willing to mediate for us in the courts of heaven, paying full price for every transgression and thereby meeting the legal demands of justice, he rightly became our new master and could mercifully offer freedom to all who would accept his terms. Thus by remaining just, "God ceaseth not to be God," but "mercy claimeth the penitent," which mercy "cometh because of the atonement." In a wonderful, preplanned way "justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved." [^94] Using a forceful image, Amulek explained that through Christ, mercy "overpowereth justice. . . . And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles [the penitent] in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice." [^95]

Abinadi lamented over those who would not accept this generous act of mercy and freedom. These have, he said, "gone according to their own carnal wills and desires; having never called upon the Lord while the arms of mercy were extended towards them; for the arms of mercy were extended towards them, and they would not; they being warned of their iniquities and yet they would not depart from them; and they were commanded to repent and yet they would not repent." [^96]

Those that "mercy claimeth" as "her own" are the followers of Christ. They understand, as Paul did, that they were "bought with a price" [^97] and owe something in return for that freedom. As a consequence of the Atonement, we need not be in subjection to the devil, but we must be willing, as Jacob taught, to "become subject unto [Christ]." [^98]

What that subjection means does not involve anything slavish or restrictive nor does it require any payment of money or worldly gifts. What that subjection means, what these people choosing redemption "owe" to Christ, their new master, is a life of discipleship, beginning with faith, repentance, and baptism and leading on to all the ordinances and covenants of the gospel and a life of loving kindness. Clearly all of humankind is still in debt even after the full effect of the Atonement has transpired. But fortunately he to whom we are indebted is Christ the Merciful rather than Lucifer the Miserable. We still have obligations, but they are of a much higher and happier sort. We are in debt, but we are not in bondage.

Jacob cried out, "O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." [^99]

Christ is our master, our divine Lord (literally "keeper"), but he freely opens the door of salvation and joy to all who knock in faith and humility. Therefore Jacob's counsel: "Wherefore, do not spend money for that which is of no worth, nor your labor for that which cannot satisfy. Hearken diligently unto me, and remember the words which I have spoken; and come unto the Holy One of Israel, and feast upon that which perisheth not, neither can be corrupted, and let your soul delight in fatness." [^100]

Nephi drove home this same sense of an open, unlimited invitation for all to accept Christ as their Master. Declaring that the Savior's entire life, his entire existence, is devoted to the good and salvation of his Father's children, Nephi said,

"He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him. Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation.

"Behold, doth he cry unto any, saying: Depart from me? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; but he saith: Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without price. . . .

"Hath he commanded any that they should not partake of his salvation? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but he hath given it free for all men; and he hath commanded his people that they should persuade all men to repentance.

"Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not partake of his goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all men are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are forbidden. . . .

"For none of these iniquities come of the Lord; for he doeth that which is good among the children of men; and he doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile." [^101]

As just one group of many in the Book of Mormon who came back from the depths of transgression, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies thanked God that they had been forgiven their many sins and murders, and that their guilt had been taken away from their hearts "through the merits of [God's] Son." [^102]

"Oh, how merciful is our God!" they said. "And now behold, since it has been as much as we could do to get our stains taken away from us, and our swords are made bright, let us hide them away that they may be kept bright, as a testimony to our God at the last day, or at the day that we shall be brought to stand before him to be judged, that we have not stained our swords in the blood of our brethren since he imparted his word unto us and has made us clean thereby." [^103]

The story of the Book of Mormon is, at least in part, a story of the many men and women who cried out in laying claim upon the merciful redemption of Christ. King Lamoni cried out as he heard the gospel, "O Lord, have mercy; according to thy abundant mercy which thou hast had upon the people of Nephi, have upon me, and my people." [^104]

Then, as Lamoni was redeemed in a miraculous fashion, his wife, the queen, arose from her converting experience to cry out with a loud voice, "O blessed Jesus, who has saved me from an awful hell! O blessed God, have mercy on this people!" [^105]

A greater figure, but a less well-known one, is Zenos, whose gratitude for God's mercy was quoted at length by Alma. "Thou art merciful, O God, for thou hast heard my prayer," Zenos said, "even when I was in the wilderness; yea, thou wast merciful when I prayed concerning those who were mine enemies, and thou didst turn them to me.

"Yea, O God, and thou wast merciful unto me when I did cry unto thee in my field; when I did cry unto thee in my prayer, and thou didst hear me.

"And again, O God, when I did turn to my house thou didst hear me in my prayer.

"And when I did turn unto my closet, O Lord, and prayed unto thee, thou didst hear me.

"Yea, thou art merciful unto thy children when they cry unto thee, to be heard of thee and not of men, and thou wilt hear them.

"Yea, O God, thou hast been merciful unto me, and heard my cries in the midst of thy congregations.

"Yea, and thou hast also heard me when I have been cast out and have been despised by mine enemies; yea, thou didst hear my cries, and wast angry with mine enemies, and thou didst visit them in thine anger with speedy destruction.

"And thou didst hear me because of mine afflictions and my sincerity; and it is because of thy Son that thou hast been thus merciful unto me, therefore I will cry unto thee in all mine afflictions, for in thee is my joy; for thou hast turned thy judgments away from me, because of thy Son." [^106]

One of the greatest appeals to the mercy of Christ recorded in the Book of Mormon is the already noted account Alma repeated to his son Helaman two decades after Alma's conversion. In teaching Helaman of his anguish and pain, he spoke of "a cry within [his] heart": "While I was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins, behold, I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world.

"Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death.

"And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.

"And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!

"Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, my son, that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy." [^107]

Later, teaching the same lesson to Shiblon, Alma said he never did have relief—and by implication never would have had relief—until he cried out to the Lord Jesus Christ for mercy: "I was three days and three nights in the most bitter pain and anguish of soul; and never, until I did cry out unto the Lord Jesus Christ for mercy, did I receive a remission of my sins. But behold, I did cry unto him and I did find peace to my soul." [^108]

Such mercy granted by the Savior of the world is intended to prompt us to live as he lived, love as he loved, serve as he served, forgive as he forgave. The offer of eternal reward for such efforts was and is open to all.

"Whosoever will come may come and partake of the waters of life freely," Alma reassured Corianton, but adding that "whosoever will not come the same is not compelled to come." [^109] Clearly Christ will not force the blessings of exaltation upon anyone. With everlasting agency before us, the ineluctable consequence of personal choice, Alma declared his wish for Corianton, which reflects our Father in Heaven's wish for all his children:

"O my son, I desire that ye should deny the justice of God no more. Do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point because of your sins, by denying the justice of God; but do you let the justice of God, and his mercy, and his long-suffering have full sway in your heart; and let it bring you down to the dust in humility. . . .

"And now, my son, go thy way, declare the word with truth and soberness, that thou mayest bring souls unto repentance, that the great plan of mercy may have claim upon them." [^110]

Grace

Even though there are some conditional aspects of the Atonement that require our adherence to gospel principles for the full realization of eternal blessings, the Book of Mormon makes clear that neither the conditional nor unconditional blessings of the Atonement would be available to mankind except through the grace and goodness of Christ. Obviously the unconditional blessings of the Atonement are unearned, but the conditional ones also are not fully merited. By living faithfully and keeping the commandments of God, we can receive a fuller measure of blessings from Christ, but even these greater blessings are freely given of him and are not technically "earned" by us. In short, good works are necessary for salvation, but they are not sufficient. And God is not obliged to make up the insufficiency. As Jacob taught, "Remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved." [^111]

The Book of Mormon is unequivocal in its teaching that fallen man "could not merit anything of himself," as Aaron taught King Lamoni's father. [^112] Lehi taught the same doctrine earlier when he declared, "There is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah." [^113]

Among the earliest Book of Mormon sermons on Christ—one establishing for future Nephite generations the "doctrine of Christ"—was Nephi's concluding testimony to his people shortly before his death. In that valedictory message, he taught that through baptism we enter the straight and narrow path that leads to eternal life. But even in such outward ordinances, even by such "works," if you will, do we earn our way to salvation? Emphatically not, said Nephi:

"Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save." [^114]

That is a variation on what Abinadi later taught about the relationship of the law of Moses to the gospel, a form of the works vs. grace controversy that was observed even in ancient days. Said he, "Salvation doth not come by the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people . . . they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses." [^115]

As noted earlier, even the sometimes stern Jacob was brightened by the realization of God's grace. He taught, "Cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved. Wherefore, may God raise you from death by the power of the resurrection, and also from everlasting death by the power of the atonement, that ye may be received into the eternal kingdom of God, that ye may praise him through grace divine." [^116]

Moroni would close the Book of Mormon with his final reassurance of the grace of God, but noting it is a grace that requires our honest effort to claim and enjoy. To those of us who would live in the latter days, he wrote, "If ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; . . . then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ." [^117]

As summary, Nephi gave what surely must be the most succinct and satisfying resolution ever recorded in the history of the faith vs. works controversy. He said clearly and plainly for all who read the Book of Mormon to understand, "We know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." [^118]

Resurrection

Inasmuch as the physical resurrection of Christ is the visible, outward manifestation of the more invisible and inward spiritual triumph of the Atonement, it remains the grand, central fact at the heart of the Christian message. It is the sublime reality that sets Christianity apart from all other religions. The message is that a man who was dead did, by his own power, infuse life back into his own body, never again to experience the separation of his spirit from that body in time or eternity. In so doing, he magnificently and magnanimously provided, by that same power, a similar experience for every other man, woman, and child who would ever live in this world. As "another testament of Jesus Christ," the Book of Mormon contains twice as many references to the Resurrection as does the New Testament. It is a strong and pervasive doctrine throughout the book, clear evidence of this latter-day testament's unvarying Christian message.

Lehi taught at the very outset of the record that the Holy Messiah, would lay "down his life according to the flesh, and [take] it again by the power of the Spirit, that he [might] bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise." [^119] Moroni, in his very final and fitting verse of the Book of Mormon, said, "I soon go to rest in the paradise of God, until my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead." [^120]

These observations from the first and last prophets in the book provide brackets to the Book of Mormon story, suggesting just how universally this crucial Christian doctrine was known to these people. And yet, as in our time so in theirs, there was a rising generation who "did not believe what had been said concerning the resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the coming of Christ." [^121] To that audience as well as our modern one, the teachings of the Book of Mormon emphasize the resurrection of the Son of God.

One of the most powerful voices in the Book of Mormon on the doctrine of the Resurrection comes from Abinadi, who did so much to show that the law of Moses (and the Old Testament world generally) had no hope of salvation without the truths of the gospel, including the certainty of the Resurrection. Abinadi, "speaking of things to come as though they had already come," noted that "if Christ had not risen from the dead, or have broken the bands of death that the grave should have no victory, and that death should have no sting, there could have been no resurrection." [^122]

Samuel the Lamanite was given to see some of the actual events of Christ's birth, life, ministry, and death, including the fact that at his crucifixion and subsequent resurrection, "many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many." [^123] That passage is particularly famous in Nephite literature because its fulfillment was not fully recorded by the Nephite record keepers at the time of Christ's crucifixion and resurrection, an omission caught by the Savior himself, who directed that the fulfillment of the prophecy be added to the record. [^124]

The resurrection at the time of Christ—"a first resurrection," as Abinadi phrased it—did not apply to those who "wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them," who did not have claim upon that first resurrection experience. [^125]

Clearly not all of the Nephite prophets knew the details of the Resurrection as we know them in our dispensation, though they knew a great deal for their time. For as much as was revealed about this first resurrection and whatever implications it had for later iterations of that event, at least Alma—for one—was not given to know many of the specifics of the Resurrection even though he had "inquired diligently of God" that he might know them. It was a question about the doctrine of the resurrection that the increasingly humble Zeezrom put to Alma which the prophet could refer to only as one of "the mysteries of God." Years later in teaching his son Corianton, Alma still called it a "mystery," the details of which only God himself knows. [^126] That is, of course, a perfectly appropriate and accurate response to the complete doctrine of the Resurrection, even with the additional revelations we have received in the dispensation of the fulness of times. Only Deity knows the grand mystery of how everlasting life is actually restored to one who has died.

Alma knew there was a "time appointed that all shall come forth from the dead," though he confessed that he did not know just how many moments of such resurrection there would be. He was satisfied that God knew all such chronologies and that it was not necessary for him to know them. [^127] Furthermore, he had to clarify for Corianton the erroneous teaching of some at the time who were teaching what was called a "resurrection" but clearly was not. These were speaking incorrectly of the Resurrection as a nonphysical, figurative event—"the raising of the spirit or the soul . . . to happiness or misery." [^128]

Lastly, Alma could not say whether the wicked would be reunited in the same time frame as the righteous, but he gave it as his "opinion"—which would prove to be absolutely correct—that at least the soul and body of the righteous would be resurrected at the time of Christ's resurrection and ascension into heaven. [^129] Understandably he was not so presumptuous as to say whether that would be precisely at the moment of Christ's resurrection or immediately thereafter, [^130] a matter on which God had never spoken.

In spite of these few unknown details of the Resurrection, what Alma had inquired diligently of the Lord to know and had been told was that a time was granted between death and the Resurrection in which "the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life." He learned that there the spirits are divided into two broad categories. The righteous enter into a state of happiness, rest, and peace called paradise, "where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow." The wicked, on the other hand, are cast into "outer darkness," a rather severe but accurate description of the spirit prison spoken of by Peter. [^131] In fact, the spirit prison was a place of darkness until the redeeming light of the gospel came to those individuals. Furthermore, for those in the spirit prison who reject the offer of Christ's saving and enlightening doctrine, darkness will remain until the time of their resurrection.

Restoration

Alma also knew, as did other Book of Mormon prophets, that a doctrine of restoration accompanied the doctrine of the Resurrection. Physically this meant that "the soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame." [^132] That declaration came with almost the same phrasing and certainly the same doctrinal insight that Amulek had earlier taught: "The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

"Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil." [^133]

The spiritual impact of that doctrine of restoration is sobering for those who may have believed that Christ's atonement and their resurrection would somehow bring something more than was deserved. Alma made it very clear that if our works are good in this life, and the desires of our hearts are good, then in the Resurrection we will be restored to that which is good. But, by the same token, if our works are evil, then our reward will be the restoration of evil in the Resurrection. To Corianton, who apparently was taking casually some of these "points of doctrine," [^134] Alma expressed strongly that no one should fallaciously assume that the restorative powers of the Resurrection could restore one "from sin to happiness." That can never be, for "wickedness never was happiness.

"And now, my son, all men that are in a state of nature, or I would say, in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; they are without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness.

"And now behold, is the meaning of the word restoration to take a thing of a natural state and place it in an unnatural state, or to place it in a state opposite to its nature?

"O, my son, this is not the case; but the meaning of the word restoration is to bring back again evil for evil, or carnal for carnal, or devilish for devilish—good for that which is good; righteous for that which is righteous; just for that which is just; merciful for that which is merciful."

On the strength of that doctrine Alma encouraged Corianton to do that which he would have done unto him. In his relationship with others he should act mercifully, deal justly, judge righteously, and "do good continually." On the divine principle of restoration, all such would then be returned to him in his eternal reward.

"Yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored unto you again; ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again.

"For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all." [^135]

Of course, the ultimate promise in the Resurrection is that we will "die no more." But it is important not to confuse the miracle of restored life in mortality, such as Christ gave to Lazarus (who would later die—again—like all other mortals), with the doctrine of resurrection into immortality, after which the spirit is never again separated from the body. Amulek made this point very clear: "Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption." [^136]

The limitations experienced by an unembodied spirit are well documented in the doctrine of the restored gospel, doctrine gleaned first from Book of Mormon passages. [^137] Later, in 1833, the Lord would say to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected [the definition of the Resurrection], receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." [^138] The Lord also taught, "The spirit and the body are the soul of man. And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul." [^139]

We should not be surprised at this definition of the soul, for it is contained in the very grammar of the Book of Mormon. For example, Jacob said, "The spirit and the body is [singular] restored to itself [singular] again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls."140

Robed in Righteousness

In the imagery of the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is always better to be clothed than unclothed, to be robed rather than naked. Jacob taught that the wicked will have a knowledge of guilt and uncleanness that leads them to feel naked before God, whereas the righteous shall have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment and their righteousness, "being clothed with purity, yea, even with the robe of righteousness." [^140]

As a universal gift flowing from the atonement of Christ, the Resurrection will clothe with a permanent, perfected, restored body every spirit ever born into mortality. Furthermore, for every person who accepts the principles and ordinances of the gospel, that person's body will be something of a robe of righteousness. Therein is the redemption of the soul, and therein is a fulness of joy throughout all eternity, including, in its highest order, "a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." [^141]

The royal role and priestly power of celestial kings and queens, including the restored and perfected bodies commensurate with such a station, are among the highest and holiest gifts of the atonement of Jesus Christ. When we consider that the alternative was to see our bodies decayed and lifeless in the grave while our spirits became "devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the Father of lies, in misery, like unto himself," [^142] little wonder that we say of the Savior of the world, "O the greatness of the mercy of our God, the Holy One of Israel! For he delivereth his saints from that awful monster the devil, and death, and hell." [^143]Little wonder that one stands "all amazed at the love Jesus offers me, confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me . . . . Oh, it is wonderful, wonderful to me!" [^144]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma 42:8.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 121.
[^3] Mormon 9:12-13.
[^4] See 2 Nephi 2:1-3.
[^5] 2 Nephi 2:4.
[^6] See 1 Nephi 10, especially verse 18.
[^7] 1 Corinthians 15:45.
[^8] Romans 5:14.
[^9] 1 Peter 1:20.
[^10] Revelation 13:8.
[^11] Mosiah 4:7; see also v. 6.
[^12] Alma 12:25; see also v. 30.
[^13] Alma 22:13.
[^14] Ether 3:14; for other representative Book of Mormon examples of this commonly taught doctrine, see Mosiah 15:19; 18:13; Alma 42:26.
[^15] 2 Nephi 2:25-26.
[^16] 2 Nephi 2:5.
[^17] 2 Nephi 2:8-10. Note how repeatedly the Book of Mormon teaches simple truths that so effortlessly counter what would become the erroneous beliefs of many in the post-Messianic era. Lehi repeated three times that Christ would make intercession for all the children of men and that all would stand before God. The blessings of redemption and the invitation to eternal life were to be for all who came to earth. From start to finish, the Book of Mormon clearly opposes the later doctrines of reformed theology, predicated upon, among other things, an erroneous view of predestination. Such error would teach selective redemption for a limited few alone who, through no choice or effort of their own, would be given the privilege of embracing salvation and its eternal blessings.
[^18] See Revelation 12:7-17; Moses 4:1-4.
[^19] 2 Nephi 2:16, 26-27.
[^20] 2 Nephi 2:11.
[^21] 2 Nephi 2:12.
[^22] 2 Nephi 2:11.
[^23] Moses 5:10.
[^24] Moses 5:11.
[^25] Mosiah 16:3.
[^26] 2 Nephi 2:25, 23; see also Moses 5:11.
[^27] 2 Nephi 2:22-23; 19-20.
[^28] Mosiah 3:16.
[^29] Mosiah 3:19.
[^30] Mosiah 16:3-5.
[^31] Ether 3:2.
[^32] Ether 3:2.
[^33] See Mosiah 3:26.
[^34] 2 Nephi 2:24.
[^35] 2 Nephi 2:21.
[^36] Alma 12:24, 28-30, 32-33.
[^37] 2 Nephi 2:26-27.
[^38] Romans 3:23.
[^39] 2 Nephi 2:28-29, 27.
[^40] 2 Nephi 2:30.
[^41] 2 Nephi 2:8.
[^42] 2 Nephi 9:5-7.
[^43] Alma 34:8-10, 12.
[^44] 2 Nephi 9:21-22.
[^45] See Articles of Faith 1:2.
[^46] 2 Nephi 9:8-10.
[^47] 2 Nephi 9:27.
[^48] 2 Nephi 9:9-11.
[^49] 2 Nephi 9:13, 19-21.
[^50] 2 Nephi 9:25-26.
[^51] See D&C 68:25; 29:46-47.
[^52] Moroni 8:8.
[^53] Moroni 8:9-12, 14, 19, 22-23.
[^54] Mosiah 3:16, 18, 21.
[^55] Matthew 19:14.
[^56] 2 Nephi 9:23-24, 27.
[^57] Moroni 8:25-26.
[^58] Mosiah 3:19.
[^59] Mosiah 4:2; see Helaman 12:7-8 for Mormon's commentary on the disobedience and willfulness of mortals that makes them "less than the dust of the earth."
[^60] Mosiah 4:2.
[^61] Mosiah 4:6-8.
[^62] Mosiah 5:7-9.
[^63] Alma 5:7.
[^64] Alma 5:14, 27, 38, 48.
[^65] Mosiah 27:24-26, 28.
[^66] Alma 36:5, 24, 26.
[^67] Alma 7:13-14.
[^68] Alma 7:11-12.
[^69] See Luke 15:5.
[^70] Isaiah 40:29, 31.
[^71] Alma 7:15; Matthew 11:28-29.
[^72] D&C 88:6, 13.
[^73] D&C 133:53.
[^74] D&C 122:9.
[^75] See Alma 42:13, 22, 25.
[^76] Alma 42:14; see also v. 12.
[^77] Alma 42:19-20.
[^78] Alma 42:25.
[^79] Mosiah 2:36-39.
[^80] Jacob 6:10; see also 1 Nephi 2:18.
[^81] Mosiah 3:10; Alma 11:41, 44.
[^82] Alma 12:1, 7.
[^83] Mosiah 15:27.
[^84] See Alma 42:13, 22, 25.
[^85] Alma 12:15.
[^86] Alma 42:15.
[^87] See Mosiah 13:28, 34; 15:1.
[^88] Alma 34:11.
[^89] Alma 42:15.
[^90] See Mosiah 15:8.
[^91] Alma 42:13-14, 22-24.
[^92] Mosiah 15:9.
[^93] John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882), pp. 148-49.
[^94] Alma 42:23-24.
[^95] Alma 34:15-16.
[^96] Mosiah 16:12.
[^97] 1 Corinthians 6:20.
[^98] 2 Nephi 9:5.
[^99] 2 Nephi 9:41.
[^100] 2 Nephi 9:51.
[^101] 2 Nephi 26:24-25, 27-28, 33.
[^102] Alma 12:34; 24:10.
[^103] Alma 24:15.
[^104] Alma 18:41.
[^105] Alma 19:29.
[^106] Alma 33:4-11. Were it not for the Book of Mormon, no one would even know of the prophet Zenos, nor would there be recorded such an eloquent prayer of thanksgiving and salvation as this jewel of personal supplication.
[^107] Alma 36:17-21.
[^108] Alma 38:8.
[^109] Alma 42:27.
[^110] Alma 42:30-31.
[^111] 2 Nephi 10:24.
[^112] Alma 22:14.
[^113] 2 Nephi 2:8.
[^114] 2 Nephi 31:19.
[^115] Mosiah 13:28.
[^116] 2 Nephi 10:23-25.
[^117] Moroni 10:32-33.
[^118] 2 Nephi 25:23.
[^119] 2 Nephi 2:8.
[^120] Moroni 10:34.
[^121] Mosiah 26:2.
[^122] Mosiah 16:6-7.
[^123] Helaman 14:25; see also Matthew 27:52-53.
[^124] See 3 Nephi 23:7-13.
[^125] Mosiah 15:21, 24, 26.
[^126] Alma 40:3; 12:8-9.
[^127] Alma 40:4; see also vv. 3 and 5-8.
[^128] Alma 40:15.
[^129] Alma 40:20.
[^130] See Alma 40:21.
[^131] Alma 40:11-14; see also 1 Peter 3:19.
[^132] Alma 40:23.
[^133] Alma 11:43-44.
[^134] Alma 41:9.
[^135] Alma 41:10-15.
[^136] Alma 11:45.
[^137] For example see 2 Nephi 9:8-9, previously cited.
[^138] D&C 93:33-34.
[^139] D&C 88:15-16.
[^140] 2 Nephi 9:13.
[^141] 2 Nephi 9:14.
[^142] D&C 132:19.
[^143] 2 Nephi 9:9.
[^144] 2 Nephi 9:19.
