Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

Appendix D

Comparison of the Sermon at the Temple and the Sermon on the Mount

The Sermon at the Temple (Book of Mormon) 3 Nephi 12:1 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words unto Nephi, and to those who had been called, (now the number of them who had been called, and received power and authority to baptize, was twelve) and behold, he stretched forth his hand unto the multitude, and cried unto them, saying: Blessed are ye if ye shall give heed unto the words of these twelve whom I have chosen from among you to minister unto you, and to be your servants; and unto them I have given power that they may baptize you with water; and after that ye are baptized with water, behold, I will baptize you with fire and the Holy Ghost; therefore blessed are ye if ye shall believe in me and be baptized, after that ye have seen me and know that I am. The Sermon on the Mount (New Testament) Matthew 5:1 And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him:

3 Nephi 12:2 And again, more blessed are they who shall believe in your words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me, and that ye know that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins. Matthew 5:2 And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, 3 Nephi 12:3 Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Matthew 5:3 Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 3 Nephi 12:4 And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Matthew 5:4 Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

3 Nephi 12:5 And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Matthew 5:5 Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. 3 Nephi 12:6 And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost. Matthew 5:6 Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. 3 Nephi 12:7 And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Matthew 5:7 Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. 3 Nephi 12:8 And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matthew 5:8 Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. 3 Nephi 12:9 And blessed are all the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. Matthew 5:9 Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. 3 Nephi 12:10 And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Matthew 5:10 Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 3 Nephi 12:11 And blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake; Matthew 5:11 Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.

3 Nephi 12:12 For ye shall have great joy and be exceedingly glad, for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you. Matthew 5:12 Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. 3 Nephi 12:13 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the salt of the earth; but if the salt shall lose its savor wherewith shall the earth be salted? The salt shall be thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of men. Matthew 5:13 Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. 3 Nephi 12:14 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the light of this people. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Matthew 5:14 Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. 3 Nephi 12:15 Behold, do men light a candle and put it under a bushel? Nay, but on a candlestick, and it giveth light to all that are in the house; Matthew 5:15 Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.

3 Nephi 12:16 Therefore let your light so shine before this people, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven. Matthew 5:16 Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. 3 Nephi 12:17 Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets. I am not come to destroy but to fulfil; Matthew 5:17 Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. 3 Nephi 12:18 For verily I say unto you, one jot nor one tittle hath not passed away from the law, but in me it hath all been fulfilled. Matthew 5:18 For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. 3 Nephi 12:19 And behold, I have given you the law and the commandments of my Father, that ye shall believe in me, and that ye shall repent of your sins, and come unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Behold, ye have the commandments before you, and the law is fulfilled. Matthew 5:19 Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

3 Nephi 12:20 Therefore come unto me and be ye saved; for verily I say unto you, that except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. Matthew 5:20 For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. 3 Nephi 12:21 Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, and it is also written before you, that thou shalt not kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment of God; Matthew 5:21 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: 3 Nephi 12:22 But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Matthew 5:22 But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

3 Nephi 12:23 Therefore, if ye shall come unto me, or shall desire to come unto me, and rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee— Matthew 5:23 Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; 3 Nephi 12:24 Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you. Matthew 5:24 Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. 3 Nephi 12:25 Agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art in the way with him, lest at any time he shall get thee, and thou shalt be cast into prison. Matthew 5:25 Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 3 Nephi 12:26 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, thou shalt by no means come out thence until thou hast paid the uttermost senine. And while ye are in prison can ye pay even one senine? Verily, verily, I say unto you, Nay. Matthew 5:26 Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.

3 Nephi 12:27 Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery; Matthew 5:27 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: 3 Nephi 12:28 But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart. Matthew 5:28 But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. 3 Nephi 12:29 Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart; Matthew 5:29 And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. 3 Nephi 12:30 For it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell. Matthew 5:30 And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. 3 Nephi 12:31 It hath been written, that whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement. Matthew 5:31 It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement:

3 Nephi 12:32 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and whoso shall marry her who is divorced committeth adultery. Matthew 5:32 But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery. 3 Nephi 12:33 And again it is written, thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths; Matthew 5:33 Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths: 3 Nephi 12:34 But verily, verily, I say unto you, swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is God's throne; Matthew 5:34 But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God's throne: 3 Nephi 12:35 Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; Matthew 5:35 Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King. 3 Nephi 12:36 Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair black or white; Matthew 5:36 Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.

3 Nephi 12:37 But let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever cometh of more than these is evil. Matthew 5:37 But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil. 3 Nephi 12:38 And behold, it is written, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; Matthew 5:38 Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: 3 Nephi 12:39 But I say unto you, that ye shall not resist evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also; Matthew 5:39 But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. 3 Nephi 12:40 And if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also; Matthew 5:40 And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also. 3 Nephi 12:41 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Matthew 5:41 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. 3 Nephi 12:42 Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn thou not away. Matthew 5:42 Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.

3 Nephi 12:43 And behold it is written also, that thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy; Matthew 5:43 Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. 3 Nephi 12:44 But behold I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you; Matthew 5:44 But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; 3 Nephi 12:45 That ye may be the children of your Father who is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good. Matthew 5:45 That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. 3 Nephi 12:46 Therefore those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled. Matthew 5:46 For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? 3 Nephi 12:47 Old things are done away, and all things have become new. Matthew 5:47 And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so?

3 Nephi 12:48 Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect. Matthew 5:48 Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. 3 Nephi 13:1 Verily, verily, I say that I would that ye should do alms unto the poor; but take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven. Matthew 6:1 Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. 3 Nephi 13:2 Therefore, when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Matthew 6:2 Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. 3 Nephi 13:3 But when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth; Matthew 6:3 But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth: 3 Nephi 13:4 That thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly. Matthew 6:4 That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly.

3 Nephi 13:5 And when thou prayest thou shalt not do as the hypocrites, for they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Matthew 6:5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. 3 Nephi 13:6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. Matthew 6:6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly. 3 Nephi 13:7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen, for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Matthew 6:7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. 3 Nephi 13:8 Be not ye therefore like unto them, for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him. Matthew 6:8 Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.

3 Nephi 13:9 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Matthew 6:9 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. 3 Nephi 13:10 Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Matthew 6:10 Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. 3 Nephi 13:11 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. Matthew 6:11 Give us this day our daily bread. 3 Nephi 13:12 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Matthew 6:12 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. 3 Nephi 13:13 For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen. Matthew 6:13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. 3 Nephi 13:14 For, if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father will also forgive you; Matthew 6:14 For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: 3 Nephi 13:15 But if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Matthew 6:15 But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

3 Nephi 13:16 Moreover, when ye fast be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance, for they disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Matthew 6:16 Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. 3 Nephi 13:17 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face; Matthew 6:17 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face; 3 Nephi 13:18 That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father, who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. Matthew 6:18 That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. 3 Nephi 13:19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and thieves break through and steal; Matthew 6:19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: 3 Nephi 13:20 But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. Matthew 6:20 But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal:

3 Nephi 13:21 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Matthew 6:21 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. 3 Nephi 13:22 The light of the body is the eye; if, therefore, thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. Matthew 6:22 The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. 3 Nephi 13:23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If, therefore, the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! Matthew 6:23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! 3 Nephi 13:24 No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Matthew 6:24 No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. 3 Nephi 13:25 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words he looked upon the twelve whom he had chosen, and said unto them: Remember the words which I have spoken. For behold, ye are they whom I have chosen to minister unto this people. Therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? Matthew 6:25 Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?

3 Nephi 13:26 Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? Matthew 6:26 Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? 3 Nephi 13:27 Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature? Matthew 6:27 Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature? 3 Nephi 13:28 And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin; Matthew 6:28 And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: 3 Nephi 13:29 And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these. Matthew 6:29 And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

3 Nephi 13:30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, even so will he clothe you, if ye are not of little faith. Matthew 6:30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? 3 Nephi 13:31 Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? Matthew 6:31 Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? 3 Nephi 13:32 For your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. Matthew 6:32 (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. 3 Nephi 13:33 But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Matthew 6:33 But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you. 3 Nephi 13:34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient is the day unto the evil thereof. Matthew 6:34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

3 Nephi 14:1 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words he turned again to the multitude, and did open his mouth unto them again, saying: Verily, verily, I say unto you, Judge not, that ye be not judged. Matthew 7:1 Judge not, that ye be not judged. 3 Nephi 14:2 For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. Matthew 7:2 For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. 3 Nephi 14:3 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Matthew 7:3 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? 3 Nephi 14:4 Or how wilt thou say to thy brother: Let me pull the mote out of thine eye—and behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Matthew 7:4 Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? 3 Nephi 14:5 Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother's eye. Matthew 7:5 Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

3 Nephi 14:6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you. Matthew 7:6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you. 3 Nephi 14:7 Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Matthew 7:7 Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: 3 Nephi 14:8 For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.Matthew 7:8 For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. 3 Nephi 14:9 Or what man is there of you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone? Matthew 7:9 Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? 3 Nephi 14:10 Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? Matthew 7:10 Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? 3 Nephi 14:11 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him? Matthew 7:11 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?

3 Nephi 14:12 Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets. Matthew 7:12 Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets. 3 Nephi 14:13 Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, which leadeth to destruction, and many there be who go in thereat; Matthew 7:13 Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: 3 Nephi 14:14 Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. Matthew 7:14 Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. 3 Nephi 14:15 Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Matthew 7:15 Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. 3 Nephi 14:16 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Matthew 7:16 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

3 Nephi 14:17 Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. Matthew 7:17 Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. 3 Nephi 14:18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Matthew 7:18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 3 Nephi 14:19 Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Matthew 7:19 Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 3 Nephi 14:20 Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them. Matthew 7:20 Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. 3 Nephi 14:21 Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven. Matthew 7:21 Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. 3 Nephi 14:22 Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? Matthew 7:22 Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?

3 Nephi 14:23 And then will I profess unto them: I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Matthew 7:23 And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity. 3 Nephi 14:24 Therefore, whoso heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his house upon a rock— Matthew 7:24 Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: 3 Nephi 14:25 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock. Matthew 7:25 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. 3 Nephi 14:26 And every one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them not shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand— Matthew 7:26 And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand: 3 Nephi 14:27 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it. Matthew 7:27 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it.

3 Nephi 15:1 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had ended these sayings he cast his eyes round about on the multitude, and said unto them: Behold, ye have heard the things which I taught before I ascended to my Father; therefore, whoso remembereth these sayings of mine and doeth them, him will I raise up at the last day. Matthew 7:28 And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at his doctrine: 3 Nephi 15:2 And it came to pass that when Jesus had said these words he perceived that there were some among them who marveled, and wondered what he would concerning the law of Moses; for they understood not the saying that old things had passed away, and that all things had become new. Matthew 7:29 For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes.
