# Glossary of Symbols

### Glossary of Symbols
Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)
 
 

Glossary of Symbols

Aaron. (1) As the high priest, Aaron was a type for Christ. (2) Aaron was the illustration or symbol of one properly ordained to the priesthood (Heb. 5:4).

Abel. Adam's son, a prophet, seer, and revelator, whose innocent blood was shed at the hands of Cain, who is Perdition (Gen. 4:8; Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 169). As such he was a type for Christ.

Ablutions. An act of washing; a cleansing or purification by water. Paul refers to the ablutions associated with the Levitical order as "baptisms" and "divers washings" (Heb. 6:2, 9:10). It was in imitation of such a ritual that Pilate "washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person" (Matt. 27:24).

Abraham. (1) The father of the faithful and thus a type for what all men must be and do to gain salvation (D&C 84:34; 132:32). Through eternal marriage every man becomes as Abraham to his family and obtains the promise of eternal seed (D&C 110:12; 132:30-31). (2) In his willingness to offer Isaac as a sacrifice he was a type for our eternal Father (Gen. 22).

Abraham's bosom. A symbol for paradise, the place where the righteous spirits await the day of their resurrection (Luke 16:22-23).

Adam. (1) Abraham tells us the name means "first father" (Abr. 1:3). (2) New Testament writers typically use Adam as a symbol of all humankind (as in 1 Cor. 15:21-22; Rom. 5:12-21). (3) Christ is referred to as the Second Adam because through the Resurrection he was the firstborn into immortal life (1 Cor. 15:45).

Adultery. A frequent characteristic of Hebrew prophecy is the description of apostasy through the metaphor of adultery. God's covenant with Israel is referred to as a marriage. Having made a sacred covenant with Christ, those who turned from it in their lust and love for the things of the world are called adulterous. (See also Fornication.)

Allegory. An extended metaphor in which people, places, or things are given a symbolic meaning. Classic scriptural illustrations are Zenos's allegory of the tame and wild olive trees (Jacob 5); Paul's comparison of the two covenants to Sarah and Hagar (Gal. 4:21-31); and the story of Eve being created from the rib of Adam (Gen 2:21-25).

Almond. A symbol of divine favor, as demonstrated by the flowering of Aaron's rod and its bringing forth fruit (Num. 17:1-8). That chosen of God is identified by its fruit.

Alpha and Omega. The first and last letters of the Greek alphabet are used as name-titles for Christ. Figuratively they represent the timeless and eternal nature of the attributes of Deity (D&C 76:4).

Altar. A place of worship, most frequently associated with making sacrifices and entering into or renewing covenants. Always found in temples, altars are a place of the divine presence. Anciently, they were built on raised ground so that there was a ritual ascent as one approached the place of worship. Among the Book of Mormon peoples they were a place where one called upon God and confessed sins (Alma 17:4). In the Bible they are clearly seen as the place from which prayers were to ascend to heaven and to which angels descended bringing heavenly messages (Luke 1:9-20).

Amen. A term derived from a Hebrew word whose root suggests "so be it." Typically used as a confirmation (1 Kgs. 1:36), it implies agreement, as at the conclusion of a prayer (Matt. 6:13; 1 Cor 14:16). In Revelation 3:14, "the Amen" is a synonym for Jesus Christ, who affirms the divine purpose.

Ancient of days. Name-title for Adam, "the first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor" (D&C 27:11; Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 167). The title is incorrectly thought by the sectarian world to refer to God.

Angels. Messengers of God. They may be pre-earth spirits, translated beings, disembodied spirits, resurrected beings, or even righteous mortal men. Angelic symbols included flaming swords, trumpets, and scepters.

Anointing. Anointing with oil is associated with healing (James 5:14-15) and with consecrating or designating of something as holy (Ex. 29:36). The oil is a symbol of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. The words Messiah and Christ signify Anointed One. The anointing of prophets, priests, and kings made of each a type for the Christ.

Antitype. That which the type or symbol represents—for instance, a New Testament event prefigured in the Old Testament. Christ was the antitype of the sacrificial lamb of the Old Testament.

Apron. The fig leaves used by Adam and Eve to cover their nakedness after they had partaken of the forbidden fruit ate called aprons (Gen. 3:7).

Ark of the Covenant. Signified the divine presence and as such was the most sacred symbol in ancient Israel. It was made of incorruptible wood covered with gold. The wood symbolized the unchanging nature of God, the gold his glory and power.

Arm. (1) The upraised arms denote supplication, prayer, surrender. (2) The arm "made bare" (Isa. 52:10) represents the strength or power of God. (3) Those on the Lord's errand are the arm of the Lord (D&C 35:14).

Armageddon. A Greek transliteration of the Hebrew Har Megiddon, or "Mountain of Megiddo," a famous battlefield in the Plain of Jezreel in ancient Israel (Judg. 5:19, 2 Kgs. 9:27; 23:29). The name is used only once in the scriptures (Rev. 16:16), where it becomes the symbol for the gathering place of all nations for the final great battle preceding the return of Christ.

Armor. Used by Isaiah, Paul, and Joseph Smith as a symbol of protection against evil (Isa. 59:17; Eph. 6:11-17; D&C 27: 15-18).

Asherah (Ashtoreth, Astarte). A fertility goddess made of a tree trunk. Referred to in the King James Version as a grove, or groves (Deut. 16:21; 1 Kgs. 14:15; Isa. 17:8).

Atonement, Day of (Yom Kippur). The annual day upon which the high priest made the sin offering to effect a reconciliation between God and Israel. The ritual included the banishment of a "scapegoat" to which the priest had symbolically transferred the collective guilt of the nation. The Day of Atonement marked the once-yearly entrance of the high priest into the Holy of Holies. Paul explains this is a symbolic representation of Christ's sacrificial death and ascension to the heavenly sanctuary (Heb. 9).

Babylon. As the archetypal enemy of God's people, Babylon is used as a symbol for the idols of false religious, philosophical, and political systems that seek to destroy true religion and enslave God's people in worldliness (Rev. 17:5; D&C 1:16).

Baptism. A ritual immersion in water which symbolizes the death and burial of sins and a rebirth or resurrection into a newness of life (Rom. 6:3-6).

Bee. A symbol of industry. (See Deseret.)

Bethel. An ancient site, meaning "house of God," associated with Abraham (Gen. 12:8) and Jacob (Gen. 28:19).

Blood. (1) Represents life—"the life of the flesh is in the blood" (Lev. 17:11). In scriptural language the shedding of blood is the taking of life. The atoning power of animal sacrifice came from the shedding of the animal's blood, which represented the life of the animal, as a type for the atoning sacrifice of Christ. Christ literally shed his blood both in Gethsemane and on Calvary. (2) Thus, the blood also symbolizes an atoning sacrifice. Moses said, "It is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul" (Lev. 17:11). Through the blood of the Savior we are both redeemed and sanctified (D&C 27:2; Moses 6:60). (3) Blood is also a symbol of sin; by raising the warning voice we rid ourselves of the blood or sins of others (2 Ne. 9:44). (4) As the corruptible element in the body, blood represents mortality, or that which is earthly. "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God" (1 Cor. 15:50), while resurrected beings have bodies of "flesh and bone" (D&C 129:1-2).

Bosom. (1) Figuratively used to describe a position or place of special intimacy. The bosom is naturally associated with the idea of embracing in love and fellowship. In the East it had an extended meaning associated with the manner of dress. Long, flowing garments bound at the waist by a girdle provided a convenient carrying place, like a bag, in the fold of material over the breast. Thus the bosom became a carrying place used by shepherds to carry helpless lambs (Isa. 40:11). Latter-day scripture draws upon this imagery, speaking of Zion being taken into the bosom of the Lord (D&C 38:4), and of God sitting upon his throne "in the bosom of eternity" (D&C 88:13).

Branch. (1) Posterity: for instance, Ephraim and Manasseh are the branches of Joseph (Gen. 49:22) and those left with neither "root nor branch" will be those without family ties in the world to come (Mal. 4:1). (2) Christ is called the Branch of David (Jer. 23:5). (3) Groups of people over the centuries who have been grafted into the House of Israel, that is, have come to the knowledge of the true Messiah (1 Ne. 10:14) or been pruned from the mother tree (Jacob 5:8; Rom. 11:17).

Brazen Sea. In Solomon's Temple a large molten sea of brass placed on the backs of twelve brazen oxen (1 Kgs. 7:23-26). It was a baptismal font. Similar fonts, though not made of brass, are found in Latter-day Saint temples for the purpose of performing baptisms for the dead.

Brazen Serpent. The lifting up of the brazen serpent on a pole in the wilderness was likened by Christ to his death on the cross (John 3:14-15; Num. 21:6-9; 1 Ne. 17:41; Hel. 8:15).

Bread. (1) A symbol of life and the source of nourishment—Christ is known as the Bread of Life. As manna was showered down from heaven to save Israel anciently, so Christ came down from heaven as the living bread by partaking of which all men may gain everlasting life (John 6:31-65). (2) In the ordinance of the sacrament the bread is a symbol of the body of Christ (Matt. 26:26).

Bride and Bridegroom. One of the seven figures used to set forth the relationship of the Church to Christ: the branches and the Vine (John 15:1-11), the sheep and the Shepherd (John 10), the stones and the Chief Cornerstone (1 Pet. 2:4-8), the priest and the High Priest (Heb. 2:17), Adam and the Second Adam (1 Cor. 15:45-50), the parts of the body and the Head of the Body (1 Cor. 12), the bride and the Bridegroom. Ultimately, the Bride (the Church) will reign with her Husband (Christ) over the new earth (Rev. 21:2,9-10).

Candlestick. (1) The seven-branched candelabrum of the tabernacle was part of the furniture of the holy place. It was not lit by candles but rather by pure olive oil in cup-shaped containers resting on the head of each of its branches (Ex. 25:31-40). The light thus given was a type of the Holy Spirit illuminating all the things of God. The seven branches or stems represented the fullness and completeness of the revelations of the Spirit. The pure beaten gold of which it was made represented Christ and may allude to his role as the suffering servant. The candlestick is an appropriate representation of the tree of life. (2) The seven golden candlesticks seen by John in his revelation represent the seven churches of Asia (Rev. 1:20). (3) The two candlesticks spoken of in Rev. 11:4 "are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration" (D&C 77:15).

Cedar. Strength; nobility; incorruptibility. The sacred wood of Solomon's Temple.

Censer. A vessel used for the burning of incense (Lev. 16:12-13). Those used in the tabernacle were made of brass (Num. 16:39), while those used in the temple were of gold (1 Kings 7:50). The smoke rising from the vessel was a symbol of the prayers of Israel rising to God (Ps. 141:2).

Cherub, Cherubim (pl.). Angels of God who guarded the tree of life after the Fall (Gen. 3:24). The images of two cherubim were placed over the mercy seat of the ark in the Holy of Holies. They were made of gold and fashioned so that they faced each other and had wings that covered the mercy seat (Ex. 25:18-20). Their images were also embroidered on the veil of the temple (2 Chr. 3:14) and sculptured on a frieze around the walls of Solomon's Temple and on the bases of the "molten sea" (1 Kings 7:29). The cherubim are obviously so stationed to see that the holiness of God is not violated by those in transgression or those who have not complied with the proper rituals (see D&C 132:19). The Semitic peoples pictured them as winged lions and bulls, having human faces, and Ezekiel so describes them in his vision (Ezek. 1:5-28; 10:20). These are symbolic representations. Cherubim are angels and, as such, independent of their heavenly glory, are no different in their appearance than Christ or other men. (See also Eye, Wings.)

Circumcision. An operation in which the foreskin of eight-day-old males was removed as a ceremony of initiation into God's covenant with Israel. By it they knew that the children were not accountable before God until eight years of age (Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 17:4-20). "When a child was circumcised he was consecrated to God by the fact that his life (i.e., under the symbol of blood) was offered to God" (Hastings, James, ed. A Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1908., p. 331). Thus this covenant, sealed in the flesh, typified the subjugation of passion and the consecration of the body to God, or a putting away of the sins of the flesh (Col. 2:11). The imagery is frequently drawn upon as those who would be acceptable to the Lord are told to circumcise their hearts, their ears, and their lips.

Clay. (1) Represents the mortal body (Mosiah 3:5). (2) A symbol of limited mortal vision (John 9:6; Moses 6:35-36).

Clouds. (1) A symbol of the veil between God and man, as with the cloud on Mt. Sinai and on the Mount of Transfiguration (Ex. 24:15; Matt. 17:5). (2) In her wilderness wanderings ancient Israel followed "a pillar of a cloud" by day and the "pillar of fire" by night, which signified the presence of the Lord (Ex. 13:21-22). (3) A cloud as a symbol of the Lord's glory will rest upon the temple in the New Jerusalem in the future (D&C 84:5).

Colors. Often have symbolic meaning in the scriptures. Those most often used in this way are: white, black, purple, red, blue, gold, and silver. White signifies spotless purity, chastity, sanctification, righteousness, and sinlessness. God and heavenly beings are always clothed in white. It is also associated with transcendent perfection, simplicity, light, the sun, illumination, innocence, holiness, and sacredness. It is a statement of triumph of the spirit over the flesh, of good over evil. Black and darkness are often a symbol of evil or wickedness. Black is also associated with mourning. Purple (or scarlet) is the color of royalty, imperial and sacerdotal power. Red (or scarlet) naturally associates itself with blood and suffering and hence with the blood of atonement. Blue as the color of the heavens becomes associated with the idea of revelation and its source. Gold is the color of the sun; it represents divine power, the splendor of enlightenment; radiance, and glory. Because of its great value, and its radiance, gold is known to us as the possession of kings and great kingdoms. It is a symbol common to scriptural descriptions of God and the heavenly kingdom. Silver, like gold, is of great value and hence is associated with Christ. Traditionally, it is associated with the idea of a Reconciler, Savior, and Redeemer.

Cross. (1) Because of its association with the Lord, the cross has come to represent the Atonement (1 Cor. 1:17). (2) The trials of mortality that we are called upon to endure are commonly referred to as the cross we must bear. (3) Those committed to the gospel cause are called upon to take up their cross and follow him. "And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments," Christ said (Joseph Smith Translation, Matt. 16:25-26; 3 Ne. 12:30).

Crown. An ornamental head covering symbolic of royalty, victory, or great honor. The official headpiece of the high priest of the Israelites, and later of their kings, was called the "crown of the anointing oil" (Lev. 21:12). Nezer, the Hebrew root for such a crown, means "consecrate" or "set apart." Numerous passages speak of the Saints receiving the "crown of eternal life" (D&C 20:14).

Deseret. The Jaredite word for the honeybee (Ether 2:3). A symbol for industry and diligence.

Devil. The English word used to translate two Greek words with different meanings: (1) diabolos, "the accuser," which is synonymous with the Old Testament Satan (Zech. 3:2); (2) daimonion, a demonic being, or evil spirit (Matt. 9:32).

Diadem. "Royal power; sovereignty; the circle of continuity; endless duration" (Cooper, J. C. An Illustrated Encyclopedia of Traditional Symbolism. London: Thames & Hudson, 1978, 1982., p. 51).

Dove. "The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove.... The dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence." (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 276).

Ear. A figure for spiritual understanding (Moses 6:27).

East. As the direction of the dawn and the rising sun, it becomes a symbol of light, truth, and Christ. The orientation of the East Gate of the Temple at Jerusalem was such that on the days of the spring and fall equinoxes the first rays of the rising sun, heralding the advent of the glory of God, could penetrate into the Holy of Holies. Joseph Smith said that the coming of the Son of Man will be as the light of the morning coming out of the east (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 287).

Eden, Garden of. The events associated with the Garden of Eden make it the archetype of our temples. Here Adam received the priesthood, here Adam and Eve walked and talked with God; here our first parents were eternally married by God himself; here they learned of the tree of good and evil and of the tree of life; here they were taught the law of sacrifice and clothed in garments of skin; and from here they ventured into the lone and dreary world that they and their posterity might prove themselves worthy to return again to that divine presence.

Egypt. To dramatize the wickedness of Jerusalem in the last days, John the Revelator called it a spiritual "Sodom and Egypt" (Rev. 11:8).

Ensign. The standard of a king or prince, providing a rallying point in battle. "I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me," the Lord said (D&C 45:9).

Eve. The first woman, whose name means "mother of all living" (Gen. 3:20).

Eye. The lamp of the body. The eye is thought of as the source of light, enlightenment, and knowledge to the soul. Those laboring in the Lord's cause are to do so with "an eye single to the glory of God" (D&C 4:5). The eyes of the beasts seen in the revelation by John represented "light and knowledge" (D&C 77:4).

Fable. A fictitious story that draws its moral through the use of plants or animals endowed with human characteristics. Only two fables appear in the Bible: Jotham's fable of the trees choosing a king (Judg. 9:8-15) and Johoash's fable of the thistle and the cedar (2 Kgs. 14:8-10). In the New Testament the word has reference to Jewish myths espoused to sustain falsehood (1 Tim. 1:4).

Famine. Symbolizes a period in which the word of the Lord is not heard (Amos 8:11-12).

Fire. (1) A symbol of the presence of the Lord. God dwells in "everlasting burnings" (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 367). (2) On the head of or surrounding a person, fire represents divine power, glory, and holiness (Ezek. 8:2). Angels or ministering spirits are so presented (Heb. 1:7). (3) The act of purification as in baptism by fire (3 Ne. 9:20). It is a symbol of the burning out of the dross of sin. (4) A metaphor for the word of God (Jer. 23:29). (5) The feeling associated with testimony or the witness of the Spirit (Jer. 20:9). Fire is associated with spiritual power, illumination, inspiration, and enlightenment.

Firstborn. To Moses the Lord said: "Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine" (Ex. 13:2). By destroying the firstborn sons of Egypt and sparing those of Israel, God acquired a special ownership over the latter. Each belonged to the sanctuary, the firstborn son to serve as a priest, and the firstborn of the beasts, if a clean animal to be offered as a sacrifice, if unclean, then to be redeemed with a lamb. Later the firstborn sons excepting those of the tribe of Levi were redeemed from this obligation by the payment of a redemption tax (Num. 3:12-13). The consecration of the firstborn to the Lord as priest or as a sacrificial offering was a type for Christ, who as the firstborn in the spirit of all the Father's children was chosen in the heavenly council to be our priest or mediator and "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (Rev. 13:8).

Firstfruits. The Mosaic code required the Israelites to bring the firstfruits of their harvest to the sanctuary. This included grain, wine, and oil, which was to be used to support the priests. Thus, the Lord's people are spoken of as "the firstfruits," meaning those dedicated to him and his service (D&C 88:98).

Fornication. Is used with adultery to describe apostasy, particularly when it involves idolatry. The term is fitting because the idolatrous fertility cult worship of the Canaanites as well as of the Greeks often involved fornication with "sacred" prostitutes or priestesses (Jer. 2:20-37; Ezek. 16; Hosea 1-3).

Fountain. Christ is the fountain of all righteousness (1 Ne. 2:9; Jer. 2:13).

Frankincense. (See Incense.)

Gardens. Three sacred gardens are central to the whole plan of salvation: the Garden of Eden, the place of the Fall; the Garden of Gethsemane, with Golgotha the place of the Atonement; and the Garden of the Empty Tomb, the place of the Ressurection.

Gate. Shares the symbolism of the threshold or place of entrance, also the idea of protection or shelter. Anciently gates were commonly guarded by symbolic animals such as lions, dragons, bulls, or some strange beast. Kings sat in judgment at gates and they were also thought of as a place of communication between the living and the dead (Cooper, J. C. An Illustrated Encyclopedia of Traditional Symbolism. London: Thames & Hudson, 1978, 1982., pp. 72-73).

Gehenna. The Greek form of the Hebrew Hinnom, rendered hell in the New Testament. Gehenna is the deep narrow glen on the south and west of Jerusalem where children were burned to Molech and other pagan gods (Jer. 7:31; 1 Kgs. 11:7). Later used as a dump in which garbage was continually being burned, it became a symbol of punishment in the after life (Matt. 5:22; 10:28).

Gethsemane. Meaning garden of the "oil press," this is the garden across the brook Kidron, apparently near the foot of the Mount of Olives. Here Christ and his disciples frequently met and here Christ, pressed with the sins of all mankind, sweat great drops of blood (Luke 22:44).

Girdle. To put on one's girdle, or to gird oneself, was to prepare for, or be bound to, some action or to go forth on a mission. To gird up one's loins was to prepare for battle or some other activity (1 Kgs. 18:46). Since the girdle carried a man's weapon, it was also associated with power and strength (Isa. 11:5).

Gog and Magog. The terms Gog and Magog are used to represent the nations Satan will gather about him to attack the forces of the Messiah. Two great battles will be fought with these forces of evil: the battle that ushers in the Second Coming (Ezek. 38-39), and the final great battle at the end of the millennium when Satan and his forces have been loosed again (Rev. 20:7-9).

Gold. Often used in the scriptures as an emblem of what is divine, pure, precious, incorruptible, or glorious.

Grain. All grains are a symbol of renewal of life, the resurrection and fertility.

Grove. (See Asherah).

Hagar. Paul uses Hagar as a symbol of the Mosaic law in contrast to Sarah, who he said symbolized the fulness of the gospel (Gal. 4:22-31).

Hallelujah. A Hebrew word meaning "praise ye Jehovah," or as anglicized, "praise ye the Lord."

Hands. One of the most symbolically expressive parts of the body. (1) In Hebrew, yad, the root word, means either "hand" or "power." Thus hands signify power, strength, providence, or blessings. Priesthood, keys, ordinations, offices, blessings, and so on, are granted by the laying on of hands. This symbolizes the placing of God's hand or power upon the one so blessed (see D&C 36:1-2). It also provides an orderly, observable, and documentable way of conveying offices and authority (see D&C 42:11). (2) The extended open hand or clasped hands are a sign of friendship, confidence, and trust.

Head. Since the head is to rule the body, Christ is spoken of as the head of the Church (Eph. 4:15). Two examples illustrate the variety of ways the head is used as a scriptural type: (1) It is a type for the utter defeat that shall be brought upon Satan by Christ (Gen. 3:15). (2) The placing of dirt on the head was a sign of deep grief, sorrow, shame and humiliation (see 2 Sam. 15:32).

Heart. Has a host of usages in the scriptures. Three of the more prominent are: (1) The place of affections and emotions such as joy, fear, or hatred (Isa. 65:14). (2) An expression of spiritual receptivity or the lack of it, such as a hardening of the heart (1 Ne. 15:10). (3) True gospel understanding is to take place in the heart (Matt. 13:15).

High Priest. An obvious type for Christ, who is the great Prophet, Priest, and King (Heb. 4:14).

Honey. (1) In the Mosaic ritual, like leaven, it represented that which was corruptible (Lev. 2:11). (2) In John's revelation it represented the sweetness of the divine word (Rev. 10:9).

Horn. A symbol of power and strength (Ps. 75:10). Moses likened Ephraim and Manasseh to the horns of unicorns who would "push" or gather Israel from the ends of the earth in the last days (Deut. 33:17). Their horns or power is that of the priesthood.

Hyssop. A small plant of Egypt and Palestine, used by Israel for the ritualistic sprinkling of blood and water (Lev. 14:4,6,51-52). It is thus associated with purification and could be likened to the acts of faith that bring a remission of sins. "The addition of this herb to the vinegar or sour wine on the sponge would aid in alleviating the suffering of one on the cross. A bunch of hyssop may have accompanied the sponge upon the reed." (Wilson, Walter Lewis. Wilson's Dictionary of Bible Types. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdman's Publishing Co., 1975, 1983., p. 415.)

Idumea. The name given to Edom by the Greeks and Romans. Since Israel had to pass through it to obtain their promised land it became a symbol of the world or that which is wordly (D&C 1:36).

Incense. A fragrant substance burned in religious services of the Israelites (Ex. 25:6). The burning of the incense or frankincense was a symbol of the rising of prayers to heaven (Rev. 8:3-4).

Isaac. (1) A type for Christ when his father Abraham was commanded to offer him as a sacrifice (Gen. 22).

Israel. Is the new name given to Jacob after he wrestled with the angel at Bethel (Gen. 35:10). As the name means prince or soldier of God, it symbolizes that those of the house of Israel are of royal blood and are called upon to be soldiers or defenders of the faith.

Jacob's ladder. Jacob dreamed a dream in which he saw a ladder which joined heaven and earth which angels ascended and descended. The Lord standing above it renewed with Jacob the Abrahamic covenant. Jacob named the place of his dream Bethel, or house of God (Gen. 28:12-14, 19). Joseph Smith said, "Paul ascended into the third heavens, and he could understand the three principal rounds of Jacob's ladder—the telestial, the terrestrial, and the celestial glories or kingdoms" (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., pp. 304-5).

Jehovah. The anglicized form of the Hebrew YHWH (Yahweh), the God of Israel. Generally, references to Jehovah were translated as Lord or God (printed in small capitals) in the King James Version. The meaning conveyed by the name is that of an unchanging, ever-living God, who is faithful to his word throughout all generations of time.

Jesus. Is the Greek form of the Hebrew name Joshua. The name means "Jehovah saves."

Jordan River. Crossing over the Jordan is a metaphor for entering heaven, because the children of Israel were miraculously enabled to go over it dryshod on their way to the Promised Land (Josh. 3).

Joseph of Egypt. A type for: (1) Christ; (2) Joseph Smith; (3) The tribe of Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) in the latter-day gathering of Israel. (See Chapter 12.)

Joshua. An Old Testament type for Christ. (See Jesus.)

Jot. Derived from Iota, the smallest letter in the Greek alphabet. Figuratively, it signifies a matter of small moment (Matt. 5:18).

Key. (1) From the days of Adam the term key has been used by inspired writers as a symbol of power and authority. Keys are the right of presidency, and the one holding them holds the reigns of government. The keys given by Christ to Peter and the Twelve represented the authority to bind or loose all gospel ordinances and covenants both in heaven and on earth (Matt. 16:19; John 20:23). It was these same keys that were restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith (D&C 132:45-47). (2) Keys also denote the idea of liberation; knowledge; the mysteries; and initiation (Cooper, J. C. An Illustrated Encyclopedia of Traditional Symbolism. London: Thames & Hudson, 1978, 1982., p. 90). That is, they are the means provided whereby things are revealed or made manifest (D&C 107:18-19; 128:11).

Kings. In the Old Testament they were intended to be a type for Christ, and as such those properly assuming their thrones were anointed by the Lord's prophet (1 Sam. 9:16; 10:1).

Kneeling. Represents homage, supplication, and submission.

Lamb. (1) The gentleness of the lamb is a natural symbol of innocence, meekness, purity, and uncomplaining submissiveness. (2) A common metaphor for Israel with Christ as the good Shepherd (3 Ne. 15:21). (3) The lamb without blemish was the sacrificial victim for the sins of Israel. This was a type for Christ who is the "Lamb of God" and who offered himself as a sacrifice for all (Isa. 53:7; John 1:36).

Lamp. A symbol of enlightenment, knowledge, and guidance. The lamp represents the word of the Lord, the light by which all men are invited to walk (Ps. 119:105). (See also Olive Oil.)

Laver. In Solomon's Temple an enormous bronze bowl mounted on twelve oxen used for cleansing rituals by the priests and obviously for baptisms. (See also Brazen Sea.)

Leaven. (1) As an agent which causes fermentation, it symbolically represents any corrupting influence. Since the leaven itself has undergone corruption, and since it has a tendency to spread, it is a most apt figure. Only unleavened bread was acceptable as a sacrificial offering (Lev. 2:11); and only unleavened bread was to be eaten during the period of the Passover (Ex. 13:7). In speaking of the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, the Savior had reference to their corrupt doctrines (Matt. 16:6, 12). (2) Leaven is also used as a metaphor to depict those influences that cause a thing to raise and expand (Matt. 13:33).

Light. Is a symbol for revelation, knowledge, truth, the gospel, or the word of God (see D&C 45:9; 84:45). Christ is the "light of the world" (John 8:12), which light gives life to all things. The light of Christ is the power by which all things are created and governed (D&C 88:7-13).

Lucifer. (1) A name of honor once held by Satan when he held high position in the pre-earth kingdom of God (D&C 76:2.5-27). The name means "shining one" or "lightbearer." (2) By analogy this name is given to the king of Babylon by Isaiah (Isa. 14:12-22).

Manna. The food miraculously supplied the Israelites during their wilderness wanderings (Ex. 16). Commonly referred to as "bread" from heaven (Deut. 8:3), manna typified the spiritual salvation that can be had only through Christ, who is the Bread of Life.

Mantle. Was an emblem of authority. Elijah's placing of his mantle upon Elisha symbolized both a call and the conferring of spiritual power (1 Kgs. 19:19; 2 Kgs. 2:14).

Meggiddo. The ancient Palestinian city that overlooked the Valley of Jezreel, also referred to as the Plain of Esdraelon or Armageddon. It is the symbolic focal point of the last great war.

Melchizedek. A priest and king of the ancient city of Salem. His name means king of righteousness. Melchizedek was one of the most perfect types for Christ. From the Joseph Smith Translation it appears that he ascended to heaven with his righteous followers (Joseph Smith Translation, Gen 14:34).

Mercy Seat. The golden lid of the ark of the covenant. The name comes from the Hebrew kapporeth, which in turn comes from the root kaphar, meaning to cover, expiate, make an atonement, cleanse, forgive, or be merciful.

Messiah. A Hebrew term meaning anointed one; prophets, priests, and kings were so designated. Each were types of what the Messiah would be.

Moon. A metaphor used to contrast the glory of the terrestrial with that of the telestial (stars) and the celestial (sun) kingdoms (D&C 76:97).

Moses. As prophet, redeemer, mediator, and lawgiver of Israel, he was another of the perfect Old Testament types for Christ.

Mountains. Nature's temples. So often the place where God and man met, when there was no temple, that temples have become known as "the mountain of the Lord's house" (Isa. 2:2). They are the high place, the place to which one must ascend to commune with God. They were thought of as the summit of paradise, the place of passage from one plane to another.

Offering. All the offerings described in the scriptures are connected with Christ. Most of them picture the Savior as our offering or the propitiation for our sins.

Olive Leaf. A symbol of peace, particularly when associated with the dove. Joseph Smith designated the revelation known to us as D&C 88 as the "olive leaf . . . plucked from the Tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us."

Olive Oil. Was valued among the ancients as a source of light (Matt. 25:3), nourishment (1 Kgs. 17:12), and for its healing powers (Isa. 1:6). It is natural therefore that symbolically it be associated with enlightenment, nourishing the spirit, and the healing of the sick. The outpouring of consecrated olive oil was a symbol of the outpouring of the Spirit (1 Sam. 16:13). In the scriptures, it is associated with acts of consecration, dedication, and the infusing of new life. As the olive branch was a symbol of peace, so olive oil was a symbol of that peace which comes by the Spirit—that is, the comforting influence of the Holy Ghost (Isa. 61:3; Ps. 23:5).

Olive Tree. An emblem of peace and purity. The ancients frequently used the olive tree as an allegorical representation of Israel (Rom. 11:17-24; Jacob 5).

Palm Leaf. The palm leaf was a symbol of peace, also of triumph and victory (John 12:13; Rev. 7:9). 2 Esdras (one of the apocryphal books) captures the imagery: "I, Ezra, saw on Mount Zion a great multitude, which I could not number, and they all were praising the Lord with songs. In their midst was a young man of great stature, taller than any of the others, and on the head of each of them he placed a crown, but he was more exalted than they. And I was spellbound. Then I asked an angel, Who are these, my lord? He answered and said to me, These are they who have put off mortal clothing and have put on the immortal, and they have confessed the name of God; now they are being crowned and receive palms." (2 Esdras 2:42-45.)

Parable. Comes from the Greek word parabole ("a placing beside," "a comparison"). As used by Christ, parables were short narratives that compared something familiar to a spiritual truth. Parables were used both to unfold and to withhold spiritual truths, depending on the spiritual receptivity of those who heard them. (See Chapter 2.)

Passover, The. The commemoration of Israel's last night of bondage in Egypt when the Angel of Death "passed over" Israelite homes marked with the blood of a sacrificial lamb and destroyed the firstborn of every Egyptian household and the firstborn of their animals (Ex. 12). All that was associated with the Passover was a type of the atoning sacrifice of Christ. The Last Supper was the Passover meal. In this ritual meal with his Apostles, Christ introduced the ordinance of the sacrament, which was to replace the Passover among those who accepted him as the Christ.

Pearl. The value of the pearl was not so much in its commercial worth but in the beauty inherent in it. This made it an especially appropriate jewel to represent the word of God (Matt. 7:6; 13:46).

Perfume. Its fragrance is thought to represent the character of Christ rising in sweetness and fragrance to the heavens (Ex. 30:35).

Phylacteries. Small cases made of leather worn by Jewish men on the forehead and the left arm during prayers. Within these small cases are copies of four scriptural passages: Exodus 13:1-10, 11-16; Deuteronomy 6:4-9; 11:13-21. Christ was offended by this ostentatious display of piety (Matt. 23:5).

Pomegranate. An emblem of fruitfulness because of its many seeds.

Priest. In function and dress the priests of the Aaronic Order were types of Christ. Similarly today the priest in the Aaronic Priesthood in administering the sacrament represents Christ at the Last Supper.

Prince of Peace. A name-title of Christ signifying that eternal and abiding peace known only in him (Isa. 9:6). Melchizedek and Abraham, both prophetic types of Christ, also bore this title (Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 14:33; Abr. 1:2).

Psalm. A sacred song or poem used in praise or worship of God.

Rain. Is a symbol of revelation or heavenly blessings (Deut. 32:2).

Rainbow. (1) In a revelation to Joseph Smith the Lord said: "In the days of Noah I set a bow in the heavens as a sign and token that in any year that the bow should be seen the Lord would not come; but there should be seed time and harvest during that year: but whenever you see the bow withdrawn, it shall be a token that there shall be famine, pestilence, and great distress among the nations, and that the coming of the Messiah is not far distant" (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., pp. 340-41). (2) The rainbow is the token of the Lord's promise that he will never again destroy the world by flood (Gen. 9:8-17). (3) The rainbow was also the sign of the covenant that the Lord had promised Enoch and his city that they would return to live on the earth during the millennial era (Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 9:21-25).

Rend or Rent. (1) In biblical times the rending of clothes was a token of grief (Gen. 37:34). (2) The rending of a garment was also a way of dramatizing horror at what was deemed blasphemous or impious (Matt. 26:65; Acts 14:14). (3) It was also associated with the making of an irrevocable decision.

Rest of the Lord. Where mortals are concerned, the rest of the Lord is enjoyed by those whose spiritual knowledge and confidence shield them from the poisonous darts of doubt constantly hurled at them by those seeking to destroy their faith. In the eternal sense it is to gain the fulness of the Father (D&C 84:24).

Ring. (1) A symbol of eternity, because it is without beginning and without end. (2) Anciently, it was also a symbol of authority (Gen. 41:42).

River. (1) A symbol of divine life (Rev. 22:1-2). (2) A metaphor for the words of eternal life (John 7:38). (3) In the dream seen by Lehi and Nephi the river represented the filthiness of the world (1 Ne. 15:26-27).

Robe. A garment of distinction or majesty. Works of righteousness in which we must be clothed (Rev. 19:8).

Rock. An often-used metaphor conveying such ideas as permanence, solidity, steadfastness, strength, refuge, reliability and so on. In these and similiar senses both God and Christ are spoken of as the Rock (Ps. 42:9;1 Cor. 10:4). The Church is built on the rock of revelation (Matt. 16:13-18).

Rod. (1) An emblem of authority sharing the symbolism of a staff (Jer. 48:17). (2) The rod of Aaron is also associated with the ability to receive revelation (D&C 8:6). (3) The rod is also a symbol of chastisement (D&C 19:15). (4) Rod is used as a metaphor by Isaiah to describe a prophet of the Restoration (Isa. 11:1; D&C 113:3-4).

Rod of Iron. The word of God (1 Ne. 15:23-24; Joseph Smith Translation, Rev. 19:15).

Root. (1) Christ is the Root of David (Rev. 5:5;22:16). (2) The root of Jesse spoken of in Isaiah 11:10, is "a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days" (D&C 113:6). This is probably the Prophet Joseph Smith. (3) As the source of nourishment to a plant, the root also becomes a natural symbol for the heart or the source of life. Destruction is described as plucking up the root or the ax being laid to the root (Matt. 13:29).

Sabbath. (1) Comes from the Hebrew shabbat, meaning "rested." On the seventh day God commanded men to rest from the toil of the six days in commemoration of his having rested after the six days of creation. He blessed the seventh day and sanctified it (Gen. 2:1-3). After the Exodus it became a memorial for his having delivered Israel from their Egyptian bondage (Deut. 5:12-15). The day now sanctified to the Lord is the first day of the week, it having been the day of Christ's resurrection (Acts 20:7). (2) Anciently, other sacred days and periods were also called sabbaths, such as the Day of Atonement, the sabbatical year, and the year of jubilee.

Sackcloth. A coarse, dark cloth made of goat or camel hair worn by mourners, and thus a symbol of mourning, repentance, and humiliation.

Sacrifices. True sacrifices were gospel ordinances, given to man by revelation and performed by the authority of the priesthood. Their purpose was to typify the coming sacrifice of the Son of God for the sins of the world. From the day of Adam to the death of Christ sacrifices were offered by the Saints. No sacrifices were acceptable to God unless they were attended by personal righteousness if a personal sacrifice, or by group righteousness if a group sacrifice.

Salt. (1) Is an emblem of preservation from corruption. Salt was so essential to the sacrificial ordinance that it was the symbol of the covenant being made (Lev. 2:13). (2) The faithful in keeping covenants are spoken of as the salt of the earth. Covenant breakers are as salt that has lost its savor (D&C 101:39-40).

Satan. The name depicts the devil's role as an "adversary" in the Old Testament (Zech. 3:1-3), or as an "accuser" in the New Testament (Rev. 12:9). In all things he stands opposite God and righteousness.

Scapegoat. (1) A sacrificial goat upon whose head the high priest placed the collective sins of the people. This was done each year on the Day of Atonement, after which the goat was sent out into the desert. The scapegoat was a symbol of Christ, who would take upon himself the sins of the world. (2) In colloquial usage the term has come to mean anyone who bears the blame of others.

Scepter. A symbol of divine or royal power. (1) A prophetic figure representing the Messiah (Gen. 49:10;Num. 24:17). (2) The power of righteousness through which one obtains an everlasting dominion (D&C 121:46).

Seed. (1) Those who hearken unto the words of the prophets are the seed of Christ (Mosiah 15:10-14); similarly, those who honor the priesthood are the seed of the prophets (D&C 84:33-34). (2) Paul identifies Christ as the seed promised to Abraham (Gal. 3:16).

Serpent. A metaphor for cunning, craftiness, evil, guile, slyness, subtlety and so on. (1) Satan is known to us in the scriptures as the "old serpent" or "great dragon" (Rev. 12:9). (2) In contrast to our first definition, the serpent raised on the pole (Num. 21:9) was a prototype of Christ raised on the cross for the healing and salvation of the world.

Sheep. The flock of Christ. (See also Lamb.)

Shepherd. (1) Christ is the good shepherd (John 10). (2) The leader or protector of any flock, thus anyone serving in any capacity in the Church in which he is responsible for the spiritual or temporal well-being of others (Jer. 23:1-4).

Shewbread. The literal meaning is "bread of the presence." Twelve loaves, one representing each of the twelve tribes, were placed on the table in the holy place of the sanctuary each Sabbath. The bread was eaten in a symbolic ritual by the priests (Lev. 24:9).

Shield. A symbol of protection. "Above all," Paul said, we must take "the shield of faith" to protect ourselves from "all the fiery darts of the wicked" (Eph. 6:16).

Sleep. Used as a metaphor for death (1 Cor. 15:6).

Smoke. Represented prayer ascending to heaven.

Sodom. (1) The city forever associated with unnatural sex perversions, which God destroyed by fire, can properly be seen as a type for the destruction of all practicing such perversions today. (2) Used as a name for peoples and cities given up to wickedness (Ezek. 16:48, Rom. 9:29, Rev. 11:8).

Stake. In prophetic imagery, Zion is pictured as a great tent upheld by cords fastened securely to stakes (Isa. 54:2-7). That imagery finds its fulfillment in the eccelesiastical units called stakes in the Church today (D&C 101:21).

Star. (1) Christ is the "bright and morning star" (Rev. 22:16). (2) Pre-earth spirits are frequently referred to as stars (Job 38:7, Rev. 12:4; Abr. 3). (3) Those obtaining the celestial kingdom are also called stars (Dan. 12:3; Rev. 12:1). (4) By way of contrast with the sun and the moon the stars are used to represent the glory of the telestial kingdom (D&C 76:98).

Stem of Jesse. Christ (Isa. 11:1-5; D&C 113:1-2).

Stone. A metaphor for Christ (Ps. 118:22). (See also Rock.)

Sun. Is used to represent the glory of the celestial kingdom (D&C 76:96).

Sword. Associated with protection and strength. Paul calls the "sword of the Spirit" the "word of God" (Eph. 6:17). The word of the Lord, we are told, is "sharper than a two-edged sword" (D&C 6:2).

Symbol. From the Greek symbolon, a "token" or "sign," and symballein, to "throw together" or "compare." In the broad sense, anything that stands for something else. Synonyms include: type, sign, image, emblem, and representation.

Tabernacle. (1) The portable temple used by the children of Israel in their wilderness wanderings. Used in both the Old and New Testaments as a symbol of God's presence (Ps. 15:1; 43:3; 61:4; Rev. 21:3). (2) The physical body is also referred to as a tabernacle of clay (Mosiah 3:5).

Tares. Noxious weeds that resemble wheat in its early stages. They can only be clearly distinguished when the grain has started to mature. They represent the spiritual tares who masquerade as faithful Saints within the Church yet fail to produce good fruits (Matt. 13:24-30, 36-43; D&C 86:1-7).

Temple. (1) A true temple is the house of the Lord. It is the place where God and man meet both symbolically and literally. Within the temple, ordinances of salvation are performed. The significance of these ordinances is taught in the language of symbols. They are the most sacred places of worship on earth. (2) To dramatize the sacred and holy nature of the human body it is called a temple (1 Cor. 3:16-17; 6:19; D&C 93:35). (3) In a figurative sense, Jesus referred to himself as the temple (John 2:19). (4) Paul used the temple as a representation of the Church (Eph. 2:21).

Thorns. A figure for the enemies of Israel (Num. 33:55; Ezek. 28:24).

Tittle. A small mark made to distinguish one Hebrew letter from another. The English equivalent would be the stroke of the "t" or the dot of the "i". Figuratively, it means any trifling matter (Matt. 5:18).

Tree of Knowledge. The tree in the Garden of Eden from which Adam and Eve ate to bring upon themselves mortality (Gen. 3:3; 2 Ne. 2:15; Alma 12:21-26).

Tree of Life. Spoken of in the creative account as that tree in the midst of the Garden of Eden, the fruit of which contained the power of everlasting life (Gen. 2:9; 3:22-24). Writing to the seven churches in Asia, the Revelator said, "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God" (Rev. 2:7). Partaking of that fruit in his dream, Lehi described it as "most sweet, above all that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen." (1 Ne. 8:10-12.) Such is the fruit that all who obtain eternal life will partake (Rev. 22:14).

Trees. Represents men: green trees the righteous, dry trees the wicked (Luke 23:31; D&C 135:6). (See also Asherah.)

Trumpet. Anciently the sound of the trumpet summoned the congregation of Israel before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle. Their response represented a people assembled in a public acknowledgment of Jehovah as their King. This is but the type for the trumpets which will sound calling forth the elect on the day of his coming (Matt. 24:31), and not only the living but those who have died (1 Cor. 15:52; D&C 88:92).

Type. A person, event, or ritual with likeness to another person, event, or ritual of greater importance which is to follow. The term antitype describes the future fulfillment, while typology is the study of types. True types will have noticeable points of resemblance, show evidence of divine appointment, and be prophetic of future events.

Veil. (1) A covering for a person or sacred object. (2) That which conceals, protects, or separates (Ether 3:6, 19-20). (3) When the minds of men are veiled they are darkened by ignorance, wickedness, or unbelief (Ether 4:15; D&C 38:8; 67:10). (4) Passing through the veil denotes degrees of initiation or the gaining of sacred knowledge. (5) A passing from this life to the next is commonly spoken of as passing through the veil. (6) The wearing of a veil by a bride, or the veiling of one's face, is art ancient custom indicating modesty and subjection. (See Clouds.)

Veil of the Temple. The thick curtain separating the Holy of Holies from the holy place in the Jerusalem temple is known to us as the veil of the temple. In Luke's account of the crucifixion, from the sixth to the ninth hour (12 noon to 3 P.M.), darkness covered the land, the sun's light failed, "and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst" (Luke 23:45). The rending of the veil symbolized the removal of the barrier between man and God, for man was thus enabled "to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus" (Heb. 10:19).

Vine. A symbol of Christ, who said, "I am the true vine" (John 15:1), meaning that he is the source of life to the branches (the Apostles) and that only as they are associated with him can they bring forth fruit (John 15:5).

Vineyard. (1) A type which represents any field of labor to which God may call his servants (Matt. 20:1). (2) Often in a parable or metaphor the vineyard was used to represent Israel (Isa. 5:1-7; Matt. 21:33). (3) Also used as a metaphor for the world (Jacob 5, 6).

Water. Always associated with rituals of cleansing, purification, and rebirth. (2) Water is also a symbol of the word of God as the source of eternal life (John 4:1-14; D&C 63:23).

Wind. An emblem of the power of the Spirit and the glory of God (see Acts 2:2). Dedicating the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith prayed, "Let thy house be filled, as with a rushing mighty wind, with thy glory" (D&C 109:37).

Winepress. The device used to press the juice from grapes is figuratively used to represent the vengeance the Lord will take upon the wicked (Isa. 63:3-4; Rev. 19:15; D&C 133:50-51).

Wings. (1) Joseph Smith declared, "An angel of God never has wings" (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 162). As seen in visions, the wings on angels "are a representation of power," the ability to move, act, and so on (D&C 77:4). (2) Christ has "healing in his wings," meaning his extremities, i.e., his hands (Mal. 4:2).

Word. A title for Christ. God speaks his word, which the Son by the power of the Spirit, puts into operation, and thereby becomes himself the Word (Moses 2:5, Joseph Smith Translation, John 1:1).

Yoke. (1) A symbol of obedience (Matt. 11:29). (2) Also an emblem of bondage and servitude (Jer. 27:2). In the New Testament church, those Jews who accepted Christ but could not let go of the traditions of the Mosaic system lived under an unnecessary "yoke of bondage" (Acts 15:10; Gal 5:1).

Zion. Used to describe both a pure people and those places consecrated for sacred events (Moses 7;18; Isa. 2:3; D&C 84:1-4; 133:18).

 
 
© 1985 Bookcraft 

Printed from Gospelink.com
