Thomas S. Monson, Live the Good Life ( 1988)

Builders of Boys

In a Christmas card I received from national headquarters of Boy Scouts of America, there appeared this message: "The greatest gift a boy can have is the knowledge that a man cares enough to share a part of his life with him." I am thankful for the spirit that caring men bring to Scouting. Some have gained renown as doctors, attorneys, educators, or businessmen. Others are competent craftsmen, salesmen, engineers, or dentists. In reality, each of us is also engaged in the building trade. Our product: the building of boys.

Many of these men are skilled journeymen, even master craftsmen, with many years of service and experience in Scouting, while others are barely beginning an apprenticeship in this vital trade. All are needed. Where there is one man who is willing and able to build a boy, many more, through greed, selfishness, and lust for power, lurk in the shadows of gloom, away from the light of truth, to tear a boy down. I speak of those who peddle pornography, those who belittle morality, those who violate law, those who for filthy lucre sell a boy those products that destroy; those who put sin on a pedestal, who conceal truth, who glamorize error, who look upon a fair-haired boy as a commodity for exploitation.

The "get-rich-quick" theories, the philosophy of something for nothing, confusion of proper goals and objectives, have all combined to make our building task more difficult. The foundations of love and life-established principles are crumbling before our very eyes. They are being eroded by the forces of Lucifer. Unfortunately, some of our precious youth are even now sliding to their destruction down the slippery slopes of sin.

Throughout America, we have been screaming ever louder for more and more of the things we cannot take with us, and paying less and less attention to the real sources of the very happiness we seek. We have been measuring our fellowmen more by balance sheets and less by moral standards. We have developed frightening physical power and have fallen into pathetic spiritual weakness. We have become so concerned over the growth of our earning capacity that we have neglected the growth of our character. And our boys have been watching and learning by such an example. Perhaps this is indicative of the days in which we are living. Days of compromise and diluting of principles. Days when sin is labeled as error, when morality is relative, and when materialism emphasizes the value of expediency and the shirking of responsibility.

Well might a boy cry out in confusion in the words of Philip of old: "How can I [find my way], except some man should guide me?" (Acts 8:31.)

Our duty, our responsibility, our opportunity is to guide, to build, to inspire our boys.

Who touches a boy by the Master's plan Is shaping the course of a future man, Is dealing with one who is human seed And may be a man whom the world will need.

The Master Teacher, the best Builder of all, gave us the formula: "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 10:39.)

May I suggest a Scouter's standard, even a performance pledge: I will learn. I will love. I will serve.

Are we who work with Scouts really willing to learn? Are we willing to acquire a knowledge of the programs and become familiar with the handbooks, advancement requirements, the newest and most successful suggestions and helps that the national, district, and local councils make available to us? Are we anxious and ready to discard pet theories and, while learning the program, also learn how to win the confidence and respect of our boys?

Robert W. Woodruff, American business tycoon and a friend of U. S. presidents and other great men of the world, wrote that a successful man must believe that "his joy is one of service and meaning." He offered the following "Capsule Course in Human Relations." It will also work with boys.

Life is a sea upon which the proud are humbled, the shirker is exposed, and the leader is revealed. To sail it safely and reach our desired port, we need to keep our charts at hand and up to date. We need to learn by the experience of others, to stand firm for principles, to broaden our interests, and to be reliable in our discharge of duty. And through our willingness to learn, education will be achieved. Henry Ford said, "An educated man is not one whose memory is trained to carry a few dates in history. He is one who can accomplish things. A man who cannot think is not an educated man, however many college degrees he may have acquired. Thinking is the hardest work anyone can do, which is probably the reason why we have so few thinkers."

When we have expressed a willingness to learn, are we ready to love? The boy assigned to the leader who really loves him will never find himself in that dreaded never-never land—never the object of concern, never the recipient of needed aid. The leader who loves his boys may never open gates of cities or doors of palaces, but his success will come as he gains entrance to the heart of a boy.

When I think of the influence of a single good man upon a boy, I think of Louis C. Jacobsen. He served the Church as a bishop and as a high councilor. He served his community as a Scouter and as a member of service clubs for boys. He was a successful industrialist, a master in the art of working with others, a father of boys. In a quiet moment he said to me, "My life changed for the better when, as the son of a poor, widowed mother, I sat dejectedly one Sunday afternoon on a dirty cement curb. I felt alone, hopeless, depressed, forsaken, rejected, and deprived. Suddenly I felt the touch of a hand upon my shoulder. I turned and looked up into the understanding face of a kind man, George Burbidge. He said, 'You're a good boy, Louis, destined for great things. May I sit down and talk with you for a moment?'"

In his neatly pressed suit, that builder of boys sat down at the level of a boy on that curb and, through love, won Louis Jacobsen's heart and changed his life. A boy had come to the crossroads of decision; a leader was there to guide him.

He stood at the crossroads all alone, The sunlight in his face. He had no thought for the world unknown— He was set for a manly race. But the roads stretched east And the roads stretched west, And the lad knew not which road was best, So he chose the road that led him down, And he lost the race and the victor's crown. He was caught at last in an angry snare, Because no one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better road. Another day at the self-same place, A boy with high hopes stood. He, too, was set for a manly race; He, too, was seeking the things that were good. But one was there who the roads did know, And that one showed him which way to go. So he turned from the road that would lead him down, And he won the race and the victor's crown. He walks today the highway fair, Because one stood at the crossroads there To show him the better way.

Once we have determined to love as well as to learn, are we ready to serve? You might ask, "How might I best serve?"

First, serve willingly.

Harry Emerson Fosdick wrote, "Until willingness overflows obligation, men fight as conscripts rather than following the flag as patriots. Duty is never worthily performed until it is done by one who would gladly do more if he could." The Lord counseled, "Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great. Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days." (D&C 64:33-34.)

Second, serve faithfully.

Never let it be said of us that we didn't have sufficient time. Time is precious, but life is priceless. Faithful service enables us to work as a team, which teamwork eliminates the weakness of a man standing alone and substitutes, therefore, the strength of men standing together.

Third, serve prayerfully.

Our task is larger than ourselves, our influence more lasting than our lives. We need the help of Almighty God. The youth we lead are created in His own image. His words thunder down through time and find lodging in our souls. "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Genesis 1:27.) "In the image of God" was stated only of man and not any other of God's creations. Each builder of boys can be a partner with God in bringing to pass His work and His glory—the immortality and eternal life of man. (See Moses 1:39.)

Many years ago I saw a grown man cry. It wasn't his custom. The tears stemmed not from sorrow but from gratitude. My swimming coach, Charlie Welch, who perhaps helped more boys to achieve their swimming skills and successfully earn their life-saving merit badge than did any other man, was calling the roll of our swimming class at the University of Utah. His voice resounded and bounced back from the plaster walls.

The gym door opened that day in 1944 during World War II, and there stood a young man in a U. S. Navy uniform. The sailor came up to Charlie and said, "Charlie, excuse me, but I want to thank you for saving my life." Charlie lifted his eyes from the roll card, put the pencil in his pocket, and asked, "What's that?" The sailor repeated, "I want to thank you for saving my life. You once told me, Charlie, that I swam like a lead ball, yet you patiently taught me to swim. Two months ago, far off in the Pacific, a Japanese torpedo sank my destroyer. As I swam my way through the murky waters and foul-tasting and ever-dangerous film of oil, I found myself saying, 'If I ever get out of this mess alive, I'm going to thank Charlie Welch for teaching me, as a Boy Scout, how to swim.' I came here today to say thank you."

Twenty athletes stood shoulder to shoulder and uttered not a word. We watched the great tears of gratitude well up in Charlie's eyes, roll down his cheeks, and tumble upon his familiar sweat shirt. Charlie Welch, a humble, prayerful, patient, and loving builder of boys, had just received his reward.

And we too, by honoring our pledge to learn, to love, to serve, can be successful in the great cause of Scouting—to build better boys today for a brighter future tomorrow.

This chapter is adapted from a talk given at the forty-seventh annual Scouter's Convention, February 14, 1996.
