Thomas S. Monson, Live the Good Life ( 1988)

A Refuge from the Storms of Life

During the Pacific wars of this great nation, the port of Seattle played a most significant role in the lives of servicemen numbering in the millions. As anchors were weighed and mighty vessels slipped silently ever westward, decks were lined with silent and thoughtful men taking one last glance at the land they loved. For many it became a last glance indeed, as war took its dreadful toll.

Seattle was the scene of many homecomings, too. Giant carriers limped there for repairs; then finally the troop ships followed, emptying to a grateful nation their precious cargo of men. "Home was the sailor, home from the sea."

It is fitting that a temple of God now marks this part of our blessed land of freedom. A beacon to all, the temple seems to extend a gentle invitation, "Come, come ye to the House of the Lord." Here His precious plan is taught. Here eternal covenants are made. Here unfailing devotion is pledged. Labors are not confined to self alone, for in this and every temple two twin endeavors go hand in hand: temple work for one's self and temple work for others. Baptisms, endowments, and sacred sealings are performed in behalf of those who have gone beyond, including that throng who, during the dark days of war, waved goodbye to Seattle, never again to return.

As a temple is dedicated, may we also rededicate our lives. The Apostle Paul counseled: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" (1 Corinthians 3:16.) When we pattern our lives after the blueprint given through revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith at Kirtland, Ohio, in December of 1832, we will be fashioning temples prepared for eternity. Spoke the Lord: "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God." (D&C 88:119.) Such houses will withstand the storms and stresses of life and will become celestial dwelling places. Let us ever remember that which we learn in holy temples of God. These teachings have eternal impact.

Some time ago, as the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve met in the upper room of the temple, there came a special prayer at a sacred altar. Remembered were the names of those whom we knew and who, by reason of serious illness, needed divine help. Many of the names were well known, belonging to faithful persons of prominence. Others were less known, but equally as faithful. One name I had placed to be read before the Lord of Hosts was that of a sweet, young wife, a lovely mother, a daughter of God—stricken with a terminal illness. I had not as yet met Karen, but her plight had been conveyed to me, and I was to join her husband early that same evening, that a priesthood blessing might be provided her.

Our temple meeting concluded, the business of the office was transacted, and by late afternoon the Church Administration Building emptied. A quiet peace pervaded the hallways, entered my office, and touched my heart. What would I say to one so stricken? How might her grief be assuaged? How might hope banish despair and joy replace sorrow? Such were my thoughts as they became part of my personal prayer.

At six I met my guests and bid them be seated in my office. It was obvious they were humble of heart yet undaunted in their faith. It is difficult for one terminally ill to smile, but smile she did, though tears glistened in her eyes. Her voice quavered a bit as she told me of the love she had for her husband, the concern she felt in leaving her children. "They are so young and so need their mother," she pleaded. Karen and her husband looked into my eyes and waited for my response. Unashamedly I confess I felt inadequate to the responsibility. Then I gazed at the two pictures that grace the walls of my office.

I directed my young friends first to the portrait of the Savior. We talked of His life, His love, and His mission. We remembered that He, too, loved little children and was mindful of them. I testified that He would be mindful of her little ones. We reviewed His atoning sacrifice; its pain, its purpose. His words seemed to flow through my mind. I spoke them in reverence. "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.) "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you . . . that where I am, there ye may be also." (John 14:2-3.)

Turning from the Savior's portrait, we glanced at the other painting—the Master before His disciples, revealing the wounds of His body and portraying the reality of His resurrection. We opened the Bible to Paul's magnificent testimony—his epistle to the Corinthians—and read aloud: "Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and . . . he was buried, and . . . arose again the third day. . . . He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: after that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once. . . . After that, he was seen of James, then of all the apostles. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time." (1 Corinthians 15:3-8.)

We discussed His plan of salvation. Our pre-earth life was mentioned as we recalled Jeremiah's promise: "Before I formed thee . . . I knew thee; and before thou camest forth . . . I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." (Jeremiah 1:5.)

Next we spoke of earth life, that transient period so brief for some, so long and labored for others. We turned to the Book of Mormon and read Alma's description of Paradise. Oh, the comfort this Book of Mormon prophet provided. As we reviewed the glorious resurrection, our thoughts and our conversation moved inexorably to the temple. The holy endowment was pondered, the sacred sealing at a special altar remembered. "For time and for all eternity" was more than a phrase. It was and is a precious promise.

The hour had grown late. A worthy husband and I blessed a sweet and tender wife and mother who, barring a modern miracle, would soon pass beyond this veil of tears to her heavenly home. Our faith was united, the Lord so close, the experience so sacred.

I escorted my young friends from the building, but not before showing them the beautiful room where the First Presidency meets, where the prophet sits, and where inspired decisions are made. Then they were gone.

Returning to my office, I noticed on the hallway floor a small necklace that had broken and fallen to the carpet. As I picked up Karen's necklace, I thought: How like life is this necklace—lovely in adornment, but so susceptible to damage and risk of loss. I then reflected on the eternal covenant that bound my young friends—an unbreakable bond, even a temple marriage. Children, theirs for all eternity, are part of that sacred sealing.

I darkened the room, but before closing the door I dropped to my knees and thanked my Heavenly Father for holy houses—even temples of the Most High God. The enemy of death has been conquered. Eternal life reigns triumphant—not for Karen alone, but for all whose knees shall bow, whose tongues confess that Jesus is the Christ, and who love Him and keep His commandments. Hear His promise: "I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end. Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory." (D&C 76:5-6.)

May such be our experience.

This chapter is adapted from an address delivered at the dedication of the Seattle Temple in November 1980.
