Thomas S. Monson, Live the Good Life ( 1988)

Guideposts on the Pathway to Perfection

Commencement is a most significant time in our lives. Many years of study culminate in graduation. On this occasion we are sober in thought, serious in attitude, and very much aware that graduation is not the completion of a tedious book, but simply the ending of one chapter and the beginning of another in our exciting book of life.

And what an exciting life awaits us. We may not be a John Cabot, sailing off into the blue with the king's patent to discover new lands, nor a Captain James Cook, who declared, "I had ambition not only to go farther than any man had ever been before, but as far as it was possible for a man to go."

But we can be explorers in spirit, with a mandate to make this world better by discovering improved ways of living and of doing things. The spirit of exploration, whether it be of the surface of the earth, the vastness of space, or the principles of living greatly, includes developing the capacity to face trouble with courage, disappointment with cheerfulness, and triumph with humility.

Carl Sandburg described our possibilities: "I see America, not in the setting sun of a black night of despair ahead of us. I see America in the crimson light of a rising sun, fresh from the burning creative hand of God. I see great days ahead, great days possible to men and women of will and vision."

However, during the last half century, there has been in the United States a gradual but continual retreat from standards of excellence in many phases of our life. We observe business without morality; science without humanity; knowledge without character; worship without sacrifice; pleasure without conscience; politics without principle; and wealth without works.

Perhaps the renowned author Charles Dickens, without really realizing his prophetic powers, described our day when he spoke of a period two centuries ago. His classic A Tale of Two Cities begins: "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us."

This is the world we enter at commencement. Our future is in our hands. The outcome is up to each of us.

As we commence our journey, we must remember that to measure progress by so-called delights and thrills is to apply a false standard. The pathway to perfection does not feature a glut of luxury. Progress is not synonymous with commercially produced pleasure, the nightclub idea of what is a good time, mistaking it for joy and happiness.

On the contrary, obedience to law, respect for others, mastery of self, and joy in service are the guideposts that mark the pathway to perfection. Perhaps we would best understand these guideposts if we discussed them on an individual basis.

First, obedience to law.

We turn at once to that revered and renowned code of conduct that has guided mankind through every conceivable turmoil. In so doing, we seem to hear the echo of the voice from Mount Sinai speaking to us today, here and now:

Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. Honor thy father and thy mother. Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness. Thou shalt not covet. (See Exodus 20.)

The late Cecil B. DeMille stated, after exhaustive research for the epic motion picture The Ten Commandments: "Man can't break the Ten Commandments. He can only break himself against them."

Years after the law of Moses was given, there came the meridian of time, when a great endowment emerged—a power stronger than weapons, a wealth more lasting than the coins of Caesar; for the King of kings and the Lord of lords introduced into the principles of law the concept of love. The Apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Romans, declared: "Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God," and "Love is the fulfilling of the law." (Romans 13:1, 10.)

We must obey the laws of God. Violate them and we suffer lasting consequences. Obey them and we reap everlasting joy.

Let us not overlook obedience to the laws of the land. They do not restrict our conduct so much as they guarantee our freedom, provide us protection, and safeguard all that is dear to us.

Coming as I do from the world of business, I cannot move on without pausing to mention obedience to the laws—not theories—of economics. One cannot continually spend more than he earns and remain solvent. This law applies to nations as well as to people. A worker cannot, in the long run, adhere to a philosophy of something for nothing as opposed to something for something. Nor can management dismiss as optional the necessity of an adequate corporate profit and a reasonable return to shareholders if our economy of free enterprise is to flourish.

One person of wisdom observed, "Laws are the rules by which the game of life is played." In reality, they are much more: obedience to law is a critical guidepost if we are to proceed to perfection.

Second, respect for others.

People, by nature, are tempted to seek their own glory and not the glory of their neighbors or the glory of God. None of us lives alone. There is no dividing line between our prosperity and our neighbor's wretchedness.

Before we can love and respect our neighbors, we must place them in proper perspective. One person said, "I looked at my brother with the microscope of criticism and I said, 'How coarse my brother is.' I looked at my brother with the telescope of scorn and I said, 'How small my brother is.' Then I looked into the mirror of truth and I said, 'How like me my brother is.'"

Respect for others implies a concern and a love for our fellow human beings. Too many have been screaming ever louder for more and more of the things we cannot take with us and paying less and less attention to the real sources of the very happiness we seek. We have been measuring others more by balance sheets and less by moral standards. We have developed frightening physical power and fallen into pathetic spiritual weakness. We have become so concerned over the growth of our earning capacity that we have neglected the growth of our character.

As we view the disillusionment that today engulfs countless thousands, we are learning the hard way what an ancient prophet wrote out for us three thousand years ago: "He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase." (Ecclesiastes 5:10.)

It is an immutable law that the more you give away, the more you receive. You make a living by what you get, but you make a life by what you give.

Happiness abounds when there is genuine respect one for another. Wives draw closer to their husbands and husbands are more appreciative of their wives; and children are happy, as children are meant to be. Where there is respect in the home, children do not find themselves in that dreaded never-never land—never the object of concern, never the recipient of proper parental guidance.

To those who are not yet married, I counsel: People who marry in the hope of forming a permanent partnership require certain skills and attitudes of mind. They must be skillful in adapting to each other. They need capacity to work out mutual problems. They need willingness to give and take in the search for harmony. They need unselfishness of the highest sort, with thought for one's partner taking the place of desire for oneself.

May I mention an example. Many years ago I had the opportunity to deliver a commencement address to a graduation class of Brigham Young University. I had gone to the home of President Hugh B. Brown, that we might together drive to the university, where he was to conduct the exercises and I was to speak. As President Brown entered my car, he said, "Wait a moment." He looked toward the large bay window of his lovely home, and then I saw what he was looking for. The curtains parted, and I saw Sister Brown, his beloved companion of well over fifty years, at the window, propped up in a wheelchair, waving a little white handkerchief. President Brown took from his inside coat pocket a white handkerchief, which he waved to her in return. Then he turned to me with a smile and said, "Let's go."

I asked President Brown to tell me about the sign of the white handkerchiefs. He related to me the following incident: "The first day after Sister Brown and I were married, as I went to work, I heard a tap at the window, and there she was, waving a handkerchief. I found mine and waved in reply. From that day until this I have never left my home without that little exchange between my wife and me. It is a symbol of our love one for another. It is an indication to one another that all will be well until we are joined together at eventide." This is respect—a vital guidepost on our journey.

Third, mastery of self.

Perhaps the surest test of an individual's integrity is his or her refusal to do or say anything that would damage selfrespect. The cornerstone of such a person's value system is never "What will others think?," but rather, "What will I think of myself?"

One teacher commented, "In the last analysis, I have to be true to myself. But it is a little tough to do that when I am being false to my students, because I'm a teacher, not for my sake but for the sake of my students. And if I do them any mental, physical, emotional, or social harm, then I drag them down with me into what ought to be, but cannot be, my own private purgatory."

Remembered is this truth: "The power to lead is also the power to mislead, and the power to mislead is the power to destroy." Self-mastery is a rigorous process at best; too many of us want it to be effortless and painless.

Some spurn effort, and substitute an alibi. We hear the plea, "I was denied the advantages others had in their youth." And then we remember the caption that a cartoonist placed under a sketch of Abraham Lincoln's log cabin: "Ill-housed, ill-fed, ill-clothed."

Others say, "I am physically limited." History is replete with successful persons who possessed physical limitations.

Should temporary setbacks afflict us, a very significant part of our struggle for self-mastery is the determination and the courage to try again. Most of us will need that second effort as we pursue life's journey. In the words of the fight song of a high school in Yonkers, New York: "Lead us, oh lead us, Great Moulder of men; / Out of the darkness to strive once again."

The world moves at an increasingly rapid pace. Scientific achievements are fantastic, advances in medicine are phenomenal, and the probings of the inner secrets of earth and the outer limits of space leave one amazed and in awe. In our science-oriented age we conquer space, but we cannot control self; hence, we forfeit peace. Through modern science, man has been permitted to fly through space at undreamedof speeds and to silently and without effort cruise sixty days underwater in nuclear-powered ships. However, while man can devise the most complex machines to achieve such fantastic feats, he cannot give them life or bestow upon them the powers of reason and judgment.

Why? Because these are divine gifts, bestowed solely at God's discretion. God gave man life, and with it the power to think and reason and decide and love. With such power given to you and to me, mastery of self becomes a necessity if we are to have the abundant life.

Fourth, joy in service.

To find real happiness, we must seek for it in a focus outside ourselves. No one learns the meaning of living without surrendering ego to the service of others. Service to others is akin to duty, the fulfillment of which brings true joy.

Describing the joy of fulfillment of duty and service to God and country, Sir Winston Churchill, upon the unconditional surrender of enemy forces during World War II, declared: "Weary and worn, impoverished but undaunted and now triumphant, we had a moment that was sublime. We gave thanks to God for the noblest of all His blessings—the sense we had done our duty."

The mantle of leadership is not the cloak of comfort, but the robe of responsibility. Some time ago at our nation's Capitol in Washington, D. C., I had the privilege of addressing a conference of America's religious leaders. My topic—Church welfare services and the response to the Teton Dam disaster in Rexburg, Idaho.

June 5, 1976, was a time of terror for residents of that community, but during that perilous period the people there experienced perhaps their finest hour. Who can forget the outpouring of good will and the service extended by others. Food was provided, shelter erected, clothing donated, love extended. The caravans of electricians, mechanics, and honest laborers, both men and women, who traveled all night to aid those whom they had never met must be recorded as a noble example of service to others.

This is the joy that comes through service.

May we ever look backward with pride and press forward with hope. Our training, our experience, our knowledge are tools to be skillfully used. They have been self-acquired. Our conscience, our love, our faith are delicate and precious instruments to guide our destiny. They have been God-given.

One may ask, "Is there a safe way for me to walk through this world of uncertainty and infinite challenge?" I answer in the words of Louise Haskins, who wrote, "I said to the man who stood at the gate of the year: 'Give me a light that I may tread safely into the unknown.' And he replied, 'Go out into the darkness and put your hand into the hand of God. That shall be to you better than a light and safer than a known way.'"

I bear witness to the truth of this advice. May each of us recognize and follow the guideposts that mark the pathway to perfection—obedience to law, respect for others, mastery of self, and joy in service.

This chapter has been adapted from a baccalaureate address delivered at Ricks College in Rexburg, Idaho, April 2, 1982.
