Thomas S. Monson, Live the Good Life ( 1988)

Your Journey to Eternal Joy

In a classic poem, author Henry Wadsworth Longfellow described youth and the future. He wrote:

How beautiful is youth! how bright it gleams With its illusions, aspirations, dreams! Book of Beginnings, Story without End, Each maid a heroine, and each man a friend!

At the dedication of the Idaho Falls Temple, the First Presidency, in the dedicatory prayer, stated: "How glorious and near to the angels is youth that is clean. This youth will have joy unspeakable here and eternal happiness hereafter."

Contemplating the decisions that young people must make, and how their very lives depend on those decisions, I turn to the scriptures for inspiration. A particular word stands out time and time again. The word is come. The Lord said, "Come unto me." He said, "Come learn of me." He also said, "Come, follow me." I like that word, come. My plea is that we would come to the Lord.

May I provide some suggestions to help young people come unto the Lord, to come and follow Him, to have a code of conduct to influence their decisions, to guide their pathway through mortality, and to ensure that they receive, at the conclusion of life's mission, that salutation, "Well done, good and faithful servant; . . . enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matthew 25:23.)

I have divided my code of conduct into four parts:

First, you have a heritage; honor it.

There comes thundering to our ears the words from Mount Sinai: "Honour thy father and thy mother." (Exodus 20:12.) Oh, how our parents love us, how they pray for us! I know that parents are praying for our welfare every morning and every night. We must honor them. How do we do that? We can follow them and pattern our lives after theirs.

An example of honoring one's mother took place in a human drama in Salt Lake City. Ruth Fawson, mother of six, had just undergone life-threatening surgery. Her devoted husband and her three sons and three daughters were all at the hospital. The physicians and nurses explained to the family that they could return to their homes and that the staff was prepared to adequately care for Sister Fawson. The family expressed thanks to the hospital staff but indicated a desire for one of their number to be present with their mother, each taking a turn. One of her daughters, Lynne, expressed the feelings of all: "We wanted to be here when Mother awakened and stretched forth her hand, so that it would be our hands she would grasp; it would be our smiles she would see; it would be our words she would hear; it would be our love she would feel."

One of the most popular musicals of our time is Fiddler on the Roof, by Joseph Stein. One laughs as the old-fashioned father of a Jewish family in Russia attempts to cope with the changing times, which are brought forcibly home to him by his beautiful daughters. With abandon they sing "Matchmaker, Matchmaker, Make Me a Match." Tevye, the father, replies with "If I Were a Rich Man." Tears come to the our eyes as we hear the beautiful strains of "Sunrise, Sunset," and we appreciate Tevye's love of his native village when the cast sings "Anatevka."

The gaiety of the dance, the rhythm of the music, the excellence of the acting all fade in significance when Tevye speaks what to me becomes the message of the musical. He gathers his lovely daughters to his side and, in the simplicity of his peasant surroundings, counsels them as they ponder their future. "Remember," cautions Tevye, "in Anatevka each of us knows who we are and what God expects us to become."

Contemplating our earthly life, could not each of us well consider Tevye's statement and respond, "Here, each of us knows who we are and what God expects us to become."

Some time ago I had an assignment in St. George, Utah. While there, Sister Monson and I drove to the little cemetery in the nearby community of Santa Clara. We saw many Swiss names on the tombstones: Gubler, Hafen, Stucki. Most of the tombstones were old and weathered. Many of them marked the graves of children. We contemplated how difficult it was for the early pioneers to provide nourishment and sustenance for their families. Children by the score passed away. I pictured mothers and fathers standing by open graves. I thought of the words I read on one tombstone: "A light from our household is gone; a voice we knew is stilled. A place is vacant in our hearts that never can be filled."

We must not wait until that light from our household is gone, until that voice we know is stilled, before we say, "I love you, Mother. I love you, Father." Now is a time to think and a time to thank. May we do both.

Second, you will meet sin; shun it.

Remember these words from the Book of Mormon: "Wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:12.)

I recall attending a meeting where President David O. McKay, at that time a counselor in the First Presidency, was speaking. He said, "I implore you to think clean thoughts." He then made this significant declaration of truth: "Every action is preceded by a thought. If we want to control our actions, we must control our thinking." That is a profound statement of truth. If we fill our minds with good thoughts, our actions will be proper. May we be able to echo in truth the line from Tennyson spoken by Sir Galahad: "My strength is as the strength of ten because my heart is pure."

Essential to success and happiness is the advice, "Choose your friends with caution." In a survey made in selected wards and stakes of the Church, we learned a most significant fact. Those persons whose friends married in the temple usually married in the temple, while those whose friends did not marry in the temple usually did not themselves marry in the temple. The influence of one's friends appeared to be a more dominant factor than parental urging, classroom instruction, or proximity to a temple.

We tend to become like those whom we admire. As in Nathaniel Hawthorne's classic story "The Great Stone Face," we adopt the mannerisms, the attitudes, even the conduct of those whom we admire—and they are usually our friends. We should associate with those who, like us, are planning not for temporary convenience, shallow goals, or narrow ambition, but for those things that matter most—even eternal objectives.

Inscribed on the wall of Stanford University Memorial Hall is this truth: "We must teach our youth that all that is not eternal is too short, and all that is not infinite is too small."

Beyond the friends of our peer group, even our own age, will we make a friend of our father? Each of us actually has three fathers. First, we have our Heavenly Father. He stands ready to answer the prayers of our heart. Being the Father of our spirits, and having created us in His own image, He knows the end from the beginning; His wisdom faileth not and His counsel is ever true. Make a friend of Him.

Each of us also has an earthly father. He labors to insure our happiness. Together with our mother, he prays for our guidance and well-being. Make a friend of him.

Our third father is the father of our ward, even the bishop. He has been called of God by prophecy and the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority, to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof. In short, he is endowed to provide us with counsel and help. Make a friend of him.

These, our true friends and fathers, will strengthen us constantly.

Third, you have the truth; live it.

The Apostle Paul said to Timothy, "Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers." (1 Timothy 4:12.) President Stephen L Richards was a profound thinker. He said: "Faith and doubt cannot exist in the same mind at the same time, for one will dispel the other." My advice is to seek faith and dispel doubt.

The Lord said: "Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.)

Books are keys to wisdom's treasure; Books are gates to lands of pleasure; Books are paths that upward lead; Books are friends; come, let us read.

Reading is one of the true pleasures of life. In our age of mass culture, when so much that we encounter is abridged, adapted, adulterated, shredded, and boiled down, and commercialism's loudspeakers are incessantly braying, it is mind-easing and mind-inspiring to sit down privately with a good book. It is ennobling when that book contains the revealed word of God.

I think of the words of President J. Reuben Clark, one with whom I had the privilege of associating closely. He said: "You do not find truth groveling through error. You find truth by seeking truth." We can find truth in the standard works of the Church, the teachings of the prophets, the teachings of our parents, and the inspiration that comes to us as we bend our knees and seek the help of God.

We must be true to our ideals, for "ideals are like the stars: you can't touch them with your hands, but by following them you reach your destination."

In pursuit of academic goals, our young people will meet many teachers. I would hope each of those teachers would meet the description written of one: "She created in her room an atmosphere where warmth and acceptance weave their magic spell; where growth and learning, the soaring of the imagination, and the spirit of the young are assured." Unfortunately, there are exceptions to such teachers. There are those who delight to destroy faith rather than build bridges to the good life.

In the words of President J. Reuben Clark: "He wounds, maims, and cripples a soul who raises doubts about or destroys faith in the ultimate truths. God will hold such an one strictly accountable; and who can measure the depths to which one shall fall who fitfully shatters in another the opportunity for celestial glory?"

Since we cannot control the classroom, we can at least prepare the pupil. You ask "How?" I answer: "Provide a guide to the glory of the celestial kingdom of God, even a barometer to distinguish between the truth of God and the theories of men."

Several years ago I held in my hand such a guide. It was a volume of scripture we commonly call the Triple Combination, containing the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. The book was a gift from a loving father to a beautiful, blossoming daughter who followed carefully his advice. On the flyleaf page her father had written these inspired words, dated April 9, 1944:

To My Dear Maurine:

That you may have a constant measure by which to judge between truth and the errors of man's philosophies, and thus grow in spirituality as you increase in knowledge, I give you this sacred book to read frequently and cherish throughout your life.

It was signed "Lovingly your father, Harold B. Lee."

We must never overlook the power of personal prayer. The prayers of a teacher can bring the blessings of heaven to those whom he or she teaches. Consider Sister Hansen, the faithful teacher of a Laurel class in a small mission branch. How she prayed for inspiration, that she might teach well the precious girls in her class. Particularly did she pray for Betty, a young woman who had been subjected to great stress and temptation to leave the pathway of truth and follow the detour of sin.

Through the constant persuasions of her classmates at school, Betty had decided that she would would attend opening exercises of a special Young Women class, so that she might appear on the roll as being present. Then the sound of an automobile horn would announce to her that her girlfriend and their dates, who were older and far more experienced than Betty, were at hand, and a night of carefully arranged escapade of sin would begin. Then she would be one of the inner circle.

But before calling the roll that night, this humble, loving teacher, Sister Hansen, announced to the class that a shipment from Church headquarters had arrived at her home that day. She had opened the packages and found copies of a pamphlet by Elder Mark E. Petersen. Its subject: chastity. Sister Hansen said, "I feel impressed to leave for another week our lesson scheduled for tonight and want, rather, to review with you the inspiration of this pamphlet. We will each read a paragraph or two aloud, so that all might participate." She looked at each of her precious girls and then said, "Betty, will you begin?" Betty looked at the clock: just two minutes before the scheduled rendezvous. She began to read. Suddenly her heart was touched, her conscience awakened, her determination renewed. She scarcely heard the repeated sound of the automobile horn. She remained throughout the class and rode home with her teacher, her guide, her friend. The temptation to detour from God's approved way had been averted. Satan had been frustrated. A soul had been saved. A prayer had been answered.

Fourth, you have a testimony; share it.

That which we selfishly keep, we lose; but that which we willingly share, we keep. Never underestimate the far-reaching influence of testimony.

One day I congratulated a friend of mine who, together with his wife and family, was preparing to visit the Manti Temple. I asked him to recount to me the experience of his conversion. May I share it with you.

Sharman Hummel and his wife, Anne Marie, lived in the eastern part of the United States and enjoyed a typical American family life with their three lovely daughters. They worked together and they attended their church together, but they had only the most vague idea concerning The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And then the day came for their lives to change. A transfer of employment came, and Sharman went to the West Coast to prepare for the arrival of his family. The bus ride across the continent was beautiful but rather insignificant until that bus stopped at Salt Lake City. A young woman boarded the bus and sat next to Sharman Hummel. She was en route to Reno to visit an aunt.

Knowing that he was in "Mormon country," Sharman asked the young woman if she were a Mormon. When she answered "Yes," he inquired, "What do you Mormons believe?" The young woman then described what the Church of Jesus Christ meant to her. She mentioned doctrine, but the emphasis was upon testimony and feelings. She described the simplicity of the Church, its teachings, its chapels, its youth program. Said Sharman Hummel, "I don't remember everything she said, but I do remember the spirit in which she said it."

The young woman left the bus at Reno, but all the way to San Francisco, Sharman could think of nothing but what he had learned from this young woman. He immediately investigated the teachings of the gospel; and, through the aid of members and missionaries alike, he, his wife, and their children were converted and baptized.

Sharman Hummel today holds the Melchizedek Priesthood. He has often confided to me that he has but one regret in his life. He never obtained the name of the young woman who sat next to him on the bus and who, in her humble way, taught him what she believed and the importance of acquiring a personal testimony and sharing it. This young woman was prepared. Her spirit gave credence to her testimony. She had been a recipient of the promise of Moroni contained in the Book of Mormon: "And now, I would commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever." (Ether 12:41.)

Remember that we do not walk alone. The Lord has promised, "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.) As we walk through life, may we always walk toward the light, and the shadows of life will fall behind us.
