Each Sunday we hear the words, “O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen” (Doctrine and Covenants 20:77).

Now, as you read that, did you quickly rush through the words because you’re used to hearing them, or did you carefully speak each word, remembering for what and for whom they stand. Whichever way you read it, we have all, at some stage in our lives, rushed through the words of the sacrament prayer, whether speaking them or hearing them. We sometimes forget that simply hearing these words is never enough. We need to be doing these words.

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, recently declared in his April 2019 General Conference address that, “this hour ordained of the Lord is the most sacred hour of our week”. There are 168 hours in a week and out of all of them, the sacrament hour is the most important one.

Why? Elder Holland reminds us, “to remember in as personal a way as possible that Christ died from a heart broken by shouldering entirely alone the sins and sorrows of the whole human family.

“Inasmuch as we contributed to that fatal burden, such a moment demands our respect.”

The Savior taught us, “If ye love me, keep my commandments” (John 14:15).

Out of love and respect for our Savior and His atoning sacrifice, performed by Him on our behalf, we promise each week not to just hear the words of the sacrament prayer, but to do them. We promise to take upon us the name of the Son, and always remember Him and keep His commandments which He gives us.

With the inspired changes that have taken place over the last year, it is obvious to see that our loving Heavenly Father is guiding us more towards doing and acting, and away from just hearing. The Savior himself declared, “ye shall know them by their fruits” (3 Nephi 14:16). Each week as we partake of the bread and water—representing the body and blood of our beloved Savior, Jesus Christ—what fruits are we showing Him?

Elder Holland further said, “My beloved brothers and sisters, with the exciting new emphasis on increased gospel learning in the home, it is crucial for us to remember that we are still commanded to, ‘go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day.’ (Doctrine & Covenants 59:9) In addition to making time for more home-centered gospel instruction, our modified Sunday service is also to reduce the complexity of the meeting schedule in a way that properly emphasizes the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper as the sacred, acknowledged focal point of our weekly worship experience.”

Our focal point throughout the week should be on this most important hour of our week, and that hour solely focuses on our Savior. When we are truly focused on our Savior and His teachings, the sacrament isn’t just about going to church. It’s about doing, it’s about becoming, and we will no longer do the things of the Savior half-heartedly.

I have learnt from my own experience that my weeks are better when I am focused on my Savior during the sacrament. It doesn’t necessarily mean that my weeks are better because I have fewer challenges and no moments of weakness. No, this is not the case, but I find myself wanting to pray more, wanting to feast upon the words of Christ more, wanting to serve, wanting to do and become more, so that I can overcome more through my Savior.  

As a missionary serving in the Idaho Pocatello Mission (July 2017–December 2018), I came to really understand the importance and blessings of keeping the covenants we renew during the sacrament each week—when I physically took upon me the name of my Savior by wearing the name tag with His name on it. I came to realize that as I acted on the words of the sacrament prayer, the Savior’s name began to be written on more than just my name tag, it began to be written on my heart. As we continue to act on behalf of our Savior. the writing on our hearts doesn’t fade away, and eventually turns into that, “never-ending happiness,” (Mosiah 2:41) promised to all true followers of Christ.

Come follow Him is the invitation. Come follow Him, by taking upon yourself the name of Christ, always remembering Him and keeping His commandments, is the way. No worldly care, recognition or pull can be or is more important than our Savior. He is the way, the truth and the life. By His broken and bleeding body He has earned, in every sense, that love and respect that is our privilege and blessing to give Him.
