Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

1

In Similitude of Christ

Symbols are the timeless and universal language in which God, in his wisdom, has chosen to teach his gospel and bear witness of his Son. They are the language of the scriptures, the language of revelation, the language of the Spirit, the language of faith. They are a language common to the Saints of all generations. Symbols are the language in which all gospel covenants and ordinances of salvation have been revealed. They are a means whereby we enrich, deepen, and enhance understanding and expression. They enable us to give visual and conceptual form to ideas and feelings that may otherwise defy the power of words. Symbols take us beyond the language of words, granting us an eloquence in the expression of feelings.

Symbols are the language of testimony. Such was the language in which the prophets of the Old Testament foretold the birth and ministry of Christ; such was the language in which the atoning sacrifice was foreshadowed and the resurrection fore-known. Nowhere are symbols used with greater effect than in the mortal ministry of the Savior—a ministry that began with his ritual immersion in the waters of Jordan and ended with the rending of the veil of the temple when his work was finished and he gave up the ghost on Golgotha.

All Things Bear Witness of Christ

To be literate in the things of the Spirit is to be fluent in the language of symbols. The Lord told Enoch that "all things have their likeness" and that "all things" were created and made to bear record of him. This he said was true of things both temporal and spiritual, "things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of me" (Moses 6:63). To illustrate this principle let us take twelve categories (that being an appropriate number as far as the law of witnesses is concerned), with an example from each category briefly noting how it testifies of Christ. As categories let us use the following: objects, places, personal names, titles, animals, events, feelings, foods, persons, words, rituals, and elements.

Objects. Illustration: an altar. As properly used in the Bible, altars were primarily places of blood sacrifice. They were stages upon which the atoning sacrifice of Christ was enacted. Malachi described them as the "table of the Lord" (Malachi 1:7, 12), suggesting that what was burned on the altar was considered to have been consumed by God, thus attesting that those making the offering were acceptable to him. Classic illustrations of this would be the fire that came from heaven to consume the offering on the altar at the dedication of Solomon's Temple (2 Chronicles 7:1) and the fire that fell from heaven to consume the offering of Elijah in his confrontation with the priests of Baal (1 Kings 18:38). Altars were also understood to be a place of peace and a place where God would manifest himself (Genesis 12:7; 13:18; 26:25; 35:1, 7).

Places. Illustration: the city of Bethlehem. Anciently it was prophesied that Christ would be born in Bethlehem (Micah 5:2). The name means "house of bread." Thus the name seems to testify that it is the place from which the Bread of Life will come (see John 6:35).

Names. Illustration: the name Jesus. Both Joseph and Mary were instructed by the angel of the Lord that the Son of God was to be named Jesus (Matthew 1:21; Luke 1:31). That he would bear this name had been known prophetically among the Book of Mormon peoples from the time of Nephi and Jacob (2 Nephi 25:19; Jacob 4:6; Mosiah 3:8). The name Jesus (Joshua in the Hebrew) means "Jehovah saves." Thus the name of the Savior testified that he was the God of salvation.

Titles. Illustration: the title Christ. This is not a given name but rather a title meaning "anointed" or "anointed one." In Old Testament times anointing was the principal and divinely appointed ceremony in the inauguration of prophets, priests, and kings. The anointing was a ritual consecration or setting apart to sacred purposes. The ritual centered in the pouring of pure olive oil upon the head of the one being anointed in a symbolic representation of the Spirit of the Lord that was to be poured out upon him and through him upon the nation of Israel. Under the leadership of her prophets, priests, and kings, Israel was to walk in paths of righteousness, with each prophet, priest, and king being a type or symbolic representation of the Christ who would be the great Prophet, Priest, and King.

Animals. Illustration: a lamb. From the time of Adam to the time of the atoning sacrifice the lamb was a vicarious sacrifice offered by the shedding of its blood as a similitude of the sacrifice that Christ would make for all men. The prophecies of the last days include the promise that the sons of Levi will yet offer this same sacrifice unto the Lord in righteousness (Malachi 3:3; Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., pp. 172-73). As the priests of the Aaronic Priesthood kneel at the sacrament table to administer the ordinance of sacrament today, so their ancient counterparts in the Aaronic Priesthood were commissioned to make an equivalent offering at the table or altar of the Lord in the form of a lamb without blemish.

Events. Illustration: the Sabbath day. The Sabbath has been consecrated as a day in which to remember and rejoice in the blessings of God. From the days of Adam to the time of the Egyptian bondage the Sabbath commemorated God's resting on the seventh day after the six days of creative labor. From the time of the Exodus to the time of Christ's resurrection the Sabbath commemorated the liberating of the children of Israel from their Egyptian bondage. When Christ came forth from the tomb on the first day of the week, this day was then designated as the Sabbath in remembrance of his atoning sacrifice, his breaking the bands of death, and his extending immortality to all and the privilege of eternal life to those who would diligently seek it.

Feelings. Illustration: the spirit of peace. One of the names or titles by which Christ is known is Prince of Peace (Isaiah 9:6). The title symbolizes the peace associated with his presence and the living of his gospel. Gideon built an altar where the angel of the Lord had appeared to him, and he called the place Jehovah-shalom, meaning "God of peace" (Judges 6:24). Teaching the nature of the spirit of revelation to Oliver Cowdery, the Lord reminded him of the occasions when he had enjoyed that spirit and then asked these questions: "Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter?" and "What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23).

Foods. Illustration: bread. "I am the bread of life," Christ declared, "he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst" (John 6:35). Israel would have perished in the wilderness were it not for the bread or manna sent down from heaven. That heaven-sent bread symbolized that all men would have perished had it not been for Christ, who came down from heaven as the food or spiritual nourishment of which all must partake or die as to the things of the Spirit.

Persons. Illustration: Christians. Those who follow Christ take upon themselves his name and are adopted into his family. The family resemblance always includes a likeness or similarity of works. Of such Christ said: "In my name they shall do many wonderful works; In my name they shall cast out devils; In my name they shall heal the sick; In my name they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf; And the tongue of the dumb shall speak; And if any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not hurt them; And the poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them." (D&C 84:66-72.)

Words. Illustration: those things spoken by Christ. John called Christ "the Word, even the messenger of salvation" (D&C 93:8). Thus Christ becomes both the message and the messenger. The two are inseparable; one cannot profess to accept Christ and reject his doctrines any more than one could profess to accept him while rejecting his example.

Rituals. Illustration: the ordinance of baptism. Paul explained the ordinance of baptism, saying: "We are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin." (Romans 6:4-6.)

Elements. Illustration: light. Christ, we are told, is the light of truth;

Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (D&C 88:6-13.)

All things evidence their creators: the watch, the watchmaker; the painting, the artist; the book, its author; the child, its parents; and heaven and earth, the God of heaven and earth. Of Christ, the scriptures say, "All things were made by him, and through him, and of him" (D&C 93:10), and thus all things testify of him. Man, the greatest of God's creations, is in the image and likeness of his Creator—as all things created by him carry within them the evidence of their divine origin, each being a symbol or similitude of the Creator.

Increasing Our Scriptural Understanding

Those conversant in the language of symbolism and similitudes enjoy significantly enriched scriptural understanding. Let us briefly illustrate with an example from each of the standard works.

The Old Testament

From the Old Testament let us take as our example Samuel's calling and anointing of David to be the king of Israel. (The story is found in 1 Samuel 16.) The Lord had rejected Saul as the king of Israel because of his disobedience, and Samuel the prophet was directed to fill his horn with oil and go to Jesse the Bethlehemite and find a king from among his sons. When Jesse brought forth his first son, Eliab, Samuel, much impressed with his appearance, thought he should be ordained as Israel's king. Yet when he sought confirmation from the Lord he was told not to judge by the outward appearance of a man, but by his heart. One by one Jesse brought forth seven sons, yet the Spirit identified none of them as the one the Lord had chosen.

Frustrated, Samuel asked Jesse, "Are here all thy children?" and then learned that Jesse had still another son who had been left to tend the sheep. He was sent for, and when he came "the Lord said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he." Samuel then took his horn of oil and anointed David in the midst of his brethren.

Though this is a beautiful story of the anointing of a king, it is also appreciably more than that. The story is what the ancient prophets called a "type and shadow," meaning that it was a replica of future events of even greater importance. Within this story is hidden, for those sensitive to the things of the Spirit and fluent in the language of symbolism, one of the most detailed Messianic prophecies in the Old Testament. Consider how perfectly it foretells both the setting and the events that would surround the coming of Christ.

First, the Messiah was to come at a time when, because of their disobedience, God had rejected those professing the authority and right to rule Israel. He was to come from Bethlehem and be of the lineage of Jesse. He would not be recognized by those looking for outward things or a temporal Messiah, indeed he would be the overlooked one, yet he would be the good shepherd, the boy David (the name meaning "beloved son"), the one destined to be anointed king of Israel. The reader should understand that the term anointed as used in the Old Testament, which comes to us from Hebrew manuscripts, when translated into the Greek of the New Testament becomes Christ. As David was called forth from the midst of his brethren and anointed Israel's king, he became a type or symbol of the Christ.

The Pearl of Great Price

Let us turn now to the third chapter of the book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price as our second illustration. The chapter recounts how Abraham through the use of the Urim and Thummim had the heavens opened to him that he might learn about the glory and revolutions of the sun, moon, and stars. This is the chapter in which we learn about Kolob, the planet nearest the throne of God, and the other great heavenly bodies that are near to it. Midway through the chapter the subject changes and we find ourselves reading about the nature of spirits before they were born into mortality. The chapter concludes with a brief account of the Grand Council in Heaven, at which Satan rebelled.

What is generally missed in the reading of the chapter is the phrase "as, also" in verse 18, which ties the revelation on stars to the revelation on spirits. Here we discover the reason for giving the great patriarch the revelation on stars. The knowledge of astronomy is not essential to salvation, but the knowledge of the order of the government of heaven is. When Abraham was learning about Kolob he was really learning about Christ, for Kolob is the similitude of Christ, and the stars are in the likeness of the spirits. We are told that Kolob was the first created, the nearest to the throne of God, and thus the greatest of all the stars. Kolob is described as being "after the manner" or in the likeness of God, as being first in government, and as governing all those of the same order. Though there are many great ones near it, all receive their light from Kolob and it is Kolob, we are told, that holds the key of power. (Abraham 3; Facsimile 2.) In virtually every detail Kolob is described in the same prophetic language that is used to describe Christ, and the stars are described in language that parallels that used by Abraham to describe the spirits.

The Book of Mormon

Let us turn now to the Book of Mormon and briefly consider an event in the ministry of Christ among the Nephite people. When the Savior introduced the ordinance of the sacrament to the Nephites we are told that he took the bread and gave it to the disciples as the multitude watched and commanded them to eat, which they did until they "were filled." Only after they were "filled" did they give bread to the body of the Church, who also ate until they were "filled." The same ritual was followed with the wine. (3 Nephi 18:4-9.) Scores of times I have asked Book of Mormon students why the Lord would require the nearly twenty-five hundred men, women, and children present in that meeting to wait while the Twelve not only partook of the bread and wine, but had a sacramental meal—that is, actually ate until they were filled. Their response is always the same. The text could not possibly mean that they actually ate until they were filled. Rather, it means that they were filled with the Spirit.

Surely, the experiences of the meeting to that point had been sufficient to fill them with the Spirit. They had already witnessed the descent of Christ from the heavens and heard the voice of the Father introduce him. They had heard as marvelous a gospel discourse as had ever been delivered; they had gone forth one by one to meet the Savior and handle the wounds in his hands, side, and feet; and they had either been healed of infirmities or witnessed loved ones that were. They had already experienced more than we could dare hope for in a lifetime of spiritual experiences. The context of the meeting suggests that they did not have to wait until that point to be filled with the Spirit.

Let us then dare to suppose that the passage means what it says, that they actually ate until they were filled. That is, in this meeting, as in the first sacrament meeting in the Old World, they partook of a sacramental meal. Then let us ask what purpose would be served by their so doing. Obviously, in a meeting of this length (consider the time necessary for all twenty-five hundred to come forth and handle the Lord alone) physical refreshment would be welcome. Yet beyond that, doesn't it seem rather appropriate that the Twelve, these newly called prophets, seers, and revelators, these men through whom the word of the Lord was to come to the people, would symbolically in the sacrament be the first to receive the "bread of life?" Is it not important that the body of the Church learn that there will be those occasions upon which they must patiently wait upon Twelve, for the Twelve cannot give that which they themselves have not yet received? And is it not the Twelve through whom the bread of life both ritually and literally must come to the membership of the Church? The ritual was a perfect teaching device demonstrating the role of the Twelve and their relationship to the body of the Church.

The Doctrine and Covenants

As with our ancient scriptural records, the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants also take on a greater richness for those conversant with the language of symbols. Since so many of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants center in the restoration of the priesthood, keys, and organization of the Church, let us use them as our example. These revelations tell us that the "keys of the kingdom," meaning the authority to preside over the Church, have been held by the Presidency of the High Priesthood in all dispensations (see D&C 81:2). Further we are told that this presidency or presiding quorum has always consisted of three "righteous and holy men" (D&C 107:29). Since we have also been told that the earthly kingdom is patterned after the heavenly kingdom, we then recognize the "righteous and holy men" chosen to stand at the head of the Church on earth as the symbolic representation of the heavenly Presidency of Three, or the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. By definition, to hold the priesthood is to be the agent of God; it is to have the authority to act in the first person for him.

The New Testament

To complete our survey of the standard works let us now consider a New Testament type, taking as our example Christ's cursing of the fig tree. Our story finds Jesus and his associates walking from Bethany to Jerusalem. It is Monday morning. Before the week is over Christ's lifeless body will lie in a borrowed tomb for three days, after which an angel will announce, "He is risen." The group are on their way to the temple, where Christ, for the second time in his short ministry, will cast out the money changers and others who have defiled his Father's house. As they progress to the temple, Christ sees "afar off" a fig tree "having leaves," to which he then goes in the expectation of obtaining fruit, doubtless to find refreshment for himself and his disciples. The tree, however, has no fruit. Mark tells us that "the time of figs was not yet," simply meaning that it was too early in the season for figs to have ripened. Christ, finding the tree to be without fruit, curses it and then proceeds with his company to the temple. The following morning when he and the Apostles pass that way again, Peter observes that the cursed tree has already "withered away." (Mark 11:12-14, 20-24.)

The story has embarrassed some Bible commentators, who view it as the "least attractive" of the stories about Jesus. These writers applaud Luke for his wisdom among the synoptic writers for not haying included it in his gospel. Still, Matthew and Mark mention it, and so they must wrestle with the question of the common sense and judgment of Christ cursing a fruitless tree when he knew it was not the season of its fruit.

Viewed with the eye of faith, the incident becomes not only a great teaching moment but a prophecy as well. All present knew that fig trees bring forth their fruit before their leaves. All were equally aware that it would be some weeks before fig trees normally gave fruit. Yet the profusion of leaves on this tree constituted an announcement that it was laden with fruit. Christ was thus attracted to it. The symbol was perfect—a tree professing fruits and having none standing in the very shadows of the temple where a corrupt priesthood professed righteousness and devotion to Israel's God as they plotted the death of his Son. How better could Christ have typified the rustling leaves of religious pretense that took refuge within the temple walls? And does not such hypocrisy, be it individual or national, merit the disdain and curse of that very authority it mocks?

The stage was set, the lesson was most timely, and in the false pretense of the fig tree was to be found perfect typecasting. The moment now belonged to the Master Teacher, who used it to dramatize his power over nature and evidence once again his claim to Messiahship, while making the fig tree a prophetic type of what befalls those who profess his authority and fail to bring forth good fruits. Of such he has said, these I will curse "with the heaviest of all cursings" (D&C 41:1).

Our Journey

With the understanding that all things testify of Christ, and that symbols are often the language of that testimony, and with the realization that symbolism is a language common to the revelations of all ages, be they scripture or personal experiences, we proceed on an adventure through scripture and history in the hopes of gaining greater fluency in this the universal tongue. Symbols are a dramatic and effective teaching device for those who have the Spirit, and a stone of stumbling and rock of offense for those who do not. An understanding of gospel symbols enhances both testimony and the ability to bear it. Symbolism is the language of inspired teaching and writing. It has ever been the language of prophecy and prophets. It is the language of the gospel, the means of communication between the Saints of all ages.

1985 Bookcraft
