Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

2

Teaching in Technicolor

Symbols are to the gospel teacher what pigments are to the artist—the source of color and richness. With them the master teacher can paint word pictures that give breath to thoughts. They are as the morning light that awakens the slumbering soul, bringing with them both warmth and nourishment. Let us acquaint ourselves with the primary colors of the verbal artist—similes, metaphors, and hyperboles—for with these one can create an infinite variety of feelings and enhance ideas of every hue and form.

Similes and Metaphors

No figurative teaching devices are used more effectively in the scriptures than similes and metaphors. A simile is created by likening one thing to another: "He is like a lion." A metaphor is created by depicting the two things as the same: "He is a lion." Both give confidence and personality to our expression. Similes and metaphors can be strong or mellow, aggressive or serene, but their purpose is always to give depth, color, and warmth to our expressions. They are to words as character is to the individual. Whereas we might say that it is a sad thing for a person to join the Church and then leave it, returning to his old ways, the scriptures evoke more emotion and depth of feeling when they speak of one such as being like a dog who has returned "to his vomit," or like a sow that has been washed only to return to "wallowing in the mire" (3 Nephi 7:8; 2 Peter 2:22). To those professing reverence for the words of dead prophets while demeaning the Prophet Joseph Smith, John Taylor replied, "Rather a live dog than a dead lion."

It was Christ who spoke of Herod as "that fox" (Luke 13:32) and told the Pharisees that they were poisonous snakes. "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers," he said, and then asked, "How can ye escape the damnation of hell?" He called them "blind guides" who strained at gnats and swallowed camels, and likened them to "whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness." (Matthew 23:24, 27, 33.) He warned of "ravening wolves" who came in "sheep's clothing" (Matthew 7:15) and cautioned his disciples against giving that which was holy to dogs or casting their pearls before swine (Matthew 7:6).

Christ's words to the hypocritical hounds that were constantly yapping at his heels tell us something about the soul in which they were forged. Words that are searing hot come from a soul that burns with flaming fire. Words too are living things, created in the image and likeness of those who breathed into them the breath of life. "Give heed to my word," the Lord said to those of our generation, "which is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and marrow; therefore give heed unto my word" (D&C 11:2). Again, the message to those of our day is, "Repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth" (D&C 19:15). Further, we have been told that his word is "true and faithful" (D&C 1:37; 68:34; 71:11). That there is a power innate to the word itself is illustrated in the revelation which states, "For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ" (D&C 84:45).

The simile and metaphor are miniature parables that can with a quick stroke paint a vivid image or evoke a strong emotion. They can be used to give a feeling of peace or elicit a feeling of tension. The words of the Baptist, "Behold the Lamb of God!" (John 1:36) bring quite a different feeling than the words of the Revelator as he describes the "great dragon," the "old serpent," "the accuser of our brethren" who was cast out of the heavenly realm (Revelation 12:9-10).

Christ is known to us as "the Branch," "the Bread of Life," "the Door," "the Lamb of God," "the Light," "the Lion of Judah," "the Rock of Heaven," "the True Vine," and the "Living Water." Satan we know as "the Dragon," "the Serpent," or "the Prince of Darkness." We speak of the Holy Ghost descending "like a dove," and one of our favorite hymns announces that the "Spirit of God like a fire is burning." We speak of the "morning stars" who sang together for joy. The righteous we call the "salt of the earth," the faithless are as "salt that has lost its savor." The mortal body is called a "tabernacle of clay," and those coming forth in the morning of the first resurrection are known as the "first fruits."

Effective comparisons are a burst of energy to an idea. They are like sight to the blind or hearing to the deaf—they give a dimension to understanding that otherwise could not be had. Like the rising sun, words can be used to give life and light and warmth to ideas that otherwise we might have missed as travelers in the night.

Parables to Conceal and Reveal

Parables are similes expanded into short stories. The narrative may be factual or fictional, but it must still represent things according to the nature of the real world. In this sense parables differ from fables, which are fictional stories whose casts of characters include talking animals, trees, and other inanimate objects. An allegory is more of an extended metaphor. Whereas the parable has only one point of comparison, the allegory has many. Somewhat like the fable, the allegory uses inanimate objects for comparison, but it does not involve itself in the fantasy of attributing speech or intelligence to the objects so used. The classical scriptural example is Zenos's allegory of the tame and wild olive trees, in which he prophesies the scattering and gathering of Israel (Jacob 5).

Parables and allegories are much alike, "and it is less important to distinguish between them than it is to distinguish between allegory, which the author intended, and allegorical embellishment or interpretation, which he did not" (Caird, G. B. The Language and Imagery of the Bible. Duckworth Studies in Theology. London: Gerald Duckworth and Co. Ltd., The Old Piano Factory, 1980., p. 167). Here the classic example is Augustine's allegorization of the parable of the Good Samaritan, in which he held that the man was Adam, "Jerusalem, the heavenly city; Jericho the moon—the symbol of mortality; the thieves are the devil and his angels, who strip the man of immortality by persuading him to sin and so leave him (spiritually) half dead; the priest and Levite represent the Old Testament, the Samaritan, Christ; the beast, his flesh which he assumed at the Incarnation; the inn is the church and the innkeeper the apostle Paul" (Caird, G. B. The Language and Imagery of the Bible. Duckworth Studies in Theology. London: Gerald Duckworth and Co. Ltd., The Old Piano Factory, 1980., p. 165). Such an interpretation may have served Augustine's purpose; it most assuredly did not serve the Lord's.

The use of the parable as a teaching device is greatly misunderstood. Parables have been used in the scriptures both to conceal and to reveal truth. Christ used them to hide or shield truth from those seeking to oppose it. Prophets of the Old Testament used parables to expose or dramatically reveal the truth. Knowing the purpose for which a parable was used is essential to the proper understanding of it. Let us consider the parable and its close kin the allegory as they are used to protect prophecy and sacred truths, and then examine the parable as a device for manifesting and emphasizing truths.

The perspective of the parable's rather limited role is no better illustrated than in its limited use. No parables were used by Christ in his visit among the Nephite people. No parables are found in the entire Book of Mormon. No parables were used by John in his gospel, which is the gospel written to the Saints. No parables were used by Paul in his epistles or in any New Testament book save the synoptic Gospels. There are a few parables used in the Old Testament but they are not used to teach gospel principles. Similarly, Christ did not teach the Apostles with parables. Matthew and Mark both tell us that Jesus did not begin to teach regularly in parables until opposition to his teaching developed. (See Matthew 13:10-16; Mark 4:11-12.) After Christ had taught publicly in parables the disciples came to him privately, asking, "Why speakest thou unto them in parables?" Notice that the question was not "Why speakest thou unto us in parables?" The "them" to whom reference was made were the scribes and Pharisees; they were the spies sent by the Sanhedrin to find fault; they were those who had hardened their hearts against Christ (See McConkie, Bruce R. The Mortal Messiah. 4 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981. 2:238-39.) Jesus answered:

Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.

For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.

Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:

For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. (Matthew 13:11-15.)

As the scriptural example suggests, parables are not appropriately used in teaching members of the Church. The gospel message ought not be cloaked or veiled to those ready to receive it in plainness. Further, "Parables are not sources to search to learn doctrine. They may serve as illustrations of gospel principles; they may dramatize, graphically and persuasively, some gospel truths; but it is not their purpose to reveal doctrine, or, standing alone, to guide men along the course leading to eternal life. Parables can only be understood, in their full and complete meaning, after one knows the doctrines about which they speak." (McConkie, Bruce R. The Mortal Messiah. 4 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981. 2:241.)

As to allegories, it ought to be observed that they are a form of prophetic ambiguity, having no meaning apart from their intended interpretation. They are, as it were, a sealed book until they have been decoded or translated by the prophet who gave them or one filled with the spirit of revelation. Once understood they can be used to effectively sustain the teaching of a particular doctrine, but they are not the source of doctrine. Unlike the parable, they have no profitable purpose in teaching the nonmember. They are veiled prophecies to be understood only by those having the spirit of revelation.

Parables to Dramatize Truth

The best known Old Testament parable is the story of the ewe lamb by which Nathan cleverly got David to pronounce his own guilt and punishment for the murder of Uriah. Nathan told David the story of two men, one rich and the other poor. The rich man had great flocks and herds, while the poor man had but one ewe lamb, which he loved and nourished as his own children. When a traveler came to visit the rich man, he took the lamb of the poor man to feed his guest. The story made David very angry and he said to Nathan, "As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die: And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity." To this Nathan responded, "Thou art the man." He then rehearsed for David the manner in which the Lord had blessed him and how, if that had been too little, the Lord would have given him whatever he desired, and yet he had despised the commandment of the Lord and had had Uriah killed that he might take his wife. Nathan then told David that he had pronounced judgment upon himself. (2 Samuel 12:1-12.)

Another of Israel's prophets used a similar device to get Ahab, the wicked king of the north kingdom, to pronounce judgment upon himself. When the Syrian King Ben-hadad besieged Samaria, the capital of Israel, Ahab routed his army with a surprise attack. Ben-hadad escaped, but later was captured. King Ahab, contrary to the instruction of the Lord, spared Ben-hadad on condition that the Galilee towns that had been occupied by his father be returned and that Israel be given trading rights with Damascus. Wounded and disguised, a prophet waited for Ahab by the roadside. As the king passed he called out to him:

Sir, I went into the thick of the battle, and a soldier came over to me with a prisoner and said, Take charge of this fellow. If by any chance he gets away, your life shall be forfeit, or you shall pay a talent of silver.

As I was busy with one thing and another, sir, he disappeared. The king of Israel said to him, You deserve to die. And he said to the king of Israel, You have passed sentence on yourself.

Then he tore the bandage from his eyes, and the king of Israel saw that he was one of the prophets.

And he said to the king, This is the word of the Lord: Because you let that man go when I had put him under a ban, your life shall be forfeit for his life, your people of his people. (New English Bible, 1 Kings 20:39-42.)

Similarly, Christ in speaking to the Pharisees told a parable of a householder who planted a vineyard, hedged it, dug a winepress, and built a tower within it. Then he let it out to husbandmen and went into a far country. When the time of harvest approached he sent his servants to receive its fruits. His servants were beaten and killed. Additional servants were sent with the same results. The householder then sent his own son, and the husbandmen, knowing full well that he was the master's son, killed him also. Now, asked the Savior, "When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?" To which his antagonists replied, "He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons." Thus they prophesied their own destiny. (Matthew 21:33-41.)

Such parables are not used to conceal but rather to reveal in a clever and dramatic way the justice of God in the affairs of men. Such devices were common among the peoples of the Bible. A touching illustration concerns a young Hebrew mother whose twin sons became ill and died in the absence of their father. Upon his return home the woman told her husband that a few years ago a man had come to her and asked her to care for two precious stones. "Today," she said, "just before you returned, he appeared again. I am loath to part with them. Tell me, must I give them back to him?"

"Of course," the husband responded, "They never really were your property, no matter how long you have held them." Then sensing the quietness of the house he discovered the death of his precious sons. (Milton Steinberg, As a Driven Leaf, pp. 132-33.)

1985 Bookcraft
