Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

3

Teaching in Black and White

All learning takes place in relationship to what we know. Teachers expand our understanding by comparing or contrasting that which is to be learned to something we already understand. The previous chapter considered how the scriptures teach with comparisons (similes, metaphors, parables, and so on); in this chapter we will consider how the Lord teaches his prophets and people by the use of contrasts. Whereas comparisons give color to ideas, contrasts are most often found in the form of darkness versus light, or scriptural absolutism. Scriptural absolutism is found in an instance where a particular principle is emphasized without showing its relationship to other principles. For instance, one of the commandments given the nation of Israel through Moses was, "Thou shalt not kill" (Exodus 20:13); another was to "utterly destroy" the seven nations that inhabited the land of Palestine (Deuteronomy 7:1-2). No scriptural harmony is provided as a bridge between these two diverse commands; both were given in absolute terms.

A distinctive characteristic of Christ's teaching was the positive and unqualified manner in which he taught. To follow him was and is to travel a "strait and narrow path." There is nothing ecumenical in such statements as: "I am the bread of life" (John 6:35), "I am the light of the world" (John 8:12), or "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6). Paul perpetuated that narrowness, declaring that there was but "One Lord, one faith, one baptism" (Ephesians 4:5), as did John Taylor with his motto "The kingdom of God or nothing."

Truth and Authority

Christ taught "as one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matthew 7:29). Scribes or rabbis taught by the authority of precedent. They made no claim to the spirit of revelation or to holding priesthood; their authority was conferred by man and consisted of nothing more than the traditions of men. In contrast, Christ spoke as the representative of God. It was at his command that unclean spirits departed and the afflicted were healed. To the man sick of the palsy he said, "thy sins be forgiven thee," and the scribes, knowing that only God could forgive sins, said within themselves, "This man blasphemeth" (Matthew 9:2-3). Again and again in the Sermon on the Mount, he said "that it was said to them of old time" (meaning Jehovah told Moses on Sinai) that they were to do such and such—that is, your revelations tell you this—and then he would add, but I say unto you this and this, and thus he would add to or edit the scriptures. In so doing he forced his listeners to choose between the law he had given Moses and himself as the lawgiver. Such was the authority with which Christ taught.

The system of salvation is the same today. The testimony of the Restoration forces the same choice between the world's profession of loyalty to what God spoke to prophets of ages past and our testimony of what he is speaking to prophets now living. Surely those representing the Savior today should be found teaching the same gospel he taught, and teaching it with the same confidence and authority. Describing Christ's preparatory years, the Joseph Smith Translation states, "He served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him" (Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew 3:25). Similarly, the message of the Restoration is not the result of what men of the world can teach, but that which we know by the spirit of revelation. Thus we find the Lord instructing the missionaries of this dispensation: "Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit; And ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken." (D&C 43:15-16.)

The Weak Things of the World

The Lord has never chosen to display the majesty of the gospel in worldly trappings. He sought no honor of men, nor would he accept any worldly endorsements. Rather, he said, "I call upon the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of my Spirit" (D&C 35:13). Paul stated it thus: "God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are: That no flesh should glory in his presence" (1 Corinthians 1:27-29).

Again and again in the scriptures we see the simplicity of faith arrayed against the physical or intellectual powers of the world. We find Gideon and his army of three hundred routing the thousands of Midian; Samson slaying a thousand with the jawbone of an ass; the boy David answering the challenge of the Philistine giant Goliath; Moses and Aaron confronting Pharaoh and the might of Egypt; the Son of God born in a stable; Stephen confounding the Sanhedrin (Israel's greatest scriptural scholars); the unlearned fishermen from Galilee, Peter and John, withstanding the council of the Jews; Paul teaching on Mars Hill, testifying before Agrippa, and appealing to Caesar; and well might we add Joseph Smith, of whom the Lord said, "I raised you up, that I might show forth my wisdom through the weak things of the earth" (D&C 124:1). The power of the gospel is to be kept clearly independent from the "arm of flesh" (D&C 1:19).

Hyperbole and Absoluteness

A hyperbole is a statement exaggerated for effect. It is a way of verbally underscoring an idea or principle. Hyperbole or overstatement is a figure of speech common to peoples of all ages, and it is natural that the scriptures would abound with it. It can be used in flattery, as in the song of the dancing women: "Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands" (1 Samuel 18:7). It is also used in lament: "They were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions" (2 Samuel 1:23). It was a device frequently used by Jesus. To the Pharisees he said, you "strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel" (Matthew 23:24). To those who trusted in their wealth he said, "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God" (Mark 10:25). Literalists suggest to us that the needle's eye was the name for a low gate, like the door into the Church of the Nativity at Bethlehem, but since we find him using exaggerated statements so effectively and frequently one is left to wonder why the fuss in this instance.

The use of hyperbole necessitates at least a modest amount of sense on the part of the listener. The gospel has always been taught in such a manner that those who deliberately want to misunderstand can at least pretend to do so. Since the gospel is positive it is presented in positive or unqualified terms. This is particularly true of the way the Book of Mormon prophets taught. There is no indication in their teachings that they had any knowledge of degrees of glory in the world to come. They speak of paradise and hell, the righteous and the wicked, but no hint is given of a terrestrial or middle kingdom. This absoluteness on their part may represent a strong Old World tie, for it is very much a part of Hebrew and Arab thought and shows itself very markedly in the documents from Qumran. Indeed it has always been common to the way the gospel has been presented. In reading the promises of a patriarchal blessing we do not expect constant reminders that they are predicated on obedience and righteousness. Righteousness is implicit in all promises given by God, and everyone with any Church sense or even the least degree of spiritual maturity knows it. A couple do not receive the promise in the temple that they are married for time and eternity and suppose that it holds irrespective of the way they live. All gospel covenants and promised blessings are conditional. We need not interrupt the beauty of the marriage ceremony to list all the possible sins which would negate the sacred promises being given. That those being married must remain clean and pure, that they must keep their covenants in exactness and honor, has already been taught, and is now symbolized by the robes of righteousness in which they are clothed.

This absolutism finds its expression consistently in the scriptures. For instance, we have Luke recording the Savior as saying, "If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple" (Luke 14:26). Hate as used here is a hyperbole expressed in terms of gospel absolutism. We have the same idea expressed by Matthew, who records the Savior as saying, "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me" (Matthew 10:37). The meaning of both passages is the same. Salvation is and always has been a family affair. Jesus is merely saying that in the event of conflict between family and the principles of salvation, our loyalty and responsibility must be first to God. Now, keep in mind that the author of this statement is the same who said with absoluteness, that is, without explaining the exceptions, "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee" (Exodus 20:12). In a different setting Christ rebuked the Pharisees for having perverted this command of Sinai (see Mark 7:9-13).

Hyperboles are helpful in emphasizing gospel principles, and absoluteness is essential in presenting the gospel message. Both, like all other gospel symbols, require sense and judgment in how they are understood.

The God of Light Versus the Prince of Darkness

Among the marvelous scriptural texts restored through Joseph Smith is an account of Moses being taken in the Spirit up into an exceedingly high mountain, where it was necessary for him to be transfigured to abide the glory of God and obtain the revelation that awaited him (see Moses 1:2, 11). Following this experience he was approached by Satan, claiming, as he ever has, that he was the son of God, and commanding Moses to worship him. Moses, who by then had a point of reference, asked: "Where is thy glory, that I should worship thee? For behold, I could not look upon God, except his glory should come upon me, and I were transfigured before him. But I can look upon thee in the natural man." (Moses 1:13-14.) Again he asked: "Where is thy glory, for it is darkness unto me? And I can judge between thee and God." (Moses 1:15.)

The principle established is one of importance to all who seek proper worship and understanding. Earthly power is sufficient for the understanding of earthly things, while the glories of heaven-sent truth can be seen only by eyes that have been anointed by a heaven-sent Spirit. Paul stated it thus: "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (1 Corinthians 2:11.) The doctrine of the scriptures is that the things of the Spirit must be understood by the power of the Spirit. All other means of understanding are unacceptable to God. (See D&C 50:17-20.)

Moses' experience establishes the pattern. We find it repeated again and again in the experiences of Joseph Smith. In his account of the First Vision, Joseph Smith describes a thick darkness and his near destruction "not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world" (JS-H 1:15-16). Joseph's life was saved by the coming of a "pillar of light" and the appearance of two "Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description" (JS-H 1:16-17). This light-versus-dark experience was repeated again when he went to obtain the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. On one occasion while he was being instructed by Moroni the heavens were opened to him and he was allowed to gaze into the heavens, whereupon the angel said to him, "Look!" and as he did so he "beheld the prince of darkness, surrounded by his innumerable train of associates." As this vision passed before him, he was told, "all this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and the impure, the glory of God, the power of darkness, that ye may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by the wicked one." (Messenger and Advocate 2:198.)

Descriptive Contrasts

The manner in which the Lord teaches by contrast is amply illustrated in the great revelation on the degrees of glory. To illustrate the difference between the various kingdoms, Paul likened the greatest to the glory of the sun, the next to the glory of the moon, and finally the lowest to that of the stars (1 Corinthians 15:41). The sequence in which Joseph Smith was granted the same revelation is significant. First, he was allowed to gaze into the celestial realm and to see the throne of God upon which sat the Father and the Son (D&C 76:21-24). This was followed by a revelation of the ultimate destiny of those who become sons of perdition (D&C 76:25-49). Joseph's attention was then returned to a continuation of the revelation of the celestial kingdom (D&C 76:50-70). In this process Joseph Smith was afforded the sharpest contrast that the eternities provide. Note the similarity of this and the experience of Moses; after Moses was carried to the high mountain he was confronted by the prince of darkness and then had the visions of eternity opened to him again.

Following this vision of the celestial kingdom, Joseph Smith was shown the glories of the terrestrial or middle kingdom. He learned that those who inhabit this kingdom will be the "honorable men of the earth," the honest and the upright. He also saw that those whose lives have been touched by the Spirit of the Lord and who have known him and testified of him and yet failed to be fully valiant are to be found here. (D&C 76:71-80.) Thus by contrast Joseph Smith was taught that to inherit the celestial kingdom it is not enough to be honorable and have one's life touched by the Spirit—a full devotion to the gospel cause is necessary. Finally, and by way of further contrast, Joseph was shown the telestial or lowest kingdom. He learned that its citizenry would be made up in large measure of those professing religious devotion of one sort or another while using those professions as an excuse to reject the obligations of citizenry in the Lord's kingdom. (D&C 76:99-101.)

The Doctrine of No Neutrality

There are no neutrals where Christ and the gospel are concerned. "He that is not with me is against me," Christ declared, "and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad" (Matthew 12:30). No one taught this principle with greater plainness than Mormon, who told us that "a man being evil cannot do that which is good; neither will he give a good gift. For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water; wherefore, a man being a servant of the devil cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil." (Moroni 7:10.) One cannot march in two armies. We cannot be both an Israelite and a Philistine. Those selling their goods to both will be esteemed an enemy by both. The battle between good and evil, between light and dark, admits no middle ground. Some things we are or we are not. A woman may be pregnant or not pregnant, but hardly undecided. To be indecisive about whether or not we are going to stand for Christ is to remain sitting.

Mormon assured us that "all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God." Thus the warning that we "do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil." Nor need we be confused, for Mormon tells us:

The way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night. [This is our doctrine of contrast.]

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him. (Moroni 7:15-17.)

1985 Bookcraft
