Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

4

Joseph and the Spirit of Prophecy

No character in the Old Testament should be of greater interest to Latter-day Saints than Joseph of Egypt. Strangely, few if any prophets have been more neglected in our sermons and writings. To Jews, he has been seen as the antitype of his father Jacob, while to Christians he is cited as a near perfect type for the Savior. Bible writers have enumerated more than a hundred points of similarity between Joseph and Christ. Yet, if the life of our father Joseph—for nearly every Latter-day Saint claims descent from him—is intended as a prophetic type, it seems fitting that it be especially such for those of his own family. Perhaps the book of Genesis is hinting that his life is one of prophetic import in that it devotes eleven of its fifty chapters to him. This in a book that recounts the story of the creation and then covers nearly 2700 years of history.

Indeed, no search for treasures within the pages of the Old Testament is more richly rewarding than the story of our ancient father. Let us view the typical Joseph as he is seen in both Jewish and Christian traditions. Then, clothing ourselves with the spirit of prophecy so common to him, let us discover his life as a marvelous prophecy of Joseph Smith and the labors of the tribe of Joseph in the last days.

The Latter-Day City of Joseph

Samuel Rapaport in his work A Treasury of the Midrash compares the life of Joseph to the history of Zion and Jerusalem. "There is," he said, "a remarkable similarity in the phrases employed in describing the respective events of each whether in their adversity or in their prosperity." Both Joseph and Zion were loved of the Lord and hated of their brethren. Dreams were granted in relation to both and both were destined to rule. As Joseph's brothers contemplated his destruction, so ungodly nations contemplated the destruction of Zion. "Joseph was stripped of his coat of many colours," and concerning Zion the scriptures say, "They shall strip thee also of thy clothes" (Zimmerli, Walther, Ezekiel 1. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1979.6:39). As Joseph was clothed in grand garments, so the prophecy is "Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments" (Isaiah 52). Rapaport continues with a list of more than two dozen such similarities (Rapaport, Samuel. A Treasury of the Midrash. New York: KTAV Publishing House Inc., 1968., pp. 228-30). [^1]

The idea of the history of Jerusalem and Zion being foretold in the life of Joseph may have very ancient roots. Moroni, in his commentary on Ether's prophecy of a New Jerusalem to be built by the remnant of Joseph in the last days, announced it as the fulfillment of a type (Ether 13:6). Moroni wrote:

For as Joseph brought his father down into the land of Egypt, even so he died there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should perish not, even as he was merciful unto the father of Joseph that he should perish not.

Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come when the earth shall pass away. (Ether 13:7-8.)

Joseph as a Type for Christ

As we have already noted, Christian writers have traditionally treated the life of Joseph as prefiguring that of Christ. As Latter-day Saints we take no issue with this, and in fact with the aid of the restored gospel we can greatly improve upon their efforts to do so. The following list will illustrate:

Edersheim writes, "But in truth it was not a ‘coat of many colours,’ but a tunic reaching down the arms and feet such as princes and persons of distinction wore, and it betokened to Joseph's brothers only too clearly, their father intended to transfer to Joseph the right of the first born" (Edersheim, Alfred. Bible History, Old Testament. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1890. 1:144).

Writing about the myths and legends of the Old Testament, Theodore H. Gaster says:

It seems a pity to strip [Joseph] of so decorative and familiar a vesture, but, like several other elements of popular Bible lore . . . this one too disappears under the searching light of a more exact scholarship. What Joseph received from his father is described in original Hebrew as a "coat of pasaim"—a garment which is said in the story of Amnon and Tamar (II Samuel 13:18-19) to have been worn by the latter and to have been customarily affected by the princesses of royal blood. Now, pasaim is the plural of the word pas, which normally means "length, extension." Literally, therefore, the garment was a "coat of lengths." The Greek Septuagint and some of the other ancient translators took this to mean a garment made out of various lengths of different materials—that is, a kind of quilted or patch work tunic, and it is from this interpretation that the familiar "coat of many colors" is derived. What was really intended, however, was a coat which was extra long and extended to the ankles. (Gaster, Theodore H. Myth, Legend and Customs in the Old Testament. New York: Harper and Row Pub., no date given., p. 216.)

The late Professor Speiser, however, notes that "the traditional ‘coat of many colors,’ and the variant ‘coat with sleeves’ are sheer guesses from the context; nor is there anything remarkable about either colors or sleeves." He, too, traces the Hebrew pasaim to its only other Bible usage in the story of Amnon and Tamar and describes the garment as a "ceremonial robe." (The Anchor Bible Genesis, pp. 289-90.)

Ginzberg recounts various stories about appearances of Gabriel to Joseph. One of these appearances was while Joseph was imprisoned in the pit before his brothers sold him into slavery. Here it is said that Gabriel placed upon him a special garment of protection which he wore throughout all his Egyptian experiences. (Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909. 2:17.) Ginzberg also records that after Joseph was reunited with his family in Egypt his father gave him two gifts, the first being the city of Shechem and "the second gift was the garments made by God for Adam and passed from hand to hand, until they came into the possession of Jacob" (Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909. 2:139). "According to the view of later authors, Joseph's coat was the holy tunic of the priest" (Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909. 5:326).

Like the word colours, the word coat also bears careful examination in the story of Joseph. The translation comes from the Hebrew kethoneth, which could have been translated "garment," "robe," or "tunic." Kethoneth finds its first use in the Old Testament in the account of the "coats of skins" made by God for Adam and Eve (Genesis 3:21). The King James translators could just as well have rendered this "garments of skin" or "robes of skins." Whether intended or not, the phrase "garments of skins" lends itself to an interesting play on words. The Hebrew word for skins is ore, which has a homonym (or) meaning "light." The oral reading of the phrase "garments of skins" in Hebrew conveys the meaning "garments of light." Among the Jews, there are a number of traditions to this effect. Along with the phrase "garments of light," these traditions refer to the garments given by God to Adam as the "celestial garments," the "priestly garments," or "high-priestly garments," which were said to have "supernatural qualities" and to be the garments worn by Adam and his descendants when offering sacrifices (Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909. 5:103-4). Such traditions also hold that these were "the priestly garments worn by the firstborn who performed the priestly service before Aaron's time" (Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909. 5:283).

Though the story of Joseph's coat is still shrouded in some mystery, it is evident that it was more than a mere expression of his father's favoritism. It bespoke Joseph's position of superiority over his brothers; it apparently announced that the coveted birthright was to be his. The "coat" given to Joseph by Jacob was a priesthood garment, and may in some way have been related with Joseph's ability to dream dreams and speak by way of revelation which, in the chronology of the Bible story, he then commenced to do.

The Latter-Day Joseph

Joseph's life as a type or prophecy is not limited to the manner in which it portrays the life of Christ. We have already noticed that Moroni saw it as foreshadowing that of the New Jerusalem of the last days. In a discourse by the other Moroni of the Book of Mormon (the military commander in Alma), there is preserved for us a prophecy that Joseph's father, Jacob, made shortly before his death. Having before him a remnant of Joseph's coat, given to him by his sons when they declared Joseph lost, Jacob noticed that part of the remnant of that coat had decayed with the passing of years, while part of the coat's remnant had been preserved. Seeing this, Jacob prophesied, "Even as this remnant of garment of my son hath been preserved, so shall a remnant of the seed of my son be preserved by the hand of God, and be taken unto himself, while the remainder of the seed of Joseph shall perish, even as the remnant of his garment" (Alma 46:24).

Moroni, in response to dissensions within his own nation, rent his coat and wrote upon it, making of it a memorial to God, their religion, their freedoms, and their families, and then fastened it upon the end of a pole. "He went forth among the people, waving the rent part of his garment in the air, that all might see the writing which he had written upon the rent part, and crying with a loud voice, saying: Behold, whosoever will maintain this title upon the land, let them come forth in the strength of the Lord, and enter into a covenant that they will maintain their rights, and their religion, that the Lord God may bless them" (Alma 46:19-20).

Responding to Moroni's challenge, many came forth "rending their garments in token, or as a covenant, that they would not forsake the Lord their God," and that they would not transgress his holy laws, nor would they be ashamed to take upon them the name of Christ, for should they do so, "the Lord should rend them even as they had rent their garments." Those entering this covenant were reminded by Moroni that they were "a remnant of the seed of Joseph, whose coat was rent by his brethren into many pieces," and that they must keep the commandments of God or their garments would be rent by their brethren and they "be cast into prison, or be sold, or be slain." Rehearsing Jacob's prophecy about the remnant of Joseph that would perish, Moroni, likening the prophecy unto his own people, said, "Who knoweth but what the remnant of the seed of Joseph, which shall perish as his garment, are those who have dissented from us? Yea, and even it shall be ourselves if we do not stand fast in the faith of Christ." (Alma 46:21-27.)

Though we see the shadows of Jacob's prophecy reaching far beyond the circumstances to which Moroni applied them, of greatest interest to the present work is that Book of Mormon and Bible prophets alike saw Joseph's life as a prophetic type. In that same spirit, let it be suggested that its greatest significance to those of our day is as a marvelous foreshadowing of the life of Joseph Smith, his great labors and those of the tribe of Joseph, of which he effectually stands as the head in this the last dispensation. We know that Joseph of Egypt knew the Prophet Joseph Smith by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, that he described the work that Joseph Smith would do, that he named him by name, and declared that "he shall be like unto me" (2 Nephi 3:15).

Viewing the life of Joseph of Egypt as a type foretelling the destiny of his tribe in the last days as it centers in the experiences of Joseph Smith, the following parallels are suggested:

How striking it is that the testimony of both Josephs evoked such reaction! Surely such announcements from obscure boys should have been passed off as youthful prattle, resulting in amusement or perhaps sympathy, but not a murderous hatred. It is truth that kindles the wrath of hell today as it did anciently. Had the Spirit of the Lord found place in the hearts of Joseph's brothers either anciently or in modern times it would have caused rejoicing at the prospect of a divinely appointed leader. Had the brothers disbelieved the prophecies, they certainly had no cause for concern. Their very bitterness in both instances evidenced the truth of the testimony borne.

Joseph's brothers were often quarrelsome, envious, and resentful. One matter alone seems to have united them: that of persecuting their younger brother. Such is the type, and so we find Joseph Smith declaring of his "Christian" brothers, "all united to persecute me," this being but the pattern of a quarrelsome world of churches that can agree upon nothing but to oppose Mormonism.

Notes

1985 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] There is some justification in the root word to render this crocodile instead of serpent. Such would be most fitting since the crocodile was so reverenced in Egypt. (The Joseph Smith Translation leaves it serpent.)
