Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

6

An Everlasting Memorial: From Sinai to Palestine

As the journey from Egypt to Sinai was replete with types and shadows, so the journey from Sinai to the land of promise was filled with timeless teaching moments. As with the stories heretofore told, not only are such experiences marvelous teaching devices to which we can liken the present, but they prophetically prefigure and foreshadow events of far greater importance in the destiny of Israel than those of the moment of their occurrence.

It is one thing to possess a valued book and quite another to know of its value. Let us resume our journey with Israel through its wilderness wanderings, watching closely as we do so for those things of greatest worth.

A Holy Nation, A Kingdom of Priests

After Moses had brought the nation of Israel into the wilderness of Sinai, he again ascended the holy mountain, where the Lord told him of the covenant he desired to make with his people. "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant," the Lord directed Moses to tell Israel, "then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." When Moses presented this covenant to Israel they responded, "All that the Lord hath spoken we will do." Moses returned and reported to the Lord. (Exodus 19:5-8.) He was then instructed to sanctify Israel that the Lord might "come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai" and give them his law. The cleansing process included the washing of their clothes. (Exodus 19:10-11, 14.) Jewish tradition holds that they were baptized at this time (Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909. 3:88). If the allegory of Ezekiel about the covenant that God made with Israel is interpreted to begin at this point, then the sanctification ritual consisted of washing and anointing (Zimmerli, Walther, Ezekiel 1. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1979. 6:8-10). The Doctrine and Covenants affirms that the children of Israel at the time of Moses practiced the rituals of baptism, washings, and anointings (D&C 84:26-27; 124:37-40). However one chooses to interpret the ritual by which Israel was prepared to see their God, of this we can be certain: The physical cleansing mentioned in the scripture assumes meaning only as it is an emblem of the necessary spiritual cleansing.

The covenant that the Lord sought to make with Israel was one in which they would become a "kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Exodus 19:6). "Early commentators, both Jewish and Christian, and also in the ancient versions," understood this to mean that they would be "priests and kings" (Keil, C. F., and F. Delitzsch. Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament. Vol. II, Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., no date given. 2:96-97). That accords with the expectation of the New Testament Saints (Revelation 1:5-6; 5:9-10) and is the same promise made to the Saints of our day (D&C 76:56).

The covenant that Israel would become a "kingdom of priests" meant that they were to be a nation in which their citizens were to be priesthood holders. The priesthood that they held would have been the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. The Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood had not yet been revealed. These priesthood holders were to possess a royal power and dignity. A priest is an intermediary between God and man; thus Israel would become the dispenser of the knowledge of God and the ordinances of salvation to all the nations of the earth. They were to be called and chosen according to the promise the Lord had made with Abraham—that is, to bear the ministry and priesthood to all nations that all might have the opportunity to receive the "blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abraham 2:9-11). Such was the desire of God, but as we shall see, such was not the propensity of Israel.

Sinai Was Israel's First Temple

Sinai served as a temple for Moses and the children of Israel. All that took place on the holy mount we will yet see embodied in the tabernacle and the temples of the Bible. Sinai, like the temple, was the place where God and man were to meet. It was now to become the place where covenants are made. Nor is it without significance that purity was a prerequisite to participate in its blessings. Israel had been washed and sanctified in preparation for the appearance of the Lord, and Moses was instructed to establish bounds around the holy mount beyond which the children of Israel were not to go. None were to go up to the mount or even touch the border of it. Any doing so, be they man or beast, were to be killed. (Exodus 19:12-13.) The glory of the Lord would occupy the top of the mountain; Moses alone, Israel's high priest, would be allowed to part the veil and enter here. Later Aaron and the seventy were permitted to advance some way up the mountain, while the people were only permitted to come up to its base (Exodus 24:9-11). These bounds were a type for the order of the tabernacle, which would be divided into three parts: the outer court, into which the people could enter; the Holy Place, into which the priests could enter; and the Holy of Holies, into which only the high priest could enter. Moses, as the lawgiver, was to receive the statutes and judgments from God's mouth; Aaron and the elders were to receive them from Moses and in turn were to teach them to the people. The positioning of each group dramatized the order of the kingdom. Yet for all there were bounds or limits within which they must remain or be destroyed. Thus we learn that every office in the kingdom of God has its bounds and limits, as do appetites. To exceed those limits is to invite destruction.

Israel Fears the Voice of the Lord

On the third day, according to his promise, the Lord descended upon mount Sinai amid fire and smoke while the mount "quaked greatly." Moses was summoned to enter the cloud resting on the top of the mount. He had hardly entered the divine presence when the Lord told him to return and warn his people "lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish" (Exodus 19:21). Then from the heights of Sinai the Lord gave the "ten words" or commandments. "All the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off. And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die." (Exodus 20:18-19.) "For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived?" (Deuteronomy 5:26).

It was a well-established principle among Old Testament peoples that no unclean thing could endure the presence of God or his angels. Hagar, when instructed by the angel of the Lord to return to Sarai, manifested surprise, saying, "I have indeed seen God and still live after that vision" (New English Bible, Genesis 16:13). After the angel of God had appeared to Manoah and his wife, Manoah exclaimed, "We shall surely die, because we have seen God" (Judges 13:22). The principle has been announced in our dispensation in this language: "For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God. Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind." Then to those to whom the revelation was being given the Lord said, "Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now, neither the ministering of angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected." (D&C 67:11-13.)

Israel Covenants with Her God

Hearing Israel's fear of his presence, the Lord directed Moses to have them return to their tents. He then revealed his commandments, statutes, and judgments to Moses. Moses recorded them in the book of the covenant, read them to Israel, and placed the people under covenant to abide by them. As a symbol of their covenant Moses built an altar at the foot of Sinai with twelve pillars, one representing each of the tribes. On it were offered burnt offerings and peace offerings of oxen. Moses sprinkled half of the blood of the oxen on the altar and half of it on the people. This represented the sacred fellowship or unity of God and man in the covenant. Having thus been consecrated with the blood of the covenant, the Israelites were qualified to ascend the mountain, where they would behold their God. In this instance Moses, Aaron, Aaron's two sons, and the seventy elders of Israel ascended the mountain, where they saw God. The Lord then invited Moses to come further up the mountain to receive the tables of stone containing the law and commandments which the Lord had written. This Moses did, being absent from Israel for forty days and forty nights. (See Exodus 24.)

Moses as Israel's Advocate

Upon returning to the presence of the Lord, Moses was instructed in the necessity of making a sanctuary so that there would be a suitable place, howbeit temporary, for Him to dwell among them. In labored detail Moses was given the pattern for the tabernacle and "all the instruments thereof" (Exodus 25:8-9). He was further instructed in the manner in which Aaron and his sons were to minister as priests. When Moses was fully instructed the Lord wrote the Law upon two tables of stone with his own finger. Then he said to Moses, "thy people . . . have corrupted themselves: They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt" (Exodus 32:7-8). The Lord's anger was kindled and he told Moses that he would destroy Israel and raise up a new nation from Moses’ seed. At this point in our story, Moses, whom the scriptures tell us was in the similitude of Christ (Moses 1:6), assumed the role of a mediator and pleaded for his people. His argument was threefold: first, that they were God's people, he having brought them out of Egypt by his own power; second, that God's glory was thus involved and would be shamed in the sight of Israel's enemies; and third, that he had covenanted with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to raise up a mighty nation from their seed. Though the Old Testament account of this story is garbled, it has been clarified in the Joseph Smith Translation. There we read of Moses saying: "Turn from thy fierce wrath. Thy people will repent of this evil; therefore come thou not out against them And the Lord said unto Moses, If they will repent of the evil which they have done, I will spare them, and turn away my fierce wrath; but, behold, thou shalt execute judgment upon all that will not repent of this evil this day. Therefore, see thou do this thing that I have commanded thee, or I will execute all that which I had thought to do unto my people." (Joseph Smith Translation, Exodus 32:12, 14.)

A Broken Covenant

Moses returned to his people and, seeing their wickedness, was so angered that he broke the tablets of the law even as Israel had broken their covenant and the law. Swift retribution followed in the camp of Israel. Moses took the golden calf and burnt it—then, grinding it to powder, he sprinkled it on water and made the Israelites drink it, as a symbol that "each one must receive and bear the fruits of his sins" (Edersheim, Alfred. Bible History, Old Testament. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1890. 2:129). Many resisted Moses, but the tribe of Levi stepped forward to sustain him. At their hand nearly three thousand Israelites were slain that day. Though not stated, it appears that those who died were the rebellious and unrepentant of Israel.

Moses as Israel's Mediator

Having received an errand from the Lord, Moses was required to return and report. The honor of the Lord having been avenged, Moses returned to give an accounting and receive further instruction. In this obvious type for Christ, Moses departed from Israel, saying, "I shall make an atonement for your sin" (Exodus 32:30). To the Lord he said, "Blot my name from the book of life if you will not forgive them." The Lord responded that those who had sinned would be blotted from that book but that Moses was to lead his people to the land of promise and that an angel would go before them. Further, the Lord said, "When I visit I will visit their sin upon them" (Exodus 32:34). Israel could not escape from the responsibility of her sins. Though the nation would be preserved and yet lay claim to the land promised, the covenant relationship was not to be restored in full, for as one scholar noted: "Though grace may modify and soften wrath, it cannot mar the justice of the holy God" (Keil, C. F., and F. Delitzsch. Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament. Vol. II, Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., no date given. 2:232).

A Lesser Law Given

Israel was now promised the presence of an angel but not that of the Lord himself, for the Lord said, "I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way" (Exodus 33:3). When the people heard this they mourned, and as a manifestation of their sorrow we are told that they "stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb" (Exodus 33:6). The Septuagint reading of this passage is especially interesting: "The people, having heard this sad declaration, mourned with lamentations. And the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Now, therefore, put off your robes of glory, and your ornaments, and I will show you the things I will do unto you. And the children of Israel put off their ornaments and robes by the mount, by Horeb." In his commentary Clarke suggests that that which they took off was "emblematical of spiritual things," because they were no longer entitled to these emblems of "Divine protection" (Clarke, Adam. Clarke's Commentary. 3 vols. Nashville: Abingdon Press, no date given. 1:470).

To further illustrate that he would no longer be in the midst of Israel, the Lord directed Moses to place the tabernacle of the congregation outside the camp, where he would then come to converse "face to face" with Moses. Shortly thereafter the Lord instructed Moses, "Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law," but we learn from the Joseph Smith Translation that it would "not be according to the first," for the Lord said, "I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them." The law they were then given was to "be after the law of a carnal commandment." (Joseph Smith Translation, Exodus 34:1-2.) From the Doctrine and Covenants we learn that the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the "key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God." The revelation then states that it is in the "ordinances" of that kingdom that the "power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." Such were the privileges forfeited by Israel in her rebellion and apostasy. "This Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God; But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory. Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also." (D&C 84:19-25.)

A Warning and a Promise to Modern Israel

Our ancient text is a sober warning to modern Israel, for we too have been invited to be a "peculiar treasure" unto the Lord, a "kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." We too must be sanctified and so live as to enter the presence of the Lord, even while in the flesh. And we too, if we turn to worship the idols of the world and fail to honor our covenants, will have that priesthood, its power, its blessings, and its ordinances taken from us by a God who is the same yesterday, today, and forever. If the Lord is to be in our midst, as he has promised, we must live for that privilege. Teaching this same principle to the meridian Saints, Paul said: "For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them [Moses and the children of Israel]: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. . . . And they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of unbelief." (Hebrews 4:2, 6.)

To the faithful of Israel in our day the Lord has promised:

Therefore, I will raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as Moses led the children of Israel.

For ye are the children of Israel, and of the seed of Abraham, and ye must needs be led out of bondage by power, and with a stretched-out arm.

And as your fathers were led at the first, even so shall the redemption of Zion be.

Therefore, let not your hearts faint, for I say not unto you as I said unto your fathers: Mine angel shall go up before you, but not my presence.

But I say unto you: Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land. (D&C 103:16-20.)

Pillars of Fire and of the Cloud

When the sanctuary was completed, the cloud which had evidenced the protection and presence of the Lord from the beginning of their wilderness march filled the dwelling. When the Israelites were fleeing Egypt this same cloud moved from its position in leading Israel to the rear of their camp to separate them from their enemies. This phenomenon was a cloud of darkness to the Egyptians while giving light to the camp of Israel. (See Exodus 14:19-20.) So glorious was the cloud in filling the tabernacle that even Moses was unable to enter the sanctuary. The cloud afterwards drew back into the most holy place, to dwell there above the outspread wings of the cherubim of the ark of the covenant, so that Moses and (eventually) the priests were able to enter the holy place and perform the required service there without violating the sacredness of the Holy of Holies.

So long as the cloud rested upon the tabernacle the children of Israel remained encamped; when it ascended, they broke up the encampment to proceed onward. Thus the cloud by day or the pillar of fire by night became the sign for camping and for breaking camp and moving forward until the time their wilderness journey ended. (Exodus 40:34-38.) Such was the symbol of the divine presence. Their path could only be that path in which he led them, and it must be in the patience of faith that they waited upon him. "Whether it was by day or by night whether it were two days, or a month, or a year," they journeyed or rested at his command (Numbers 9:21-22). Further, the cloud was a symbol of his presence and their right to appear before him and seek his blessings. Yet they were still forbidden to go directly to his throne. The barrier which sin had erected between the Holy One and this unholy nation was not yet taken away. To this end a law had been given, a law to remind them that no unclean thing could enter his presence.

The Ark of the Covenant

When Israel marched they were instructed that the ark of the covenant was to go before them; otherwise it was to occupy the most holy place within the sanctuary. As with the pillar of fire and the cloud, the ark was a symbol of the presence of the Lord. It will be remembered that those who rebelled at Kadeshbarnea and attempted to possess the land of promise without the ark fell by the sword (Numbers 14:40-45). In contrast, when the soles of the feet of the priests carrying the ark touched the water of the Jordan River, it parted so that all of Israel could walk through on dry ground (Joshua 3:13-16).

Rebellion and Spiritual Death

Other than Moses, none were held in higher esteem among the camp of Israel than his sister, Miriam the prophetess, and his brother, Aaron the high priest. Both had been richly endowed with spiritual gifts and both had spoken and prophesied in the name of the Lord (Numbers 12:2). It appears that both drank too deeply of the sweet wine of pride, the dregs of which leave the bitter aftertaste of jealousy. Intoxicated by such foolish spirits, they brought accusation against Moses and claimed themselves his equal. This strange story has its counterparts in our day. It will be remembered that Oliver Cowdery, in the very early days of the Church, commanded Joseph Smith to erase certain words from a revelation that he had received (Smith, Joseph. History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1927 [published by the Church]. 1:104-5). And William McLellin thought himself quite capable of writing revelations the equal of Joseph Smith's, at least until he attempted to do so (Smith, Joseph. History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1927 [published by the Church]. 1:226).

That Miriam was the instigator of this rebellion needs no other proof than the punishment God inflicted upon her, though her role is hinted at by the placing of her name before Aaron's in the Bible story (Numbers 12:1). Together they could do no better for an accusation against Moses than that of his having "married an Ethiopian woman," a marriage he had entered into long before he had been called of God.

Moses in perfect humility made no response, though the Lord was not slow to speak. The three children of Amram were immediately summoned to appear together before the judgment seat, to which the Lord had descended in a pillar of cloud. Aaron and Miriam were called to come forward. To them the Lord said: "If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches [riddles]; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?" (Numbers 22:6-8.) Moses was the dispensation head; until the day of Christ all other prophets would but echo that which had been revealed through him.

The matter did not end with this expression of the Lord. He was still angry, and immediately upon his departure Miriam was stricken with leprosy. Seeing his sister thus smitten, Aaron, fully aware of his own guilt, sought Moses to heal her. Moses importuned the Lord to do so and was told that she was to remain outside of the camp of Israel for seven days before she was to be admitted again (Numbers 12:14).

As we shall see in the chapter that follows, leprosy was a symbol to ancient Israel of the corruption of sin. Because it was contagious, lepers were banished from the camp of Israel. The afflicted were thought of as dead. Thus this loathsome and dreaded disease provided the perfect type to represent spiritual death. Dramatically, Miriam and those of all future generations were here warned that jealousy and evil speaking of those the Lord has called place the accuser in jeopardy of contracting the most loathsome of spiritual diseases, banishment from the society of his people, and ultimate spiritual death.

The Twelve Spies

After Miriam had been cleansed and readmitted to the camp of Israel they marched into the wilderness of Paran. It was here that the Lord commanded Moses to send men to search the land of Canaan. Moses formed the group by choosing one of the chief rulers from each of the tribes. Oshea of the tribe of Ephraim was apparently designated to be their leader. Not satisfied with Oshea's name, however, Moses changed it to Joshua (Numbers 13:16). Thus Moses chose twelve men, the "heads of the children of Israel," to act as guides to show Israel the way from their wilderness wanderings to their promised land. He set one at their head and specified that he was to be called Joshua. As earlier noted, Joshua is the Hebrew form of the name Jesus. The story is an obvious type, saying to Israel of all future generations that the only way they can escape the wilderness of life and obtain the eternal inheritance promised them is to follow Jesus and the Twelve.

An Attempt to Usurp Priesthood

Among the epic lessons of the wilderness years, none is of greater interest than the Korah rebellion (Numbers 16). Korah, a Levite, along with Dathan and Abiram of the tribe of Reuben, led two hundred and fifty of the leaders of the church, all "men of renown," to challenge the authority of Moses and Aaron. From a restoration of text in the Joseph Smith Translation we learn that Korah, who held the Aaronic Priesthood, desired to hold the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood held by Moses and Aaron (Joseph Smith Translation, Numbers 16:10). The Reubenites involved in this sedition may have been seeking that same authority. Theirs would have been the birthright tribe had it not been for the sin of their ancestral father. Our story finds them seeking the authority to officiate in the sacred rituals of the tabernacle.

Moses responded first to Korah and his company, suggesting a test that would afford a sure answer as to whom the Lord desired to function in the priestly office. He invited the rebels to appear on the morrow in the holy place of the tabernacle with censers to perform the sacred priestly function. There the Lord could manifest his approval of or displeasure with their action.

The test was fairly put. All Israel knew that no unclean thing could stand in the presence of the Lord and live. Further, all knew that Aaron's sons Nadab and Abihu had been devoured by fire when they improperly attempted to perform the same ordinance (Leviticus 10:1-3).

Moses also sought to counsel with Dathan and Abiram, but they bitterly refused to speak with him. The following morning the two hundred and fifty princes of Israel took their censers, entered the holy place, and functioned in the stead of the authorized priests. In the meantime Moses stood before the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and said: "Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent me to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind. If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; then the Lord hath not sent me. But if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the Lord." Immediately the earth opened and swallowed Moses’ three chief antagonists "and all that appertained to them." At the same time a fire from the Lord consumed the two hundred and fifty men that had offered incense. (Numbers 16:28-35.)

The judgment on Korah, his company, and the would-be priests filled the camp of Israel with terror, yet it did not change the hearts of those in rebellion. The next morning the whole congregation began to murmur against Moses and his brother, accusing them of having killed the people of the Lord. Their murmurings were met with a wrathful judgment; a deadly plague immediately began to spread among the people. Moses directed Aaron to go quickly with his censer, coals, and incense to the holy place and make expiation for the congregation. Thus the plague was stayed (though not until 14,700 were to die) and it was abundantly evident to Israel that it was God's wrath that had opened the earth and brought forth the fires of heaven the previous day, not some occult powers of Moses and Aaron.

Further, Israel then understood that only by the intervention of one who held the proper authority could the ravages of the plague be stayed. The temporal salvation granted by Aaron's ministration typified the power of him who as the great high priest would yet save all mankind from an endless death.

Moses and his people were once more reconciled.

The Rod of Aaron

The Lord's acceptance of Aaron and his house as his priestly ministers, as evidenced by the staying of the plague when Aaron made the high-priestly offering, was immediately confirmed for all the families of Israel. Moses was directed to have each tribe bring a rod with its tribal name written upon it. These twelve rods were then taken and placed before the Lord in the Holy of Holies within the tabernacle.

Moses had been told that the rod representing those chosen to minister for the Lord would be made to blossom. In this manner the Lord could indicate if the sacred dignity of this office was to be shared by all the tribes, and if not, to which tribe or tribes it should be extended. The following morning when Moses went to the sacred place he found the rod of Aaron covered with buds, blossoms, and even mature almonds. The other rods remained as barren as before. (Numbers 17.)

The symbolism associated with this test was most deliberate: A rod, or branch, had been chosen to represent each of the twelve tribes or families of Israel, each had its name carefully placed upon it. By tradition the rod, as a staff or sceptre, represented one's position and authority. Together all were presented before the Lord. By making Aaron's rod bud, blossom, and put forth fruit, the Lord demonstrated once again that it was for him to choose those who will stand in his stead, be filled with his power, and bring forth his fruits.

God then commanded that Aaron's rod be taken back into the sanctuary and preserved as "a token against the rebels," that they murmur not, lest "they die." The preservation of the rod before the ark of the covenant, in the immediate presence of the Lord, was a pledge to Aaron of the continuance of his call and the permanent duration of his priesthood.

Water Flows from a Rock

In the fortieth year of their wanderings the camp of Israel found themselves in Kadeshi, the very place where the ban had been passed thirty-seven and a half years earlier forbidding that generation from entering the land of promise. As our wilderness story concludes, once again the children of Israel find themselves without water, and once again we find them murmuring against their prophet. Moses sought direction of the Lord and was told to take his rod (not to be confused with the rod of Aaron), gather the assembly of Israel, and in their presence command a rock to bring forth water. This Moses did, saying, "Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?" He then smote the rock twice with his rod "and the water came out abundantly." (Numbers 20:10-11.)

Thereupon the Lord said to Moses, "Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them" (Numbers 20:12). It is often concluded that Moses sinned in not speaking to the rock but striking it instead. The Psalmist recorded that Moses’ error was in speaking "unadvisedly," the inference being that he and Aaron were improperly taking credit for the miracle by saying "we" fetch you water (Psalm 106:32-33). Such would accord with the expression of the Lord to our dispensation wherein he said, "In nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments" (D&C 59:21).

Though the precise nature of Moses’ transgression is not clear, this event perfectly illustrates that everyone, irrespective of office or position, from Moses and Aaron to the least of Israel, must endure in faith and obedience to the end of life's journey if he is to be privileged to obtain his land of promise.

The Brazen Serpent

As Israel circled Edom en route to the point at which they would cross the Jordan, they found the way hard and again became greatly discouraged. Once more we find them speaking against God and against Moses. "Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this light bread," they complained. Their thankless grumbling was properly rewarded with a plague of fiery flying snakes, whose venom was as poisonous to the body as their evil words were to the soul. Many died of their bite.

Realizing they had brought this curse upon themselves, a repentant people pleaded with Moses to persuade the Lord to remove the snakes from them. Moses was commanded to make a serpent of brass and raise it as a standard, with the promise that any bitten by the serpents could by looking upon it in faith be healed. (Numbers 21:4-9.)

The incident is one of the best known of the Old Testament types. Christ interpreted it, saying: "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life" (John 3:14-15). Nephi told us that still there were many of their number who refused to look upon the brazen serpent because of "the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it," and thus they died (1 Nephi 17:41). Well may we suppose that it will ever be that in like manner men will eschew faith in Christ, repentance from sin, and the healing waters of baptism, because of the "simpleness of the way," and die in the anguish of their sins.

We end our brief account of the wilderness journey with the story of the brazen serpent and its testimony of the coming of Christ, for it reflects the meaning and purpose of all that has preceded it.

1985 Bookcraft
