Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

7

The Law of Moses

The gospel in its fulness was on the earth from the time of Adam to the time of Moses. Because of their rebellion, as we have seen in the two preceding chapters, the children of Israel lost the right to that gospel, its ordinances, and its priesthood. Responding to the question, Was the Melchizedek Priesthood taken when the Lord took Moses from the midst of Israel? Joseph Smith said, "All Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained." (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 180.) In keeping with the statement of the Prophet that there is but one priesthood, it ought also to be said that there is but one gospel, one plan of salvation, and one Christ. As the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood is to the Melchizedek, so the law of Moses is to the fulness of the gospel. We do not understand it to be another gospel, for there can be no other gospel; it is rather a partial manifestation of that gospel to which were added performances, ordinances, and restrictions designed to keep Israel in constant remembrance of God and their duty to him.

In its weakness Israel was given a law of carnal commandments (D&C 84:27; Joseph Smith Translation, Exodus 34:2). The concept of carnal commandments does not refer to the lusts of the flesh alone, but rather to all that is worldly as contrasted with the things of the Spirit. The law was replete with daily reminders that Israel was to be a people set apart and consecrated to the Lord and that in all things they must keep themselves clean and pure. Virtually all aspects of their lives were drawn upon as types or reminders of who and what they were to be. Birth and death, seedtime and harvest time, their diet, the manner in which food was prepared, their Sabbaths and feast times, even diseases and restoration to health, were all used to typify their obligations to God. The law also contained a host of sacrificial rituals that served to keep constantly before them their dependence on the great sacrifice yet to be offered by the Son of God.

In addition to the carnal law, Israel enjoyed a portion of the gospel law, including the invitation to exercise faith in Christ, repent, and be baptized by immersion for the remission of sins. Further, they held the keys of the administration of angels through those of the tribe of Levi, who held the lesser or Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 84:26-27; 107:20.) Together the carnal law and the lesser portion of the gospel law enjoyed by Israel constituted a "preparatory gospel," its purpose being to prepare them to accept Christ and receive once again the gospel in its fulness.

Difficulties in Understanding the Mosaic Law

It is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice, the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in future; but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the Priesthood, or with the Prophets.

The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings. (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 172.)

It is to be remembered that Malachi foretold a day when the sons of Levi would offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness and that such could happen only after they had been purged and purified. "Then," he said, "shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years" (Malachi 3:3-4). Nothing even resembling the fulfillment of this prophecy took place in the ministry of Christ. It remains to be fulfilled, and to that end on May 15, 1829, John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on the banks of the Susquehanna River, near Harmony, Pennsylvania, and restored the priesthood of Aaron with all the keys and authority had anciently. This priesthood, he said, "shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (D&C 13). This offering is to be made by literal sons of Levi and should not be confused with the offering to be made by the adopted sons of Moses and Aaron which will involve genealogical and temple work (D&C 84:31-32; 128:24).

Joseph Smith indicated that certain sacrifices,

as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the Holy Prophets be brought to pass. It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued. (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 173.)

The law of Moses was faithfully observed by the Saints in the Americas before the coming of Christ. Alma explained, "For it was expedient that they should keep the law of Moses as yet, for it was not all fulfilled. But notwithstanding the law of Moses, they did look forward to the coming of Christ, considering that the law of Moses was a type of his coming, and believing that they must keep those outward performances until the time that he should be revealed unto them." (Alma 25:15.) Obviously there were those in the Old World, like those in the New, who had the fulness of the gospel while rendering obedience to the law of Moses.

From revelations given to Joseph Smith we also learn that at least some temple ordinances, including washing and anointing, were administered to the children of Israel in the tabernacle in the wilderness (D&C 124:37-39).

Were it essential for us to fully understand the Mosaic system it would be fully restored to us. The carnal law has served its purpose and was done away in Christ. Those parts of the law that are essential to salvation have been restored along with the necessary keys, authority, and instructions.

Yet among the fragments of the law preserved for us we may freely glean. Indeed we are obligated to do so, not with the idea of reinstituting any of its rituals, feasts, or provisions, for such would be a mockery of the Atonement and a dead work, but rather for the purpose of identifying the timeless and eternal principles that the ancient system was given to teach. The effort to do this is marvelously rewarding, as we shall shortly see.

The Authority of the Mosaic Law

We must clearly understand that the law of Moses was a divinely ordained system. God was its author, Moses was its mediator, heaven was its origin, and eternal truth was its substance. If Jesus of Nazareth was not the Christ, then the provisions of the law of Moses would still be in effect and all faithful souls would render obedience to it. There was more truth and authority in the law of Moses than can be found in the combination of all the churches of the world. Its priesthood and laws were the offspring of a heavenly system and bore its image and likeness. Every detail of its ritual was dictated by the heavens. It was God's system, not man's. Israel was to be God's vineyard and the fruits his. How timeless the declaration, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit" (John 15:16).

Symbols, Similitudes, and Substitutes

As every doctrine in the fulness of the gospel grows out of or is an appendage to the Atonement, so every ritual of the Mosaic law pointed to Christ and his atoning sacrifice. "This is the whole meaning of the law," Amulek explained, "every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal" (Alma 34:14). Further, the entirety of the law of Moses was symbolic. It was a system of vicarious ordinances, all of which had as their purpose to center attention and faith in the great vicarious ordinances that brought life and hope of salvation to all who would believe. The doctrines of atonement, redemption, punishment, and forgiveness were all taught through vicarious offerings. The bullock, lamb, goat, ox, and dove were all substitutes, the lifeblood of each being offered in behalf of the one sacrificing. The whole system was one of vicarious ordinances and proxies, all pointing to the great vicarious sacrifice and the great proxy for us all.

The Day of Atonement

The concept of substitution or vicarious ordinances is perhaps best seen in Israel's annual commemoration of the Day of Atonement. In the fall of each year on the tenth day of the seventh month, Israel observed its Sabbath of Sabbaths, its most holy day, one which signified that the sins of Israel had been atoned for and that the nation and its people were restored to a state of fellowship with God. It was a day replete with types and shadows, a day of cleansing and a day of renewal. It was upon this day, and this day alone, that Israel's high priest entered the Holy of Holies, where he made atonement for the sins of the people.

Upon this day the high priest, he who held the office and position once given to Aaron, was to preside. He alone could stand as mediator for the people. Both a cleansing and a sacrificial ritual preceded his entrance into the Holy of Holies. He was first required to cleanse himself, then to clothe entirely in white linen garments (this in distinction to the golden garments which he otherwise wore). On this day he was to make a sin offering (a young bullock) and a burnt offering (a ram) for himself and his own family. These were to be purchased with his own money. From the public treasury he was to purchase two young goats for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering. These he sacrificed in behalf of the people. By lot one of the goats was to be designated as the goat of the Lord, the name Jehovah being placed upon him. (McConkie, Bruce R. The Promised Messiah. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978., p. 436.) The other goat was to carry the name Azazel, the root of which means "wholly to put aside," or "wholly to go away" (Edersheim, Alfred. The Temple: Its Ministry and Services as They Were at the Time of Christ. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1982., p. 324). This was the scapegoat. The goat of the Lord was to be offered as the sin offering. When the high priest entered the Holy of Holies he would take the blood of this goat and sprinkle it on the lid of the ark of the covenant. Later he would lay his hands on the head of the live goat and confess all the sins and iniquities of his people. This goat was then led off into the wilderness. (See Leviticus 16.)

In his epistle to the Hebrews, Paul shows how the law of Moses and particularly the ritual associated with the Day of Atonement was an outward ordinance or type that was fulfilled in Christ. He described the tabernacle as "a worldly sanctuary" where the sacrificial ordinances performed on the Day of Atonement prefigured the atoning sacrifice of Christ. These ordinances were to remain "until the time of reformation," when Christ should come as a high priest of "a greater and more perfect tabernacle," to prepare himself and all men, by the shedding of his own blood, to obtain "eternal redemption for us." Paul described the Mosaic covenant as a "shadow of good things to come, for it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God." (Hebrews 9 and 10.)

"Knowing, as we do, that sins are remitted in the waters of baptism; that baptisms were the order of the day in Israel; and that provision must be made for repentant persons to free themselves from sins committed after baptism—we see in the annual performances of the Day of Atonement one of the Lord's provisions for renewing the covenant made in the waters of baptism and receiving anew the blessed purity that comes from full obedience to the law involved. In our day we gain a similar state of purity by partaking worthily of the sacrament of the Lord's supper." (McConkie, Bruce R. The Promised Messiah. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978., p. 436.)

In his epistle to the Hebrews, Paul shows how the law of Moses and particularly the ritual associated with the Day of Atonement was an outward ordinance or a type which was fulfilled in Christ. Israel, Paul explained, had her tabernacle with its altar, ark, veil, and holy of holies, in which sacrifices and cleansing ordinances were performed. All of these the Holy Ghost manifested were in similitude of the coming ministry of the Son of God. Through those ordinances Israel anciently gained a forgiveness of sins because of their faith in the future coming of Christ, which the ordinances foreshadowed. That Christ, Paul testified, had now come, and in fulfillment of the ancient type had shed his own blood and entered into the eternal Holy of Holies, and thus those who embraced and served him in faith could also receive a remission of sins. (See Hebrews 9.)

The First Fruits

Another ritual of the Mosaic system laden with symbolism was that of the offering of the firstfruits. These offerings were essentially of two kinds: those offered by an individual or family, and those offered for the entire nation of Israel. The offering made for both the individual and nation shared meaning in that both constituted an acknowledgment of Israel's indebtedness to God and that all blessings both temporal and spiritual come from him. The yearly presentation of their firstfruits in the temple manifested their relationship with God as one in which they gratefully received at his hand all that they enjoyed, and solemnly dedicated it and themselves to him. The ritual was an acknowledgment that the Lord was master and that they sought only to be wise stewards of his property. Their daily bread they would seek and receive only at his hand, use it with thanksgiving, and employ it in his service—and this, their dependence upon God, was their joyous freedom, in which Israel declared itself the redeemed people of the Lord.

As a family feast the presentation of the firstfruits would enter more than any other rite into family religion and family life. Not a child in Israel—at least of those who inhabited the Holy Land [for only that grown in the Holy Land was thus sacrificed]—could have been ignorant of all connected with this service, and that even though it had never been taken to the beautiful "city of the Great King," nor gazed with marvel and awe at the Temple of Jehovah. For scarcely had a brief Eastern spring merged into early summer, when with the first appearance of ripening fruit, whether on the ground or on trees, each household would prepare for this service. The head of the family . . . accompanied by his child, would go into his field and mark off certain portions from among the most promising of the crop. For only the best might be presented to the Lord, and it was set apart before it was yet ripe, and solemn dedication being, however, afterwards renewed, when it was actually cut. Thus, each time any one would go into the field, he would be reminded of the ownership of Jehovah, till the reapers cut down the golden harvest. (Edersheim, Alfred. The Temple: Its Ministry and Services as They Were at the Time of Christ. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1982., pp. 380-81.)

Jeremiah explained the type. Israel was the Lord's firstfruits and as such had been consecrated to him; all that sought to devour Israel sought that which was the Lord's, and evil would come upon them (Jeremiah 2:3).

There were two firstfruit offerings that were public or national. The first was associated with the Passover and involved a sheaf of grain; the second took place at Pentecost using loaves of bread. At the time of Christ the sheaf offering was accomplished as follows: The wave-sheaf was to be taken from the neighborhood of Jerusalem. Deputies from the Sanhedrin went out on the eve of the festival, and tied the growing stalks in bunches. In the evening of the festival day the sheaf was cut with all possible publicity, and carried to the Temple. It was there threshed, and an omer of grain after being winnowed, was bruised and roasted: after it had been mixed with oil and frankincense laid upon it, the priest waved the offering in all directions. (Edersheim, Alfred. The Temple: Its Ministry and Services as They Were at the Time of Christ. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1982., pp. 256-59.) The waving of the sheaf of the first-fruits took place "on the morrow after the sabbath," immediately following the Passover (Leviticus 23:11), this being the very time of year when Christ actually burst the bonds of death.

The offering made at the feast of the Pentecost was a thanksgiving offering noting the conclusion of the wheat harvest. It consisted of two loaves of new flour baked with leaven, which were waved by the priest as were the sheaves at the Passover. These first loaves appear to be a type for the firstfruits of those gathered by Christ in the gospel harvest, who were on that day filled with a marvelous outpouring of the Holy Ghost as they commenced their labors among those of. all nations. (Acts 2.)

The Law of Sacrifice

Nothing was more basic to the Mosaic system than the law of sacrifice. The variety of sacrifices included offerings of cereals (rendered "meat offerings" in the King James Version) and various animal offerings. There were public sacrifices, offered by the priests on behalf of the whole community, and also private offerings made by individuals or families. Five basic offerings are described in the book of Leviticus: the burnt offering, the meal offering, the peace offering, the sin offering, and the trespass offering. Let us briefly examine each.

The burnt offering

The burnt offering involved the presentation of a male animal (bull, ram, goat—if fowls, either turtledoves or young pigeons) without blemish at the door of the congregation. The one offering the sacrifice would then place his hands upon the head of the animal, thus dedicating it to God as a vicarious representation of himself or those for whom the ordinance was being performed. The sacrificer would then slaughter the animal. The priests would take its blood and sprinkle it upon the altar, and after properly preparing the animal they would place it upon the altar, where it was to be entirely consumed. (See Leviticus 1:1-3.) Because this offering could only be accepted from one either sinless or already purified from sin, it was always preceded by a sin offering (Jukes, Andrew. The Law of the Offerings. Grand Rapids, MI: Kregal Publications, 1980., pp. 61, 138).

Apparently this is the same ordinance had from the time of Adam (Moses 5:7). As such, it is not properly thought of as a part of the Mosaic system. It also appears that it will be this same offering that will be offered by the sons of Levi in fulfillment of the prophecies of Malachi and John the Baptist, and the promise of Joseph Smith (Malachi 3:3-4; D&C 13; Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., pp. 172-73).

Adam was told that this sacrifice was in similitude of the atoning sacrifice of Christ (Moses 5:7). In the Mosaic system, Christ can be seen as the sacrificial offering, the priest, and the offerer. That he is vicariously represented by the male animal without blemish is most obvious. In the entirety of the Mosaic system the priest is to be seen as the mediator standing between God and man. Hence the Levitical priest was always to be seen as the representation of Christ. Nor has that order changed, for it is the priest in the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood who kneels at the sacramental altar to bless both bread and water in our weekly sacramental ritual (D&C 20:46). In the instance of the burnt offering Christ can also be seen as the offerer, at least in the sense that he, above all, must comply with all ritual "to fulfill all righteousness."

It should be observed here that no single type can adequately represent Christ. Thus the necessity for many emblems and the propriety of these emblems carrying a multiplicity of meanings. As with the shadows cast by light, these spiritual reflections cast various shapes and figures according to the position from which they are viewed. Though gospel principles do not vary, we can constantly expand our perspective of them. None can properly say of their understanding of gospel principles, "We have enough" or "We understand in full."

Among the offerings, only the burnt offering was to be entirely consumed. This was a type connoting the necessity of complete submission to the will of God, with the attendant idea of total dedication to his service. When we covenant to live the law of sacrifice we ate announcing that our sacrifice will in like manner be one of complete submission and total dedication. Our commitment is to give all our heart, might, mind, and strength. Further, the burnt offering was acceptable only when preceded by a sin offering. As a "sweet savor" offering, it, like proper service to God, must be offered in righteousness and purity. It was an offering seeking acceptance rather than expiation for sin.

The meat offering

Like the burnt offering, the meat offering was a "sweet savor" offering. It is not associated with the idea of sin but is rather the representation of man in perfect obedience giving to God that which is acceptable and pleasing to Him. Unlike the burnt offering, it did not represent the giving of life. The ingredients were "fine flour," oil, and frankincense. It was to be burnt upon the altar but not entirely consumed. That which was not burned was to be eaten by Aaron and his sons. No leaven or honey was to be used in the offering, while every oblation was to be seasoned with salt. (See Leviticus 2.)

As would be anticipated, the ritual is rich with symbolism. This bread offering obviously represented Christ as the bread of life. The fine flour, or bruised corn as Isaiah called it (Isaiah 28:28), represented Christ in the deepest of suffering. It may also betoken that there is no unevenness in him. The oil was the constant emblem of the Holy Spirit. As the oil was poured on the flour, so the Holy Ghost would descend upon the Messiah or Anointed One as he commenced his ministry. Frankincense brought to the offering sweetness and fragrance. All were inseparably mixed together. Honey and leaven were forbidden, for these are agents of corruption, and none such were to touch the symbol of our salvation. The last ingredient was salt, which stood in opposition to honey and leaven, as the agent of preservation.

The peace offering

The peace offering was given either in thanksgiving or as a vow offering. It was an offering of the flock, either male or female without blemish. It too was a "sweet savor" offering, meaning that it was not associated with atonement for sin but with the desire to be fully acceptable to the Lord. It was a giving of that which was sweet and pleasant to the Lord. The ritual of presentation, laying on of hands, and slaughtering of the animal were the same as in the burnt offering. (See Leviticus 3.)

The symbolism is much the same as that of the burnt offering, differing, however, in that the peace offering was not entirely consumed on the altar. Both offerer and priest were fed upon that which was not symbolically consumed by God. In this respect it differed from all other offerings. God, man, priest, and even his family were all to partake of this offering and find satisfaction in it. However, none of the priest's family could eat of the offering unless they were clean (Leviticus 7:20). Such is the peace enjoyed only by those who can feast together in perfect unity and harmony.

The sin offering

The sin offering could be either a male or female animal or fowl without blemish. It involved the expiation of sin and as such was not a "sweet savor" offering. The offering was not entirely consumed by fire, but like the peace offering was eaten in a sacrificial meal as a part of the ritual. (See Leviticus 4.) The offering was for the forgiveness of sins committed in ignorance or in violation of covenants. It constituted a renewal of covenants much as we do in the partaking of the sacrament.

The sin offering apparently was burnt without the camp (Leviticus 4:12, 21). The other offerings were burnt on the altar in the tabernacle. The fulfillment of this type was found in the crucifixion of Christ. Paul announces its fulfillment in this language: "Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate" (Hebrews 13:12).

The trespass offering

As the name implies, the trespass offering, like the sin offering, is not one of "sweet savor." Of necessity the trespass offering had to be preceded by the sin offering (Leviticus 5:8). The trespass offering seems to differ from the sin offering in that it centers in overt acts, acts that wrong another and for which justice demands that restitution be made. The trespass offering required not only the life of the sacrificial animal but a payment to the injured party, the valuation of which was to be made by the priest and paid in shekels of the sanctuary. Then, in addition to this, a fifth part more, in shekels also, was added to the sum determined by the priest. All was given to the person trespassed against by the offender. (See Leviticus 5.) The sin offering centered on what one was, while the emphasis of the trespass offering centered on what one had done. The primary principle being taught was that of restitution.

Though the nature of the sacrificial laws was varied and complex, the principles upon which they operated were common to every gospel dispensation and are an inseparable part of the doctrine of salvation. Under the law no sacrifice was acceptable unless it was offered as God required. The offering, the place, the mode of sacrifice—all were specified in laborious detail. All were of God's design and of his choice. Anything other than exact compliance with these requirements as God had established them could not, by its very nature, be regarded as a true sacrifice. It is not for man to suggest alternatives to the partaking of the bitter cup, nor could the ordinances comply with their preordained types. One must comply with the letter in order to obtain the spirit. It was Nephi who observed that Christ, notwithstanding his holiness, rendered obedience to the outward ordinances of the law in order that he might "fulfill all righteousness. . . . How much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized." (2 Nephi 31:5.)

It must also be observed that, according to the ancient system, no offering was regarded as efficacious unless it was sustained by righteousness. Without repentance there was no atonement made. The Psalmist wrote, "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart," for all others would God despise (Psalm 51:17). Sacrifice of an unrighteous man was declared to be mockery, for the "Most High is not pleased with the offering of the godless, nor do endless sacrifices win his forgiveness" (New English Bible, Ecclesiastes 34:18-19). Speaking to an apostate Israel through the Prophet Amos, the Lord said: "I despise your feast days, I will not smell in your solemn assemblies [I will not take heed of your sacrifices]. Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream." (Amos 5:21-24.)

Righteousness was the lifeblood of every Old Testament sacrifice, and, as Paul said, without blood there is no sacrifice. All who see and read with an honest heart must acknowledge that this near-endless array of Old Testament types all bespeak the same truth—that man is saved by the grace of another's sacrifice only if he has sustained his faithful offering with works of righteousness!

Purification and Consecration

The Mosaic system consisted of a host of ritualistic reminders to Israel that they were a nation set apart, a nation consecrated to God and his service—and that as such they needed to be pure. Only that which was clean could enter into his presence. This was the purpose of their dietary laws, which delineated at great length between those animals which they were permitted to eat, designated as "clean," and those forbidden to them, designated as "unclean."

The Hebrew word for clean used in the dietary law reached far beyond that of physical cleanliness. Synonyms include pure, unadulterated, uncontaminated, innocent, and holy. a Jewish writer explaining these dietary laws observed:

A hog could be raised in an incubator on antibiotics, bathed daily, slaughtered in a hospital operating room, and its carcass sterilized by ultra-violet rays, without rendering kosher the pork chops that it yields. "Unclean" in Leviticus is a ceremonial word. That is why the Torah says of camels and rabbits, "They are unclean for you, limiting the definition and the discipline to Israel. Chickens and goats, which we can eat, are scarcely cleaner by nature than eagles and lions, but the latter are in the class of the unclean. (Wouk, Herman. This Is My God. New York: Pocket Books, Simon & Schuster, Inc., 1959.pp. 100-101; italics added.)

Like the Word of Wisdom, the ancient dietary law was first spiritual and only secondarily a health law. This principle has been overlooked in far too many discourses on the Word of Wisdom. Its primary purpose is to keep modern Israel clean—that is, pure, unadulterated, uncontaminated, innocent, and holy—in order that they might have the Holy Ghost as their constant companion. The health benefits are secondary. Of what particular value is it to live to a great age avoiding cancer if we are unworthy to associate with the Spirit of the Lord?

The Mosaic dietary code can only properly be understood when viewed as a symbol of a people consecrated or dedicated to the Lord. Every meal was a reminder to Israel of who they were and what they had covenanted to be. It has been suggested that strength comes from living such a law, vision from understanding it.

The Sabbath

To such daily ritual as diet was added the commemoration of holy days, the most important and most frequent of which was the Sabbath. Like much of the sacrificial system in the Mosaic code, the Sabbath had existed from the days of Adam. It was given anew in the Decalogue, first as a commemoration of the Creation, and then as part of the lesser law to remind Israel of God's mercy in liberating them from their Egyptian bondage. It was to be a sign between Israel and their God whereby he would know them and they would know that he had consecrated them (Exodus 31:13). Anciently, as today, Sabbath observance was to be one of the solemn and distinctive features of the Lord's people. As renewed to gathering Israel in the last days the revelation states:

Thou shalt offer a sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in righteousness, even that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day;

For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High; Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times;

But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. (D&C 59:8-12.)

Such was the order of the Sabbath anciently. On this day the daily sacrifices were doubled, and the people abstained from all manner of work and attended their holy assemblies, where they were instructed in the doctrines of the gospel.

Symbolism of Birth and Death

The Levitical code was a marvelous teaching device in which every physical defilement had its spiritual counterpart. "But especially was this the case with reference to birth and death, which were so closely connected with sin and the second death, with redemption and the second birth. Hence, all connected with the origin of life and with death, implied defilement, and required Levitical purification." (Edersheim, Alfred. The Temple: Its Ministry and Services as They Were at the Time of Christ. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1982., pp. 343-44.) A woman who had given birth was ritually unclean for forty days if she had given birth to a male child, eighty days if the child was female. After that period she was to offer for her purification a lamb for a burnt offering and a pigeon or a dove for a sin offering; in case of poverty a dove or pigeon was substituted for the lamb. (Leviticus 12.) This was the offering made by Mary when she presented herself in the temple forty days after the birth of the Christ child. It was at this time that the redemption tax was paid if the child was the firstborn. This ritual of purification connected with the origin of life was not nearly as solemn or important as that necessary for the removal of defilement from contact with death.

So serious was that defilement which came by contact with death, that a very elaborate system of purification was necessary. The defilement lasted seven days and extended not only to those who had touched the dead, but also to the house or tent where the body had lain, and to all open vessels therein. Further, the law stated that "whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days" (Numbers 19:16). Even those touched by one who had been defiled became unclean (Numbers 19:22). For priests and Nazarites the law was even more stringent. The former were not to defile themselves by touching any dead body, except those of their nearest kin; the high priest was not even to approach the body of his own parents.

Purification was obtained in the following manner: An unblemished red heifer, which had never been yoked, was slain by the eldest son of the high priest outside the camp of Israel. A portion of its blood was sprinkled seven times toward the sanctuary; the rest of it, including the entire carcass, was then burned under the direction of the priest, who would cast into the fire cedar wood, hyssop, and scarlet. The ashes were then to be collected by a clean man and deposited in a clean place outside the camp. Then, when needed for the ritual of purification, a clean person would take some of the ashes and place them in a vessel, mix them with spring water, dip hyssop in it, and on the third and seventh days after contraction sprinkle those unclean with it. The tent or house and all the vessels in it were to be similarly purified. The one performing the ritual was also sprinkled and considered unclean until evening.

Although not always clear from our vantage point, every particular of the ritual had symbolic significance. Edersheim notes:

Its application must have been so frequently necessary in every family and circle of acquaintances that the great truths connected with it were constantly kept in view of the people. In general, it may be stated, that the laws in regard to defilement were primarily intended as symbols of spiritual truths, and not for social, or sanitary purposes; though such results would also flow from them. Sin had rendered fellowship with God impossible; sin was death, and had wrought death, and the dead body as well as the spiritually dead soul were the evidence of its sway. (Edersheim, Alfred. The Temple: Its Ministry and Services as They Were at the Time of Christ. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1982., p. 348.)

Obviously, the heifer without spot and blemish taken outside the camp of Israel, where its blood was shed, is a type of the atonement of Christ, whose blood was shed outside the city walls. Other details would not be as certain. One scholar suggests the following:

The sex of the victim (female, and hence life-giving), its red color of blood, (the seat of life), its unimpaired vigor (never having borne the yoke), its youth, and the absence in it of spot or blemish, the cedar and the hyssop (possessing the qualities, the former of incorruption, the latter of purity), and the scarlet (again the color of blood)—all these symbolized life in its fullness and freshness as the antidote of death. At the same time the extreme virulence of the uncleanness is taught by the regulations that the victim should be wholly consumed outside the camp, whereas, generally certain parts were consumed on the altar, and the offal only outside the camp (comp. Lev. iv. 11, 12); that the blood was sprinkled towards, not before, the sanctuary; that the officiating minister should be neither the high-priest, nor yet simply a priest but the presumptive high-priest, the office being too impure for the first, and too important for the second; that even the priest and the person that burnt the heifer were rendered unclean by reason of their contact with the victim; and, lastly, that the purification should be effected, not simply by the use of water, but of water mixed with ashes which served as a lye, and would therefore have peculiarly cleansing qualities. (Smith, William. Dictionary of the Bible. Vols. 1-4. New York: Hurd and Houghton; Cambridge: Riverside Press, 1870. 3:2644.)

Of this we can be sure, that if death was intended to symbolize the wages of sin, then this purification ritual in all its detail points to the gift of God, which is eternal life, as it comes only through the sacrifice of his Son.

Leprosy—A Type for Spiritual Death

The ritual of purification for one cured of leprosy is one of the most impressive and instructive of Levitical laws. Being both loathsome and infectious, leprosy served as the perfect physical counterpart for spiritual infection and spiritual death. As the leper was banished from the camp of Israel, so those whose spirits had been corrupted would be banished from the congregation of Israel, both in this life and in the world to come. In those instances in which the disease was cured it was required that the leper present himself to a priest, who alone was empowered to determine if he was free of the dreaded corruption. Similarly, those who have suffered serious spiritual corruption can only be readmitted to fellowship in the congregation of Israel when they have been judged clean by a bishop or other appropriate ecclesiastical officer. The ritual of fellowship was of two parts, separated from one another by an interval of seven days. The first was that of restoration to fellowship with the covenant nation; the second was that of restoration to fellowship with the Lord and his sanctuary.

In the first of these rituals the leper, now adjudged clean, was to present to the priest two birds "alive and clean," along with cedar wood, scarlet wool, and hyssop. Under the priest's direction one of the birds was to be killed over a vessel filled with spring water into which the blood would fall. The living bird, along with the cedar wood, the scarlet thread, and the hyssop, were then dipped into the mixture of blood and water. The unclean person was sprinkled seven times with this liquid and then the bird was permitted to fly away. As with the other cleansing rituals, the two birds were the vicarious representation of the person seeking to be made clean; the first, dying by the shedding of blood, represented the death of the natural or sinful man; the bird set free represented the newness of life associated with proper fellowship with Israel. Again, the cedar wood symbolized the need to avoid that which corrupts or decays, the scarlet wool typified the atoning blood of Christ, and the hyssop bespoke the constant necessity of purity. These are among the most essential elements associated with spiritual life. The mixture of blood and water symbolized the elements of birth or newness of life, and announced again the inseparable nature of the blood of atonement and the waters of purification. Once more we are being told that the blood of atonement does not stand alone but gains the power of salvation when associated with water, which symbolizes the need to be clean and pure. The candidate was sprinkled seven times with this mixture of water and blood as a token of the covenant. The cleansing ritual was concluded by the candidate's washing his clothes, shaving his hair, and washing himself. He could then enter the camp of Israel but had to stay outside his tent for seven days, thus emphasizing that something was still lacking before he was fully of Israel, though the first part of the cleansing ritual was now complete.

After the interval of seven days the washing was repeated and the shaving more rigidly performed to include the eyebrows and all the hair of his body. The shaving of the hair may have been to give the likeness of a newborn infant; the washing was clearly the symbol of cleansing. The following day the one to be cleansed was presented at the door of the tabernacle by the priest with the offerings for the Lord. The offerings were to consist of two he-lambs without blemish, one ewe of the first year without blemish, three-tenths of an ephah of flour mixed with oil for a meat offering, and one log of oil. One of the he-lambs was offered as a trespass offering together with the log of oil; both were waved as a wave offering before the Lord. In the wave offering, the lamb and oil were symbolically transferred to the Lord as was the life of the one offering them. Thus he was consecrated to the Lord. This was needful to restore the rights belonging to the covenant nation that had been lost in the ban of leprosy. The priest would slay the lamb and apply a portion of its blood to the right ear, the right thumb, and the great toe of the right foot of the candidate; he would next sprinkle a portion of the oil seven times before the Lord, and then apply the oil to the ear, thumb, and foot of the leper as he had done with the blood. The remainder of the oil was poured over the person's head. The blood obviously typified the atoning blood of Christ, the oil the effects of the Spirit or the Holy Ghost. Everything affected by the atonement must in like manner be affected by the spirit: The ear must hear and hearken to the word of the Lord, the hand must labor in the cause of the Lord, the foot must walk or follow paths of righteousness. Thus the one cleansed from leprosy was reconciled to God and reinstated in the covenant privileges. This having been accomplished, the priest could proceed to make expiation for him with the sin offering (for which the ewe had been brought), and then the burnt offering and meat offering were sanctified to the service of the Lord.

Conclusion

As we have seen, the law of Moses was appreciably more than a health code or a system of laws to govern a nation. It was a temporal expression of spiritual reality, an unequalled system of types and shadows. It was a constant reminder to Israel that they were a nation set apart, a people consecrated and dedicated to their God and his service. Its influence reached into every facet of life—be it private, family, or public. If the book of Leviticus be taken as the illustration of the purpose of the law, we note that the first part (chapters 1-16) is for the purpose of instructing Israel in how to approach God and announcing those things that were inconsistent with his presence. In its second part (chapters 17-27) Leviticus instructs Israel in how to maintain the state to which the previous chapters have brought them. It could be said that the forepart of the book exhibits in a symbolical form the doctrine of justification, while the latter part exhibits that of sanctification. As Edersheim put it, the forepart illustrates the "manner of access to God," while the latter illustrates the "holiness which is the result of that access" (Edersheim, Alfred. Bible History, Old Testament. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1890. 2:138). Such was the purpose of the law.

1985 Bookcraft
