Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

15

Figurative or Literal?

If the cloud of darkness created by confusing that which is literal with that which is figurative and vice versa in the scriptures were to be blown away, it would disrobe the devil himself. Turning things inside out is high fashion among the legions of hell and has provided many a devil with a clever disguise. Plain and precious truths, from the greatest to the least, have been dressed in costumes of myth and allegory, their glory hidden, and their purpose lost, while the threads of metaphors have been stretched to cover the most ridiculous of religious garb worn in the name of piety. From Christ's claim to Divine Sonship to the reality of his resurrection (from Genesis to Revelation) the letter has been used to kill the Spirit and the Spirit to kill the letter.

Idols of Sophistry

The idols of our day have not been cast in molds or hewn from wood or stone; rather they have been shaped in sophistry and gilded with false traditions. As with our ancient counterparts, we too have been fed on meat offered to idols and have dressed ourselves in robes of heresy that we might be fashionable in a world "ever learning" yet "never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Timothy 3:7).

The greatest heresies stand opposite the greatest truths. Their ploy is to feign acceptance of principles while cleverly redefining them in such a way that their true purpose and significance have been lost. One need not deny the existence of God if he can by definition describe Him as uncreated, invisible, incorporeal, and incomprehensible. The whole thing works out rather nicely. Truth is slain with the dagger of definition while the schemer sits in church piously saying his amens. No saving doctrines have escaped the purge. God, the Creation, the Fall, the Atonement, baptism, marriage, priesthood, temples—all have felt the blade of the assassin as the literal is said to be figurative and the figurative is said to be literal.

The Nature of God

Every Christian religion that ascribes to a creed has described God as an immaterial being. The God of these creeds is an invisible spirit who has neither body, parts, nor passions. The creeds are united in stipulating that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one in essence or substance. Joseph Smith stood in sharp contrast to such views when he said, "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit" (D&C 130:22). So we have the Prophet Joseph on one side of the fence and the Christian world on the other. Since both profess a belief in the Bible, a review of its testimony of the nature of God is in order.

In describing God the Bible speaks of his head, face, eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth, voice, arm, back, hand, palm, fingers, foot, heart, bosom, and bowels. The Bible describes God with such titles as king, judge, father, and master. It testifies that "we are the offspring of God" (Acts 17:29), that we were created in his "image" (Genesis 1:27), in his "likeness" (Genesis 5:1,3), and in his "similitude" (James 3:9). Christ affirmed this truth, saying, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:9). We are told that Enoch "walked" with God (Genesis 5:24), that Jacob saw him "face to face" (Genesis 32:30), as did Moses (Exodus 33:11).

Others of the Bible prophets who saw the Lord include the seventy elders of Israel, Micaiah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and Ezekiel from the Old Testament, and Stephen, Paul, and John the Revelator from the New Testament. Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy elders of Israel saw God and partook of a sacral or covenant meal with him (Exodus 24:11; Butteric, George Arthur, ed. Interpreter's Bible. 12 vols. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1971. 1:1016; Zimmerli, Walther, Ezekiel 1. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1979., p. 240). Micaiah testified, "I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left" (1 Kings 22:19). Isaiah said, "Mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts" (Isaiah 6:5). Jeremiah left us with no description but announced that any professing to be prophets must have stood before him in the heavenly assembly where they are to receive their message (Jeremiah 23:18, 22; modern translations are necessary to clarify the King James Version here). Daniel's description was of "one like the Son of man" (Daniel 7:13). Ezekiel described God's "likeness as the appearance of a man" (Zimmerli, Walther, Ezekiel 1. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1979.:26). In the New Testament Stephen before his death testified, "Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God" (Acts 7:56). Paul wrote that he had seen the risen Lord and was instructed as Christ "stood" before him (Acts 22:18; 23:11; 1 Corinthians 15:8). The Revelator records seeing "one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters." (Revelation 1:13-15.)

With such passages so common to the Bible we are left to ask why there is such confusion about the nature of God. The response is that such references are "merely figurative," and we are reminded that "No man hath seen God at any time" (John 1:18). It was the symbol of his presence that the prophets saw, we are told, but certainly not God himself. Such references, it is argued, are merely metaphorical and are no different than such expressions as the "eye of a needle," the "shoulder of the road," or the "foot of the mountain." Further, it is pointed out that the scriptures use such imagery as "the Lord God is a sun and shield" (Psalm 84:11), a "Rock" (Deuteronomy 32:15), a "fountain of living waters" (Jeremiah 2:13), and "a consuming fire" (Deuteronomy 4:24). Starting with the premise that God is an incomprehensible mystery, all references to him are held to be metaphorical. References to God as the sun, a rock, a spring, and a fire, are used in the Bible, it is held, for the very purpose of providing "a useful corrective" to balance the anthropomorphic metaphors which tend to "domesticate the remote, the mysterious and the uncontrollable," all of which are necessary attributes of the sectarian God (Caird, G. B. The Language and Imagery of the Bible. Duckworth Studies in Theology. London: Gerald Duckworth and Co. Ltd., The Old Piano Factory, 1980., p. 174).

A favorite text used by a leading anti-Mormon spokesman in attacking missionaries for teaching that God is a personal being is the Psalm which states that God will protect his people with "his feathers, and under his wings." In a mocking tone the question is asked, "Is God a chicken, or some other kind of a bird that he would have feathers and wings?" The line brings a good laugh, and young missionaries are not always prepared to respond, though a reading of the text would be more than adequate. Dramatizing the protection one finds in the Lord and by obedience to gospel principles, the Psalmist referred to God as a refuge and fortress. Then to further illustrate his point he wrote: "Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler." (Psalm 91:3-4.) The expression is an obvious metaphor.

A thousand additional Bible texts describing God as having body, parts, and passions, along with the testimony of prophets and righteous Saints to whom he had appeared, would be of no avail. As long as there is a single text that is figurative, it will be argued that all other texts are figurative also. Nor can the matter be resolved by an independent revelation, for those preferring to worship a God of mystery have sealed the heavens to such a possibility. Like the honor rendered to dead prophets, their allegience to the Bible is unbounded. Having silenced God they interpret his word according to their pleasure. From such a comfortable pew there is little difficulty in singing praises to the sacred book. They have made their position unassailable with the dagger of definition. They have the carcass, the dead word, but the spirit of revelation, that spirit which gave it life, they deny. To praise dead prophets is one thing, to accept living prophets quite another. All the lip service in the world isn't worth a single revelation. They worship in museums rather than temples.

The Creation, Fall, Atonement, and Resurrection

It is a common practice for books dealing with the Bible to begin with the story of Abraham, skipping the first twelve chapters of Genesis. This is done on the premise that the events described in these early chapters, from the account of the Creation through the Flood, are myth or legend. Since they cannot be harmonized with science, it has become popular with those who still desire to profess a belief in the Bible to liken them to fables or parables. As such, their value is not in their factual reality but rather in their ability to preserve culture, tradition, and meaning. This approach has been attractive to many within the Church. Unable, for instance, to harmonize the statement in the Doctrine and Covenants that the earth is to have seven thousand years of temporal history—that is, seven thousand years in which there can be death—with the millions of years necessary in scientific theory, they simply resolve the matter by suggesting that the Doctrine and Covenants reference was not intended to be interpreted literally.

The great difficulty with making the creation story allegorical is the chain reaction that it causes. If we have tampered with the reality of the creative account, we have tampered with the reality of Adam and Eve. If we have made myth of Adam and Eve, we have made myth of the Fall, and if the Fall is not a reality neither is the Atonement, and if there is no need for an atonement, then we have no need for a Savior, and if we have no Savior and no atonement we have no resurrection, and without the resurrection we have no judgment by works or degrees of glory, and so on.

Illustrating this position I was scolded by a rabbi in a gospel discussion for using the phrase "plan of salvation." He explained that he had nothing to be saved from and thus eschewed such words as "saved," or "salvation." Having rejected Christ as the Savior, he was consistent in rejecting the doctrine of the Fall and any need for a plan whereby men needed to be redeemed.

"A corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit," Christ said (Matthew 7:17), and the "corrupt tree" that makes a myth of Adam and the Fall, with the attendant "evil fruit" of no Atonement, no Christ, and no resurrection, is the perfect example. One bad doctrine can have progeny without number.

The Literal Made Figurative

This confusion is reminiscent of the thick darkness with which Moses cursed the Egyptians while among the children of Israel there was light (Exodus 10:21-23). The meaning of such titles as Father in Heaven, Son of God, Son of Man, and sons of God have been lost to the world. The world has lost the knowledge that God is literally the father of our spirits, that he fathered Christ "after the manner of the flesh" (1 Nephi 11:18), and that Son of Man means Son of Man of Holiness (Moses 6:57). Nor have they ever supposed that when the scriptures declare Adam to be the son of God, they mean precisely what they say (Luke 3:38).

Nephi described our day as one in which the reality of the devil and hell would be spiritualized away (2 Nephi 28:21-22). In fulfillment of that prophecy, even within the Church we find those who suppose that hell is merely a state of mind and not an actual gathering place for the wicked. Similarly, it has been with something of a sense of pride that the churches of the world have announced that they have outgrown the idea of a literal hell. One prominent Christian publication responded to the question as to whether hell is an actual, literal place, by suggesting that "The idea of hell is going to hell." "The question is not pertinent," the article held, for the value of hell is in the sense of eventual justice it gives us when we see wickedness that goes unpunished. (Stranberg, "A Hell for Our Time," p. 1104.)

An article in U.S. Catholic announced, "That charming place of everlasting fire, pitchfork-bearing demons, and constant gnashing of teeth is going out of style for many contemporary believers, partly because they cannot reconcile a merciful God with a damning divinity, partly because hell seems like such a childish belief, and partly because they don't really understand what hell is supposed to be. Threat? Punishment? Myth? Reality? Just what is hell?" A major conclusion of this article was that "Hell may be paved with good intentions, priests' skulls, and spike helmets; it may be full of worms and fire like Gehenna; it may be everlasting underarm odor or an eternal cocktail party. Whatever it is, hell has lost the power to terrify people." (James Brieg, "Hell: Still a Burning Question?", pp. 6-10.)

A sophisticated statistical study of religious commitment in America conducted by the University of California published in 1968 found that only 38 percent of Protestants and 66 percent of Catholics surveyed believe that the devil actually exists (Stark, Commitment). In 1977, U.S. Catholic reported that only one out of three Catholics believed in a literal hell (James Brieg, "Hell: Still a Burning Question?", p. 7).

The Figurative Made Literal

As marvelous truths have been lost by making that which is real into a figure, so they have also been lost by making the figurative literal. No example better illustrates the darkness of apostasy than that by which the symbolic bread and wine of the sacrament is declared to be literally the flesh and blood of Christ. According to this dogma, known as transubstantiation, the priest in administering the mass brings Christ back to life that he might be sacrificed again, thereby literally making his flesh and blood available for repeated consumption. Scriptural justification is found in texts that have introduced the ordinance of the sacrament by saying: "Take, eat; this is my body"; and, "Drink ye all of it; For this is my blood" (Matthew 26:26-28). What Christ would actually have said has been restored for us in the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. It reads: "Take, eat; this is in remembrance of my body which I give a ransom for you"; and, "Drink ye all of it. For this is in remembrance of my blood" (Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew 26:22-24).

Another of the prominent illustrations of a symbol being made literal is the reference in the creative account to the creation of Adam from the dust of the earth and Eve from the rib of Adam (Genesis 2:7, 21). Some have sought to sustain this idea by making literal the statement of John the Baptist to the Sadducees and Pharisees "that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham" (Matthew 3:9).

The Book of Moses tells us that all men were created from the dust of the earth (Moses 6:59). It seems obvious that the Bible account of the creation of Adam and Eve is figurative. Brigham Young called the idea that Adam was "fashioned the same as we make adobies" a "baby story" and that if he had been made in such a manner he would be nothing but a brick in the resurrection (Journal of Discourses, Vols. 1-26. Liverpool: F. D. and S. W. Richards, 1854. 2:6). "He was made," Brigham Young said, "as you and I are made, and no person was ever made upon any other principle" (Journal of Discourses, Vols. 1-26. Liverpool: F. D. and S. W. Richards, 1854. 3:319).

The scriptures provide no better illustrations of the cult of excess and extremism in which the symbolic and figurative are made into a physical burden than in the traditions of the Pharisees. In their preoccupation with the letter of the Mosaic law they lost the spirit which gave it life and meaning. The public display of righteousness became the end and purpose of righteousness. Christ, who honored in both letter and spirit the law given on Sinai, ignored rabbinic traditions that required a ceremonial cleansing of pots and vessels, the ritual washing of the hands before eating, and the rabbinic injunction against the husking of grain on the Sabbath day.

The commandment that Israel write the word of God on their hand and on their head (Deuteronomy 6:8) was given a literal interpretation. Passages from the Torah were written on tiny pieces of parchment and placed in small cubical boxes made of the skins of clean animals. These boxes, called phylacteries, were fastened to the arm and head with leather straps. "The common people wore them only during prayers, but the Pharisees wore them continually" (Freeman, James M. Manners and Customs of the Bible. Plainfield, NJ: Logos International. Reprinted 1972., p. 368). To call attention to their righteousness, Pharisees also made their phylacteries larger than those used by others. And since Moses had commanded the children of Israel to put fringes on the borders of their garments as a reminder of their duty to God (Numbers 15:38), the Pharisees also enlarged these fringes on their clothes (Matthew 23:5).

How much better it would have been had their "eyes beer single" and the labor of their hands consecrated to works of righteousness, that they might have accepted their Messiah, than that they clothe themselves in the garb of piety while rejecting him!

Knowledge Restored

The reality of a host of doctrines that the world has long since relegated to the stature of spiritual metaphors has enjoyed a physical resurrection with the restoration of the gospel. For instance, "John 14:23—The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse," Joseph Smith tells us, "is a personal appearance; and the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false" (D&C 130:3). In like manner we learn that the promise of the Savior in the Sermon on the Mount that the pure in heart shall see God is also literal and is to be understood as taking place in this life. "Sanctify yourselves," states one of the many scriptural texts so teaching, "that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you" (D&C 88:68). Another text states "that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am" (D&C 93:1). Similarly, we learn that the promise in the Sermon on the Mount that the meek shall inherit the earth is also literal, for this earth is destined to be exalted and be the abiding place of celestial beings (D&C 88:17-18).

Another of the great doctrines to regain its physical reality in the Restoration was that of the gathering of Israel. "We believe in the literal gathering of Israel," Joseph Smith said (Article of Faith 10). Also restored was a knowledge of the promises made to the "literal seed" of Abraham (Abraham 2:11), and the knowledge that we "are the children of Israel, and of the seed of Abraham" (D&C 103:17), and that as such we "are lawful heirs, according to the flesh" (D&C 86:9).

1985 Bookcraft
