Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985)

17

Interpreting Scripture

John records an incident in which God audibly responded to a public prayer offered by Christ. Among those present, some said it thundered, others that an angel spoke to him. (See John 12:28-29.) Apparently few both heard and understood the heavenly voice, as John did. Thus it has always been; when the heavens speak some give it one interpretation, others another.

There is a remarkable divergency of views among those professing the Bible as the source of their doctrine, practices, and authority. Declaring the Bible to be the "sole norm of faith" has resulted in everything but a unity of the faith. Borrowing the language of Jacob's allegory, "All sorts of fruit did cumber the tree ... and there is none of it which is good" (Jacob 5:30, 32). Many have struggled to suggest rules or standards by which the scriptures should be interpreted, though none have ever followed the rules they established. Like their pharisaical fathers before them, "They say, and do not" (Matthew 23:3). Wary of the dangers of such an undertaking, we now take up that same quest, not with the idea of marking the sure and infallible path, but in the hopes of identifying those high peaks given to us as correct principles, so that the honest might find their way and properly govern themselves.

The Bible Fraud

The Bible is the most misused and misunderstood book ever written. It has been used to justify all manner of impropriety, wickedness, and falsehood. Every spiritual fraud ever perpetrated in the history of Judaism or Christianity has claimed support from the Bible. It has been quoted as often by devils as it has by Saints. It has served as an instrument of suppression as often as it has served as a source of inspiration.

A knowledge of what the Bible does and does not claim for itself is important in protecting against its misrepresentations. The following paragraphs deal with things falsely claimed for the Bible which it does not claim for itself.

The Book of Mormon, which is a much more perfect translation than the Bible, not only makes no pretense of infallibility but specifically addresses the inevitability of errors existing in it. "Whoso receiveth this record," Moroni said, "and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these." He also said, "if there be faults they be the faults of a man." (Mormon 8:12, 17.) This principle and spirit apply to the reading of all scripture.

"All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness" (2 Timothy 3:16), but all is not of equal worth. The Proverbs, for all their wisdom, do not compare with the knowledge received in the vision on the degrees of glory (D&C 76) or with the vision of the redemption of the dead (D&C 138).

Again, there is no need to multiply examples. Prophets are mortal and are, as James said, "subject to like passions as we are." Christ warned the Nephite Twelve that they "must watch and pray always" lest they be tempted and taken captive by the devil (3 Nephi 18:15), and he told Peter that Satan desired to sift him as wheat (Luke 22:31). As a warning to Joseph Smith, the Lord said, "For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him" (D&C 3:4).

It was Joseph Smith who taught us that "a prophet was a prophet only when he was acting as such" (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 278). Yet nowhere is the principle more beautifully taught than by Moroni, who after having penned scripture humbly pleaded, "Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been" (Mormon 9:31).

Notwithstanding the fact that it contains the fulness of the gospel (see D&C 42:12), the Bible is not the source to which we as Latter-day Saints properly turn to establish doctrine, determine truth, or prove authority. This is one of the most important lessons the Prophet Joseph Smith ever sought to teach us. Of his own struggles to find the truth he said, "The teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible" (JS-H 1:12). The Book of Mormon was given for the purpose of "confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace" (2 Nephi 3:12). It is the Book of Mormon that has been given to prove the Bible true (D&C 20:8-12). All meaningful understanding of the Bible must come by revelation.

Accepting the Bible for What It Is

Farrar insightfully observes: "The Scriptures never claim for themselves as a whole the supernatural dictation or miraculous infallibility which from the days of the Rabbis have been claimed for them. They do not even furnish any test of their own canonicity; nor do they protect themselves from grievous mistranslation; nor do they give any definition of the nature of their own inspiration; nor do they lay down any of its limits or degrees; nor has their text been kept free from numberless variations; nor do they furnish any rules whatever as to the manner in which their difficulties should rightly be explained." (Farrar, Frederic W. History of Interpretation. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Book House Co., 1961., p. 162.)

The New Testament church was led by Apostles and prophets and governed by the spirit of revelation. The life-giving force of the Church was the Holy Ghost, not some scriptural record that no member of that church ever read. The New Testament did not exist until some considerable time after the apostasy was complete.

The spirit of revelation must be as much a part of the true church today as it was in the time when the events of the New Testament occurred. Every significant issue in the Bible that has been confused as to whether it was literal or figurative, whether it was allegorical or factual, has been clearly answered by the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants. Every saving truth and necessary ordinance has clearly been spelled out.

Joseph Smith and the Bible

There has never been a man on the face of the earth that had greater faith in the Bible than the Prophet Joseph Smith, and save Jesus only there has never been a man who knew more about it. A library containing everything the world knows about the book would not rival his understanding. It is one thing to read the book and quite another to be instructed by its authors. Who among the world's scholars can boast of having stood face to face with Adam, Noah, a messenger from Abraham's dispensation, Moses, Elijah, John the son of Zacharias, Peter, James, and John? While religious leaders were claiming the heavens to be sealed to them, Joseph Smith was being personally tutored by these ancient prophets and had their hands laid upon his head that they might bless him and confer upon him the power, keys, and authority they held.

Joseph Smith claimed the Holy Ghost as his textbook (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 349) and made his translation of the Bible from the original language—the language in which all the revelations were originally given—the language of revelation. By that same power and from that same language he restored the contents of a parchment written and sealed up by John the Beloved (D&C 7) and part of another written by John the Baptist (D&C 93:6-20), and by it he translated a parchment written by Abraham. Who but Joseph Smith could tell us that Seth was the perfect likeness of his father (D&C 107:43), or give a detailed description of Paul (Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph F. Smith, comp. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976., p. 180)? Joseph Smith knew the Bible, he knew its prophets, he knew its message, and he knew its central character—the Lord Jesus Christ—with whom he also stood face to face and by whom he was instructed.

Joseph Smith spoke as one having authority. He was a living Bible, and in restoring the Book of Mormon and giving us the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants he has done more to enhance the world's understanding of the Bible than any man who ever lived in it.

The Contradictory, Unbelievable, and Unworthy

To establish tranquillity in the kingdom of scriptural belief we must venture through the dark valley of confusion and face the dragons of faith, those elusive ghosts of contradiction, those texts that make God, his prophets, or his word appear quite unworthy. The dangers are plentiful even to the well-meaning and zealous, and so we carefully dress ourselves in the full armor of faith, taking with us the sword of common sense and reason. Knowing that all scripture is dependent on the Spirit for proper interpretation, we must have as companions on such a venture the light of revelation, the wise counsel of living prophets, and such trusted allies as the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. Doing so we can conclude the following:

Consider this text from Deuteronomy: "Ye shall not eat of any thing that dieth of itself: thou shalt give it unto the stranger that is in try gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God" (14:21). In the Joseph Smith Translation the Prophet simply restored the "not" that had been lost by a careless transcriber so that the text directs Israel "not" to give or sell bad meat to strangers. In 1 Samuel we read of "an evil spirit from the Lord" which troubled Saul. The Joseph Smith Translation assures us that this spirit "was not of the Lord."

The Bible went forth from the hands of its writers "in purity," but it fell into the hands of spiritual thieves who took from it "many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away. And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men." (1 Nephi 13:24-27.) Moses was told that much that he would write would be taken from the scriptural record by those who esteemed not the word of God (Moses 1:41). Jeremiah wrote of scribes who with "lying pens" had falsified the scriptural record even in that day (New English Bible, Jeremiah 8:8). Christ similarly accused the scribes of his day of having tampered with and taken truths from the scriptural text (Joseph Smith Translation, Luke 11:53). Examples could be multiplied, but in lieu thereof we simply ask, Could not a people who mocked, scourged, imprisoned, and killed the prophets find it within the grasp of their own conscience to tamper with what those hated men had written?

If a simple illustration is desired of the manner in which the Bible text has been perverted, one need only compare Moses chapters 1 through 8 with their Bible counterpart. The entire first chapter of Moses is a restoration of a scriptural text written by Moses. Among other things of great interest, its absence from the Bible leaves out Moses' confrontation with Satan, who desired to be worshiped as the Only Begotten. Also missing are the doctrines of faith in Christ, repentance, and baptism, as taught by Adam, Enoch, and Noah (Moses 6:57-59, 64; 7:11). The reference to God repenting is also corrected (Genesis 6:6 versus Moses 8:25) and much of interest is restored.

The authenticity of the apocryphal books which are a part of the Catholic Bible has been argued for centuries. By revelation Joseph Smith was told that there is much in the Apocrypha that is true and that the translation was "mostly" correct. Yet he was cautioned that it also contained "interpolations," or things added by overzealous scribes and translators. (See D&C 91.) This raises the question to what extent the Bible in like manner has been embellished with interpolations. Surely men who would take from the sacred book would not hesitate to add to it. We are left in some instances wondering what in the Apocrypha is biblical and what in the Bible is apocryphal.

A mistranslation that makes one Bible character appear quite depraved is that of Lot offering his two daughters for the sexual pleasure of the men of Sodom if they would but leave his guests unharmed (Genesis 19:8). From the Joseph Smith Translation we learn that Lot refused both his daughters and his visitors to the pleasures of his debased and lecherous neighbors (Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 19:10-14).

Along with the errors that are a result of the ignorance or carelessness on the part of scribes are the errors that are the result of theological bias on the part of translators. We have already observed the Septuagint aversion to an anthropomorphic God. A more obvious bias, one universal to all translation, is the rendering of the plural "Elohim" or Gods as the singular God. The justification for this is simply that the translators "know" that there is only one God and not a plurality of Gods. They then turn around and cite the thousands of "Elohim" passages as evidence of the three-in-one Holy Trinity (Girdlestone, Robert Baker. Synonyms of the Old Testament. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., reprinted 1978, 1897., pp. 19-22), for which there is no scriptural justification.

The concept of salvation as espoused by Luther and Calvin had an obvious influence on the King James Bible. This can be easily demonstrated by comparing the way it uses the word saved with its translation in the New English Bible.

Translated correctly, Paul consistently spoke of salvation as a process that continued throughout life. "Paul would say 'you have been justified,' or 'you have been reconciled to God,' but not 'you have been saved,' rather 'you await salvation'" (Butteric, George Arthur, ed. Interpreter's Bible. 12 vols. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1971. 10:645). An appropriate representation of Paul's intent is found in Romans 13:11, which reads, "now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed."

The classic illustration of the unscriptural is the Song of Solomon, which Joseph Smith left out of his translation of the Bible. Similarly, the Qumran community rejected the Book of Esther from their canon because it does not mention God and contributes nothing to the understanding of eternal truths. Luther in like manner spoke of the "canon within the canon" and rejected the Song of Solomon.

The idea of unscriptural scripture is easier to illustrate with the Doctrine and Covenants than the Bible because it stands so much closer to us historically. Doctrine and Covenants 134 was written by Oliver Cowdery, along with an article on marriage, both of which were included in the 1835 edition. Neither were understood to be revelations. In 1876 the article on marriage was dropped from the Doctrine and Covenants. The article on governments and laws has been retained and has informally assumed the status of revelation.

The Doctrine and Covenants includes two official declarations: the first announcing that plural marriages would no longer be practiced, the second announcing that the privilege of holding the priesthood was to be extended to worthy males of all races. These are not actual revelations—they are announcements that a revelation has been received on the matters involved. Much in the scripture that is held to be "the word of God" would likewise more accurately be described as an announcement that the "word" has been received, rather than as the actual word itself.

In some instances even that which is correctly recorded identifies itself as unscriptural. For instance, Alma offers his "opinion" on the order of the resurrection (Alma 40:20). Similarly, we have an instance in which Paul gives a "commandment, not of the Lord, but of himself" (D&C 74:5), to which we would not accord the same respect as that which has been divinely given.

Errors of Interpretation

Latter-day Saints are as subject to the law of gravity as other people. Among our number there are those who have crowded the edge and unwittingly slipped where many have fallen before us. That we might not be numbered among the "unlearned and unstable" who "wrest ...scriptures, unto their own destruction" (2 Peter 3:16), the following cautions are suggested:

Admitting the validity of allegory is something like the introduction of cheat grass or the starling—beautiful and useful in their place, they can quickly spread to become more of a menace than a help. In some instances a more apt illustration would be to liken them to a vaccine that gives immunity to some and a deathly disease to others. Nonetheless, some passages are allegorical. The account of the birth of Adam from the dust of the earth and the birth of Eve from the rib of Adam are examples. Yet, as with this illustration, significant doctrines are not given in allegorical form unless some scriptural explanation is also given.

It was not intended that we have all the answers. Revelation marks the path, but the journey must still be one of faith.

Christ and Scriptural Interpretation

Christ's example as a teacher is itself a revelation on how scriptures are to be interpreted. Our most perfect example of his scriptural exegesis is found in 3 Nephi. The following principles are clearly illustrated in that text:

In his reapplication of prophecies fulfilled by himself he illustrated that prophecies are not always limited in their intent to events within the range of understanding of those to whom they were first addressed. It also suggests that their fulfillment may go well beyond the understanding of the prophet by whom they were spoken. Habakkuk's prophecy about one who would do a work that would not be believed (Habakkuk 1:5; 3 Nephi 21:9), and Malachi's prophecy about the messenger who would prepare the way for Christ (Malachi 3:1; 3 Nephi 24:1), in their multiple fulfillments are examples.

Moroni and Scriptural Interpretation

Moroni used Bible prophecies as the basis of his instruction to Joseph Smith. Considerable insight can be obtained about scriptural interpretation from Moroni's example. His amplified rendering of the Malachi prophecy about the return of Elijah (D&C 2) is a classic example. Moroni took a passage of scripture (Malachi 4:5-6) correct in its translation, as evidenced by its rendering in the Book of Mormon (3 Nephi 25:5-6), and gave it a more detailed and specific interpretation. In so doing he illustrated that there are levels of understanding and levels of interpretation. His interpretation takes us well beyond the literal reading of Malachi's words. It also demonstrates that no passage of scripture can contain more than a fragment of the mind of God, and that the standard works contain only portions of the eternal truths known to Deity. The Bible and Book of Mormon give us an accurate translation of "content," whereas Moroni gave us a translation of "intent."

The principle being established in this instance is that the Spirit sustains the literal reading of scriptures and then, as we are prepared and as the time is appropriate, it takes us beyond that reading to even greater understanding. This is why the Lord gave Joseph Smith the gift of the Holy Ghost in preference to manuscripts in order that he might give us the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. As with Moroni, it was that Spirit which took him beyond what could be obtained from manuscripts and languages. This is why when a Moroni or a Joseph Smith translates the Bible it takes on the spirit and clarity of the Book of Mormon. Scholars speak of getting back to the original documents; prophets take us back to the original source and meaning.

Correct Principles

Faith coupled with "a sincere heart" and "real intent" are the requisites of spiritual understanding (Moroni 10:4). The source of that understanding must always be the Spirit. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit" (John 3:6). The law of tithing serves as an example. Ten thousand questions could be asked about what and how we should tithe, yet the Lord simply said that his people should "pay one-tenth of all their interest annually" (D&C 119:4). Unlike our tax laws, the principle is not a contest with laws and loopholes but rather a measure of loyalty and honesty. So it is with scriptural interpretation. Beyond the obvious announcement that truth is always in harmony with itself, there are no rules or guarantees of infallibility. Our interpretation of the scriptures becomes a measure of our honesty, wisdom, and maturity.

If we are to be honest in scripture study we cannot claim for the scriptures what they do not claim for themselves. The scriptures do not claim infallibility or inerrancy. They do not claim to have all the answers, and they do not claim to be all of equal worth. They do not claim prophets to be infallible. They do not convey authority, remit sin, or call to offices. They are in all things subject to the living oracles. Such is the testimony they bear of themselves.

Honesty in scriptural study requires of us that we stay in context. The context of every saving truth that we as Latter-day Saints have is the revelations of the Restoration. We are out of context to argue our doctrines from the Bible, for that is not where we learned them. If the Bible is the answer, there was no need for a Restoration. If there is a need for Joseph Smith, and those prophets, seers, and revelators that have followed in his stead, if there is a need for the Book of Mormon and its truths, if there is a need for the Doctrine and Covenants, then we should admit it and identify it as our context. To do so is to enter the environment of the Spirit; to do otherwise is to enter the arena of debate and confusion.

Parley P. Pratt illustrated this principle with a story from the life of Joseph Smith. When he, Sidney Rigdon, and others had gone east to seek redress from the federal government for the driving of the Saints out of the state of Missouri, a large church building was opened for them in which to preach. Some three thousand people were in attendance. Elder Pratt records:

Brother Rigdon spoke first, and dwelt on the Gospel, illustrating his doctrine by the Bible. When he was through, brother Joseph arose like a lion about to roar; and being full of the Holy Ghost, spoke in great power, bearing testimony of the visions he had seen, the ministering of angels which he had enjoyed; and how he had found the plates of the Book of Mormon, and translated them by the gift and power of God. He commenced by saying: "If nobody else had the courage to testify of so glorious a message from Heaven, and of the finding of so glorious a record, he felt to do it in justice to the people, and leave the event with God."

The entire congregation were astounded; electrified, as it were, and overwhelmed with the sense of the truth and power by which he spoke, and the wonders which he related. A lasting impression was made; many souls were gathered into the fold. And I bear witness, that he, by his faithful and powerful testimony, cleared his garments of their blood. Multitudes were baptized in Philadelphia and in the regions around; while, at the same time, branches were springing up in Pennsylvania, in Jersey, and in various directions. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 298-99.)

If we are to be honest in our scriptural study, we will not be found creating doctrines from Bible dust or creating bodies for that which has no spirit. This is most often done by establishing a doctrine from an allegory or parable. Doctrines are not revealed in allegories or parables. An allegory or parable can be used to illustrate or sustain a clearly revealed doctrine, but not to originate it. Nor will those who are spiritually honest seek to avoid the clear and factual meaning of scripture using the tag of allegory or parable.

To be spiritually honest is to listen for and accept the quiet whisperings of the Spirit. Although the Ten Commandments were thundered from the mountaintop, the more sacred doctrines are manifest in temples, closets, and quiet places. Describing the spirit of revelation, the Lord said, "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart" (D&C 8:2). As both "mind" and "heart" are involved in the receipt of revelation, so they must be used in growing into an understanding of the revelation. Both mind and heart are to be sensitive to all that is about us, for as we observed in the first chapter, "all things have their likeness," and as Christ said, "All things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of me" (Moses 6:63).

There are few if any stories in the scriptures that do not cast a shadow, that are not types or illustrations of greater principles or events. Virtually every passage of scripture is layered with meaning, and its full interpretation need not be limited to our present understanding. "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:24). For us to begin to see those countless types and shadows, the endless symbolic representations of Christ, is for us to be ever assured of the reality of his gospel and the blessings enjoyed by those who choose to live it.

1985 Bookcraft
