During my school’s values-education month, our teacher asked us to write an essay titled “Why am I here?” It had to be a 10-paragraph essay on the topic of our purpose in life. As I read the topic on the board, my heart was filled with comfort and happiness. As a member of the Church, I had known my purpose as a daughter of God for many years. But as I looked at my other classmates’ faces, my heart was filled with sadness. Why? Because they started to murmur regarding the difficulty of the topic. They didn’t have the same knowledge I did.

When I turned in my essay, I realized how blessed I am to be a member of the one true Church. From that day on, my desire to serve a mission and share my testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ was strengthened.

I know that Heavenly Father loves me and wants me to be with Him someday. I also know that it is my purpose to serve others.

Jaymee A., Philippines

The Book of Mormon inspires us whenever we need answers to questions or when we need to feel closer to the Lord’s Spirit. It contains prophecies that were received by those who were chosen by the Father because they were faithful and righteous. From this book we obtain more wisdom about the gospel, and we can see that the Lord will always be the same.

The Book of Mormon helps us now because the people in the past had difficulties that may be similar to the difficulties that we face today, from family problems to influences from other people. Their examples give us the strength and desire to press forward in faith and righteousness without being discouraged. Like us, those ancient peoples passed through various trials but triumphed in that the adversary was not able to overcome them. This gives us more desire to remain strong and unshakeable in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Caroline M., São Paulo, Brazil

Just before the San Salvador El Salvador Temple was dedicated, my family and I decided to serve at the open house and help those who were not members become acquainted with the gospel of Jesus Christ as they visited the temple. I was assigned to be a guide and speak with people about each room in the temple, the sacred covenants we make there, and how our lives change when we keep those covenants.

My shift came, and I started my tour. I had just barely gone out of the room when someone requested an additional guide since a large group had just arrived. I was told to go back to the greeting room to have another group assigned to me.

When I reached the room, I was again asked to change my assignment and show a video to people who were just arriving at the temple. I felt sad that I wasn’t able to speak with people and tell them about the temple.

About half an hour later, a group from the United States arrived who didn’t speak any Spanish. Several volunteers were running around looking for someone who spoke English and could guide this group. That’s when I understood that the Lord sends us where He needs us, not necessarily where we want to be. I was the only one who knew how to use the video and give the words of welcome in English. The Americans were glad and when they were leaving, they thanked me for receiving them so warmly.

At the end of the day, I felt thankful to the Lord for showing me that when we do things the way He prompts us, we will feel satisfied with our work.

Erick A., El Salvador
