“Geneva is where the four corners of the world meet,” declared Mike Cannon, a resident of this beautiful Swiss city. Certainly, I thought, if there are corners on this globe of ours, they might meet in Geneva—everyone else appears to.

Geneva is the European headquarters of the United Nations and of the World Health Organization. It is the home of the International Red Cross and of more than 250 other international organizations. It seems that each week we read of another peace conference in Geneva. As long ago as the 1600s, it was a cradle of the Protestant Reformation and has been a place of refuge for the persecuted and downtrodden ever since.

Walking the streets, one hears spoken and sees signs written in French, English, Arabic, German, Portuguese, Chinese, Italian, Japanese, Spanish, and a multitude of other languages.

Geneva is tucked into a valley formed by the Jura Mountains and the French Alps on the western shore of Lake Geneva. Roses and brightly colored sailboats sparkle in the sunshine as the famous Jet d’eau sprays 140 meters into the air.

The three Latter-day Saint wards that meet in the building at 32, Avenue Louis-Casai, reflect in miniature the international nature of the city as well as the international nature of the Church. I had come to Geneva to attend church because the wards here have become rather well known for their great diversity. I thought that here I could see both the challenges and the joys that the Saints are experiencing as the gospel spreads across the world.

As Bishop Karl Staffler of the Geneva Jura Ward explained, “We bring together many different languages and backgrounds. But we all understand, because we speak the language of the gospel.”

Before sacrament meeting, I was introduced to Adam Togo from Mali, Africa, who came to Geneva for a holiday. He met the missionaries, accepted the gospel, was baptized, and will soon return to his homeland.

Nearby were Bruce and Ardis Knudsen, lifelong members of the Church from the United States, who lived in Nigeria, Trinidad, and Barbados before coming to Geneva for the World Health Organization.

Behind me was Sister de Guzman with her six children. Brother de Guzman, a member of the bishopric, was sitting on the stand. They are from the Philippines but have lived in Geneva for eight years.

I sat near Sister Reine Peot, a regal-Swiss sister who has been a member of the Church for twenty-five years.

The acting ward clerk, Brother Roland Krucher, has been a member just six months.

Near the front were the lovely young sisters Melanie and Pamala Bonny, who are fifth-generation Latter-day Saints, descendants of some of the early converts in Switzerland.

Members of the bishoprics of the three wards also reflect the diversity of the Church in Geneva. They are Austrian, Italian, French, Philippine, Canadian, and Swiss. Members of the three wards come from all over Europe, as well as Peru, Chile, Nigeria, Iran, Ethiopia, Tahiti, Nepal, and lots of places in between.

Activities in the wards take advantage of these differences, helping the members understand and learn from one another. They include international dinners, imaginary world tours, and firesides in various languages. Each language and cultural group seems to have its own unique qualities that others can learn from.

“For example,” said Bishop Staffler, “the Philippine Saints teach us to share with our whole hearts. They remind us not to be too busy with many things. And they teach us about love and sharing and understanding.”

“The Swiss teach us to be reverent in church,” explained another member. “They like to have a worshipful atmosphere.”

Some members are very new, such as Raza Perera from Sri Lanka, who appreciates home teachers who teach him the gospel, explain the Book of Mormon, and strengthen his testimony. Other families are longtime members, such as Guy and Tareva Junod, whose four children have all served missions. On the day I visited, Brother Junod, a stake patriarch, was delighted to tell the missionaries he had discovered someone who could translate for their Turkish investigator.

One of the great blessings to these members is the Church magazine, which is available in twenty languages. “We are so thrilled to read the magazine in our own language—we feel reassured that the prophet still loves us,” said one brother. Sister Helen Ah-Chane considers the magazine a good missionary tool. Each year she gives a subscription to a friend: one has joined the Church, another is studying with the missionaries, and a third has continued her subscription—even though she has not joined the Church yet. The Corinne family also gives away copies of the magazine to friends, and this often makes their friends interested enough to attend church.

I was curious about the plaque—written in French—hanging in the foyer of the building. It seemed to contain a summary history of the Church in Geneva. I learned from other sources that the first missionary to come here was Elder Thomas B. H. Stenhouse, who accompanied Elder Lorenzo Snow to Italy, crossed the Alps to Geneva, and began preaching in December 1850. In February 1851, Elder Snow arrived and dedicated the land of Switzerland for the preaching of the gospel. The first convert baptism took place in March. By the end of that year, there were twenty members in Geneva, and a branch was organized in May 1852.

Since that time, the Church has grown, in spite of persecution, opposition, and even occasional violence. Most members emigrated to the United States in the early years. But the few who stayed have formed a strong core that has been the basis for growth. Many, many people have accepted the gospel here, and then have carried the message of the Restoration to other lands. Others have joined the Church elsewhere, and then have come to lend their strength to the growing wards in Geneva.

I had expected to be overwhelmed by the differences—the languages, the cultures, the variety in ages and in experience in the Church. But as we sang hymns, prayed, and worshipped together, there was a great spirit of unity. We were united by our testimonies of the Savior, by our love for the Book of Mormon, and by the knowledge that Joseph Smith was a prophet. I felt the differences melt away. The languages, the cultures, our tastes in foods and clothing were unimportant—for I had come to the place where the four corners of the world meet, and I had met my brothers and my sisters.
