With much laughter, a Latter-day Saint mother and her grown daughter discuss the advantages of each other’s season of life. They call it “trading wishes.” The mother says, “I wish I were as agile as you are.” The daughter answers, “I wish I were as wise as you are.” “You have such opportunities,” continues the mother. “You have such knowledge,” says the daughter.

How wise these women are! Each helps the other to be grateful for the blessings of her time of life. They focus on the opportunities, not the limitations, of each season. They realize the truth that: “To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven” (Eccl. 3:1).

Each season of life has rewards. A sister in her twenties may feel heavily burdened supporting her family, finishing her schooling, or beginning employment; but she may also have the joys of nurturing children or expanding her knowledge or skills. A middle-aged woman may face changes in her family, her work, and her physical health; but she may profit from the wisdom of experience. An older woman may suffer a loss of mobility or the loss of loved ones; but she may appreciate life as never before.

A joyful outlook can be part of all of our seasons. We invite each woman to value who she is and count the ways she can bless herself and others around her.

What are some of the blessings of your season of life?

Not all things are possible in all seasons. During a temple recommend interview, a mother of two small children told her stake president of her desire to attend the temple more often. But time demands, distance, and expense had prevented her from attending as often as she desired. The stake president told her, “Maria, I know you love the temple and look forward to a time when you can go often. For now, go when you can, but remember that you serve in many other important ways. The time will come when you can attend as often as you wish.”

Through prayer, each woman can find and follow her personal timetable. She can set priorities and follow gospel principles in different ways through the varying seasons of her life. A faithful woman knows that the Lord’s hand will always guide her: “In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths” (Prov. 3:6).

What are some of the ways you can serve the Lord in your season of life?

Latter-day Saint poet Sister Emma Lou Thayne notes that she has been “nurtured by all that comes along at any stage, in any time.” And she rejoices in “the absence of fear and the presence of faith.” She expresses this serenity in the following poem:

Security is not in knowing

what will come

nor if it will be

bad or good.

It is a faith drawn taut

with having learned

and seen and done

that says, Tomorrow, come.

How can the challenges of life help us develop our faith?
