I am 15 years old, and I live in Russia. The days we receive the Liahona (Russian) are like a holiday to me! I can’t explain how thankful I am that the Church publishes a magazine in Russian and many other languages.

Heavenly Father has shown me such great love in the two years since my baptism and confirmation. How blessed I will be as I live righteously and continue on the path to eternal life with him!

Layla Khasbiullina,
Russia Rostov Mission Branch, Russia Rostov Mission

I am very grateful to have L’Etoile (French) in my life today. I find in it the spiritual guidance I need. When I read it, I feel Christ’s love, and I marvel at each inspired message and at the testimonies shared by our brothers and sisters throughout the world.

L’Etoile is a source of inspiration for me and my family. I know with certainty that if we will put into practice all of the directives and counsel we find in it, we will draw closer to our Heavenly Father.

Alexis Tovar Alvarez,
Saint-Etienne Branch, Lyon France Stake

I am very thankful to my Heavenly Father for allowing me to find the gospel so early in life. I am 16 years old and live in Colombia. I am thankful for the Liahona (Spanish); it has brought many blessings into my life. It truly is a compass that guides our lives.

The December issue was very beautiful, and it filled my heart with joy. I was able to share it with my family and friends.

Angélica María Vera,
Cortijo First Ward, Bogotá Colombia El Dorado Stake

After kneeling in prayer one Tuesday morning and then beginning that day’s work, I felt dissatisfied, knowing that something was missing. It was then that I thought of the Liahona (Spanish). I went to the mailbox and found the new issue there. I am thankful for Heavenly Father’s love and for his concern for my spiritual progress.

Lourdes Giraldo García,
Genova First Branch, Genova Italy District

As in the time of Lehi and his family, the Liahona (Spanish) guides our lives, the lives of our youth, and the lives of our children in a very remarkable way. Month after month, we learn from the First Presidency Messages, from the Mormon Messages, and from others’ personal experiences.

Elba Aleyda Bonilla Enriquez,
Mezquital Ward, Guatemala City Guatemala Mariscal Stake
