Preface

Nearly four years ago some Chinese friends asked me to explain the Bible to them. They had never held a Bible in their hands, and I had never been confronted with such a task. Little did I know that what would unfold what be the production of The Story of a Kingdom (SOK) material: Book, Study Guide, PowerPoint, and in progress,

a Children’s Version. For more details on each of these visit www.sok.org.uk.

The Story of a Kingdom is primarily for people who want to understand the story of the Bible. I follow the theme of God’s Kingdom through the Bible, using the definition: God’s people, living in God’s place, under God’s rule and blessing; seeking to show how God’s Kingdom in the Old Testament builds up to prepare us for Jesus and His Kingdom in the New Testament.

There are numerous people I wish to thank for contributing to this work over the last four years. My thanks start with Peter Bovill who has been a good friend and brother in Gospel work for some years now. Peter first led the international Bible study with me and typed up very early drafts of my notes. Lee Campbell was involved in the initial design and formatting process and must take the credit for what I think is a great looking cover. He has also helped in sharpening my understanding of some parts of this work. Gareth Gamble has performed most of the design and formatting for what you now see; constantly having to adapt things as the work grew, and patiently putting up with my endless changes. He has worked so diligently behind the scenes, and I am grateful to him for the hours (in fact, days!) that he has spent in front of a computer. Send me the bill from the optician! Keri McGregor, Joanne Kilpatrick, and Philip Saunders have been involved in the editing process at some stage, and if it were not for them, it would read a whole lot worse than it does. Any mistakes that do remain are really their fault as much as mine, but I’m not supposed to say that in the preface to a book. Tim and Lynn Anderson, David Gibson and Melvin Tinker have all provided clear and helpful feedback on the material at different stages, and I am indebted to them. I wish to thank Kaman Ng and Jana Ovcarikova who have translated the SOK Book into Chinese (simplified and traditional), and Slovak respectively. Lynn Tok has kindly translated the SOK PowerPoint into simplified Chinese, and Gokhan Kaya has translated it into Turkish. These materials

are available from www.sok.org.ukT. My thanks also go to Hilton McGregor who has been extremely kind to print this material at cost price, without which this book would not be in your hands.

If this book goes some way in providing the reader with a framework in which to understand the story of the Bible then I will be extremely grateful.

Jonathan Gibson

Belfast, 2005

For God’s glory alone
