Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Introduction

During general conference in 1950, President Harold B. Lee stated, "It is my conviction that every man who will be called to a high place in this Church will have to pass these tests not devised by human hands, by which our Father numbers them as a united group of leaders willing to follow the prophets of the Living God and be loyal and true as witnesses and exemplars of the truths they teach." (Conference Report, April 1950, p. 101.)

Writing this book has helped me understand the love, mercy, and condescension of our Savior and Lord, Jesus Christ. It has provided personal insight into the eternal consequences of His mission. I have become more aware than ever before who this Jesus really is. I believe I understand more clearly what it means to walk in His steps. The essence and sum of His life consisted of His suffering for others, His serving, healing, weeping, teaching, soothing, loving, enjoying, empowering, and befriending all who walk the earth. He continues to touch our innermost lives as deeply as we individually permit Him. His unconditional love is absolutely void of force, dominion, and compulsion.

Those who choose to let Him become the center of all they are and do will surely be tested. In our own way we tread our individual winepresses, for, as President Lee stated, we will pass through tests not devised by human hands. But we need not do it alone.

Our son Scott recently received word that one of his sons is deaf. This is the third deaf son in his family. I believe this is a test not devised by human hands. Scott and Lori have a wonderful attitude regarding this test: "If God sends us one more special child," they say humbly, "we can handle it." They have and they will continue to "handle it"; nonetheless, it is not easy. These three boys, in addition to three more hearing sons, require a tremendous amount of time, finances, and care.

One day as I considered the test this family faces, the following thought came to me. These three boys are young children. Perhaps they will be here when the Savior comes in His glorious return to earth. If they are, perhaps someone will bring to His attention that there are three men from the Featherstone family who are all deaf. I can imagine Him blessing and healing them. In reality, I know that whether this miraculous event occurs is of little eternal consequence, for after the resurrection they will all hear—a later but equally great miracle.

I would gladly give my hearing for any one of these three special boys, but God does not work that way. Each must bear his own burden. I hurt deep inside whenever I think that in this life they will never hear a mother's song, a prophet's voice, laughter, wind, storms, birds, animals, and all the sounds that make up life. They will not hear the wonderful singing of the Tabernacle Choir, the sacred hymns, or the happy music of children laughing.

Yes, we tread our own private winepress, and sometimes it seems to us too great to bear. It is crucial that we then recall the majesty of this Supreme Being, the Only Begotten of the Father,
