Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Two

Justice According to the Supreme Goodness of God

I have thought much about the topic of justice according to the supreme goodness of God. (See Alma 12:32.) Not surprisingly, I have discovered that God's justice is centered on the Savior's atonement. The Atonement was wrought for our sins. "The blood of Jesus Christ . . . cleanseth us from all sin," wrote the Apostle John. (1 John 1:7.) The Atonement was the greatest act in time or in eternity by any mortal soul who has ever walked this earth. Through the Atonement the lost shall be saved, the prisoner shall go free, the burdened will receive peace. All that is required of us to receive this wonderful gift of God is to repent.

All my life I have spoken of and been grateful for mercy. Mercy is an act of incomprehensible and never-ending charity. Mercy must of necessity be extended into the lives of all who would be partakers of divine forgiveness of their sins and transgressions. As a General Authority, I have witnessed mercy being extended through many wonderful experiences.

In Alma 42:24 we read: "For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved." Note that justice exerciseth his own, and mercy claimeth all which is her own. It is interesting that we give daughters names like Mercy, Faith, Hope, and Charity, whereas sons are named after justice, such as Justin or Justus.

Recently I developed an appreciation for justice that is as profound and precious as my feelings for mercy. Justice is an eternal principle and must be satisfied. It is equally as beautiful a principle as mercy. Let me raise some questions: Who suffers most—the incest or rape victim; the physically abused spouse; the paraplegic; those with debilitating diseases; those who lose a child, a parent, or a spouse; those who are unemployed; those who suffer as manic depressed, or the liar, the thief; or those involved in abortions, homosexuality, and similar unnatural sins? Who suffers most—the adulterer or the parents who have a wayward son or daughter? I believe the parents who have a wayward child suffer at least as much if not more than an adulterer. Such heartfelt suffering is expressed in this beautiful verse:

Where Is My Wandering Boy Tonight?

Where is my wandering boy tonight? the boy of my tend'rest care: The boy that was once my joy and light, the child of my love and prayer

Once he was pure as the morning dew, as he knelt at his mother's knee; No face was so bright, no heart more true, and none was as sweet as he.

Oh, could I see him now, my boy, as fair as in olden time, When prattle and smile made home a joy, and life was a merry chime. Go, for my wandering boy tonight, go search for him where you will: But bring him to me with all his blight, and tell him I love him still.

Oh, where is my boy tonight? where is my boy tonight? My heart o'erflows, for I love him, he knows, Oh, where is my boy tonight? (Anonymous.)

The adulterer can meet with a common judge, and, when repentance is complete, that priesthood leader can forgive the sin on behalf of the Church. Parents of a wayward one have a void and a heartache that will not go away until the straying one returns. The parents are innocent. Does justice somehow demand that they should suffer so deeply? Is it just for children to be born on a garbage dump in the Philippines, Rwanda, or even the United States, or in diseased and poverty-stricken communities in Mexico, South America, or anywhere else in the world? Is it just for other children to be born in homes where God knows they will be abused through incest or brutality—tortured and maimed by evil parents? Is it just for women, youth, and children to be abused or raped in their innocence without penalty to the offender? My answer is an unmistakable no!

In God's great goodness He has provided justice. Some years ago I was invited to speak at the funeral service for Rachael Runyan, a beautiful, blonde-haired, blue-eyed girl. I believe she was three or four years old. She had been kidnapped, and the entire nation was incensed at this act of horror as they sympathized with the anguished parents. Weeks later her body was found partially buried on a creek bank. She had been violated and must have been terrified beyond anything we can imagine for one so innocent and young.

I read and studied to prepare a funeral sermon, but I could not find anything that I thought could bring comfort to the parents, who must have trembled at thoughts of the horrific indignities suffered by this sweet little innocent soul. The day of the funeral I went to my office early and knelt in solitude. I pled with the Lord that I might be able to say something that would bring peace to two wonderful, innocent parents who had suffered more than anyone ought to suffer. Then I sat at my desk and began to write. The pen raced across the page sentence after sentence.

In essence, I explained at the funeral that as soon as that sweet, little soul had passed through the veil, she would have been cradled in the arms of a loving Father in Heaven. With one caress He could remove every horror, every terror, every indignity as though it had never happened. I then explained that if God could do that on the other side of the veil, I was convinced that He could do the same on this side of the veil for Rachael's parents. They could know that their innocent, sweet little daughter was totally healed. They need not carry the burden of hate, vengeance, anger, and bitterness that cankers and darkens the soul. According to the supreme goodness of God, they could leave justice to Him. Justice is beautiful and will be satisfied. Nothing shall be left undone.

I thank God every day of my life for other dimensions of the Atonement. Christ not only ransomed us from our sins, but also He suffered for the "pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people." (Alma 7:11.) It would only be just that the innocent find comfort, relief, and peace through Jesus as the transgressors do. If He can carry the burden of our transgressions, it would only be just that the innocent have their pain and afflictions removed as well.

Every victim of incest, rape, spouse abuse, molestation, and fraud is equally entitled to relief and peace and should be as free from suffering as the repentant transgressor. If the transgressor alone could find peace and forgiveness, where would be the justice? The Redeemer of the world has redeemed the innocent and has atoned for the suffering of the innocent as well as the guilty. All souls who suffer are invited to come unto Him. "Come unto me," He entreated, "all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.) He who has borne all burdens has asked that we transfer the horror and terror, the scars of suffering, the baggage we have carried for so many years to Him. This transfer takes place in the same way for the victim as it does for the transgressor. Alma cried, "O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death. And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more. And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold." (Alma 36:18-20.) His soul was filled with joy exquisite and sweet.

King Lamoni's father cried out, "O God, Aaron hath told me that there is a God; and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make thyself known unto me, and I will give away all my sins to know thee." (Alma 22:18.)

When we really believe that Christ will take upon Himself our afflictions, our illnesses and sicknesses, we will do what Alma and King Lamoni's father did. We will go to Him who can take the weight of our trials and sufferings from us. The Master in His loving goodness will surely bring relief to the innocent victims of horrible deeds as to those who transgress. That is true justice.

Justice demands that there be compensating blessings for every particle of suffering we go through innocently. When a child or adult is sexually or physically abused, he or she should feel no guilt or loss of virtue or chastity. A person may be violated, but it is my faith that virginity and chastity in the eyes of God cannot be taken from innocent victims. A person who is robbed financially or materially does not need to see the bishop to see if any action should be taken against him. He is an innocent victim. The same thing is true of incest and rape victims. They are innocent before God, and I witness that a loving Savior can remove every heartache, terror, horror, feeling of shame, or loss of esteem. He can fill the soul with joy, marvelous light, and exquisite sweetness. If He did that only for the sinful, He would not be just. But He is a merciful God, and He has done it for the innocent and the repentant alike.

We must not add to the burdens carried by the innocent victim. When the future conduct of a violated one is warped and veers away from normal Christian conduct because of the abuse he or she has suffered, I believe that the Lord will be extremely merciful. I am persuaded that the Lord will judge them for what they would have been had the abuse never occurred.

No man should ever physically abuse his wife or any other woman. B. H. Roberts said, "Men who are fiercest with men are gentlest with women." (Truman Madsen, Defender of the Faith, p. 96.) Any who are caught up in the vicious sin of abusing others, who will not follow counsel but continue their abusive ways, are not worthy of full fellowship in the God of Mercy's kingdom. Jacob said, "And I will not suffer, saith the Lord of Hosts, that the cries of the fair daughters of this people . . . shall come up unto me against the men of my people. . . . For they shall not lead away captive the daughters of my people because of their tenderness, save I shall visit them with a sore curse, even unto destruction." (Jacob 2:32-33.)

What brought on this harsh warning? "I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning of the daughters of my people . . . because of the wickedness and abominations of their husbands. . . . Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples . . . [and] many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds." (Jacob 2:31, 35.)

The demands of justice require that those who commit such horrible acts against children, wives—indeed against any child of God—not go unnoticed and unpunished. Justice demands full and complete restitution, either through repentance or personal suffering. The Savior said, "I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit." (D&C 19:15-18.)

It would only be just that perpetrators of incest, rape, and spouse abuse be held accountable; if they repent not, they must suffer, though "how exquisite" that suffering will be they know not!

The innocent victim should not be required to carry guilt and scars and baggage of shame. A loving and willing Master desires to lift those things from our hearts and minds and replace them with His love and sweet peace. Christ will take on Himself our illnesses, our sicknesses, our sufferings—but we must let Him. Only in this way will the demands of justice be met not only for the very, very wicked who do such foul deeds but also for the wonderfully sweet, innocent victims.

Those who do not transfer to Jesus their sorrows and heartache—those who want revenge, who have bitterness and hate for those who have offended and violated them—carry a weight too burdensome to carry alone.

Do not put time limits on justice against the wicked. Many men and women leave this life without ever having felt a particle of guilt, some without having had their vile crimes detected. They have felt no remorse for their conduct. They may even have served in Church callings and had wonderful reputations, wealth, good health, and glowing funeral services. Do not be concerned; the demands of justice reach beyond the veil! The important thing is for those who are innocent victims to remember the words of the Lord: "Be still and know that I am God." (D&C 110:16.) We must forgive and leave judgment to Him who promised justice. President Harold B. Lee said, after he had been called as an apostle, "I came to a night some years ago, when on my bed, I realized that before I could be worthy of the high place to which I had been called, I must love and forgive every soul that walked the earth, and in that time I came to know and I received a peace and a direction, and a comfort and an inspiration, that told me things to come and gave me impressions that I knew were from a divine source." (Conference Report, October 1946, p. 46.) We also must forgive and leave justice to God.

Our daughter has four sons. This last summer we were at Philmont together. The oldest son, Joshua, was six; Christian, not yet five; Michael, two; and the new baby but two months old. Joshua, as the oldest, had been given certain responsibilities and was a little older, so he had an established position of authority. Michael, two, was hardly old enough to be concerned about a new baby; besides, Michael was at that wonderfully fun, perpetually happy age. The baby, of course, was often the focus of much of the family affection. Christian, almost five, could see all the attention that Michael and the baby were getting; he must have felt neglected and needed to know his place and whether he was loved.

I was in the living room of the cottage provided for us when Christian's need bubbled out. My wife, Merlene, and Christian were in the kitchen. I heard this little boy say to his grandmother, "Grandma, do you like me?" Then I heard coming from the other room, "Oh, Christian, I love you with all my heart and soul." In a few minutes, Christian came out of the kitchen, a sweet smile glowing on his face.

Years ago, Joe J. Christensen quoted Urie Bronfenbrenner, who said, "It's good for a child to be in the company of people who are crazy about him for a substantial number of hours every day." (Psychology Today, March 1977, p. 43.)

As children of God, we have a Father in Heaven who has an unlimited, unconditional love for each one of us, and I believe if we listen carefully, we can hear Him say, "I love you with all my heart and soul." I promise in His holy name that He will extend mercy. He will be just, for justice cannot be destroyed. Justice is a dimension of charity, the pure love of Christ. I love and thank God for His mercy and for His justice.
