Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Three

The Master, the Winepress, and Us

At a stake conference in Cebu in the Philippines, I met an unusual pair. The Huguettes were middle-aged—a brother and a sister. The woman was waiting for her brother just outside the door of the men's restroom. In a moment he called to her. She went inside and bent down; he, holding onto a divider for support, climbed onto her back. She then carried him into the chapel for our priesthood meeting. When the meeting was over, Brother Huguette's sister was not close by, so I volunteered to carry him where he needed to go. He was not light—I would estimate he weighed 150 pounds or more. They lived over a kilometer from the chapel. I understood that there were times when she carried him all the way to church. Other times she carried him to a place where they could catch a jeepney and ride to church.

You may recall having read about them in the Church News. Later the Church Almanac used a picture of the couple on the inside of the back cover. We all remember the beautiful saying, "He's not heavy, he's my brother." It would be interesting and humbling if somehow we could determine the total number of kilometers and the total number of times Sister Huguette has carried her brother on her back.

The Huguettes are just two of all the myriad souls who walk the earth. We would be staggered to know the totality of this wonderful woman's commitment to serve her brother. Over the years she has had little or no help. Sister Huguette exemplifies well the fact that in life, some of our Saints "tread their own private winepress alone."

In order to comprehend the Master's love, we must go to the scriptures and mine the riches they contain. We need to understand how the Atonement works in our behalf, not only for our sins but also for the suffering that comes to us in so many other ways.

Nephi was permitted a special and spiritual experience as he beheld the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God questioned him, "Knowest thou the condescension of God?" (1 Nephi 11:16.) Nephi responded, "I know that he loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things." (Verse 17.) Nephi beheld the virgin Mary and saw that she was carried away in the Spirit. "And after she had been carried away in the Spirit for the space of a time the angel spake unto me, saying: Look!" (Verse 19.) As he looked he beheld the virgin again, bearing a child in her arms.

"And the angel said unto me: Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father!" (Verse 21.) It was this Only Begotten Son of the God of heaven who would exclaim, "I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God." (D&C 76:107.) He essentially makes the same lonely statement again in section 133 of the Doctrine and Covenants, commencing with verse 50: "I have trodden the wine-press alone, and have brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me." I feel a certain sense of loneliness—and perhaps hurt—whenever I read His words. He then goes on to say: "And I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart." (D&C 133:51.)

The more pure in heart we are, the more we despise sin. The Master, in an incomprehensible way, saw and felt the most dastardly of acts that can be perpetrated by one person on another. Acts such as murder, abortion, incest, pedophilia, homosexuality, adultery, fornication, and brutality might well have prompted the fury and anger with which He uttered the above warning.

In dramatic contrast, the Lord then says: "And now the year of my redeemed is come; and they shall mention the loving kindness of their Lord, and all that he has bestowed upon them according to his goodness, and according to his loving kindness, forever and ever. In all their afflictions he was afflicted. And the angel of his presence saved them; and in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed them, and bore them." (D&C 133:52-53.)

One morning our executive secretary in the Philippines came into my office. He said, "Look over at the temple." I looked across the street and saw a woman walking on her knees, dragging her crippled legs behind her. A woman walked on either side of her; each one held one of her hands. They walked with her as they would with a child. (She must have had incredibly calloused knees. In the Philippines sidewalks are often made from crushed gravel so that they will not be slick when it rains. Most of us could not have walked but a few steps on our knees before they would have been torn and bloody.)

I called downstairs to our welfare department and asked them how long it would take them to buy a wheelchair. They thought they could get one in an hour or so. We gave approval, and one of our bishops went out and bought a wheelchair. He took it to the temple, hid it behind a pillar, and waited. In a few minutes this sweet little soul came out of the temple, walking on her knees with her two friends on either side. The bishop stopped the woman and asked, "Do you have a wheelchair?" She responded, "I used to, but it was old and fell apart and was beyond repair." It is doubtful that this sister ever again could have saved up enough money to buy a wheelchair. The bishop asked her if she would like a new one. She began to cry. Both ladies who were with her became emotional. The bishop reached behind the pillar and pulled out the new wheelchair. It was a humbly tender moment for all involved.

A short time after that, that same bishop, Bishop Santos, was in my office again. He had a form requesting a substantial amount of money from our fast-offering funds. A boy from a less-active family had a brain tumor and would die if it was not removed. As I recollect, the surgery had to be done in Manila. The bishop had requested financial assistance. He said, "Elder Featherstone, I know we cannot afford to send that much money out of our ward's fast offerings. We have checked with the charity hospital, and the boy would be on a waiting list for at least a year." Bishop Santos said, "I am here for counsel. What do we do for this little boy?" I pondered for a moment and then felt impressed to say, "Bishop, give me the form. I will approve the request." When I looked up from signing the request form, Bishop Santos was weeping. He said, "Elder Featherstone, we belong to a magnificent and wonderful church." I replied, "We do, bishop, we really do." Many members of the Church unknowingly joined together to extend to a young boy mercy and life.

Through such acts, we begin to have some small understanding of justice and mercy. To the unrepentant sinner will come anger, justice, and suffering. In Doctrine and Covenants 19:4, the Lord declared there are only two courses open to us: "And surely every man must repent or suffer." There is no third option. The Lord further stated: "Wherefore, I revoke not the judgments which I shall pass, but woes shall go forth, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, yea, to those who are found on my left hand." (D&C 19:5.) Those who choose not to repent are on the left hand.

However, because of his love for us, Christ vicariously suffered for all who would repent. So exquisite, so bitter, so hard to bear was the suffering even for Him, that He in great mercy powerfully declared: "Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent." (D&C 19:15-16.)

It would be difficult for a man who has lost his wife or a child to explain his heartsick soul suffering to one who has never experienced such grief. Well might this man say, "I pray to God that you never have to experience what I have been through." The Savior, I believe, was letting us know that none of us ever would want to go through what He suffered in Gethsemane.

Where there are laws, they must be obeyed. If they are not obeyed, there must be a punishment. If they are obeyed, there is a blessing. But who metes out the punishment? "For, behold, the mystery of godliness, how great is it! For, behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand is endless punishment, for Endless is my name. Wherefore—Eternal punishment is God's punishment. Endless punishment is God's punishment." (D&C 19:10-12.)

This does not presuppose that the punishment from God is without end or eternal in nature. As clarified by the Lord, Eternal or Endless are other titles for Him. He might have said "Jehovah's punishment." It would have meant the same as Eternal or Endless punishment.

Why would God say, "Repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore"? To some degree, Alma the Younger helped us to understand this as he bore his testimony to his son Helaman: "So great had been my iniquities, that the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror. Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds. And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked, even with the pains of a damned soul." Later he added: "Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains." (Alma 36:14-16, 21.)

Those who choose not to repent, who take pleasure in their sins of incest, child abuse, homosexuality, abortion, adultery, and similar abominations, will feel the wrath of the Law Enforcer, whose name is Eternal and Endless. He will smite them by the rod of His mouth. How is this done?

"All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure." (D&C 131:7.) Furthermore, "the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ." (D&C 84:45.) If spirit is matter, and if light is Spirit, and truth is light, then how powerful is truth? Could truth be tangible? Could the Lawgiver enforce the laws of His everlasting gospel with truth? Is it not so, surely, that the truth from "the rod of His mouth" will provide the punishment? (D&C 19:15.)

Alma had been confronted by the angel for his sin and was told: "Seek no more to destroy the church of God." (Alma 36:9.) Nowhere does it state that he was involved in sexual transgressions or murder, yet we sometimes hear speakers interpreting his words in that way. He actually said, "I had murdered many of his children," then he corrected himself and said, "Rather led them away unto destruction." (Verse 14.) His exquisite suffering for three days and nights, he described in these words: "Racked with torment, . . . I was harrowed up by the memory [truth] of my many sins . . . in the gall of bitterness, encircled about by the everlasting chains of death." (Verses 17-18.) We do not understand how powerful truth is—either its saving effect on the righteous or its absolute accusative spirit against the wicked. I wonder if truth does not pervade every fiber and cell of the body, even to the marrow of the bones. To the righteous and repentant, it is glorious beyond all that words can say. To the wicked it will be terrible and penetrating, as much as the physical body and the mind can endure, and perhaps more.

Imagine the rod of the mouth of God punishing in His wrath those who commit incest or similar evils. How is it possible to comprehend the suffering through which the unrepentant will go? Their punishment will be Endless (God's) punishment. Those who have chosen not to repent will suffer until they have paid the full demands of justice. Once justice has been satisfied through their own personal suffering, then their debt will have been paid in full. But let there be no doubt—they will either repent or suffer.

The Atonement was also wrought on behalf of the illnesses, sicknesses, and afflictions of the world. "In all their afflictions he was afflicted." (D&C 133:53.) Indeed, Matthew recorded that the Master "Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses." (Matthew 8:17.) Alma teaches this same truth: "And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12.)

What a magnificent concept: Christ did take on all our suffering so "that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people." To succor suggests "to relieve, benefit, avail, be of some good help, befriend, lend or bear a hand, be the making of, or to see one through." Succor is what those who understand and practice charity do. To succor means that we are fulfilling a dimension of charity. Charity is the pure love of Christ, a love that never fails. When we succor, we come near the Savior-like attitude of mercy. We do what the Master Himself would do, and we do what He would have us do.

How do the Atonement and the Redemption blend to bring about the grand blessing of having the Savior promise to succor those who are in need? It is my feeling that part of the Atonement was wrought for all the righteous and worthy, the honorable and needy both in and out of the Church. Consider, as we must so often, the destructive results of divorce, child abuse, and family abandonment on the innocent. Why do the innocent suffer? Because God will not take away our agency. Therefore, those who choose to violate the commandments always leave a "trail of tears" in the lives of the innocent. The innocent should not have to suffer for another's transgression any more than all mankind should suffer for Adam's sin. However, all trials we go through in life are a testing. The innocent are not spared. Sometimes even the most perfect suffer more than the most wicked. The Savior is the supernal example. More recently, we have seen President Spencer W. Kimball—an apostle, holy and pure, filled with love—endure some of the greatest of trials.

Consider the lesson taught by the following true story. A young man was converted to the Church. His father died when this young man was but a boy. Before he died, the father gave his only possession of any value to his wife to give to his son when he grew up—a ring with a beautiful stone in it. The mother kept the ring until the boy was in high school; then she gave it to him. When he graduated from high school, his mother bought him a fine watch. It was all this woman could afford.

When her son joined the Church, she was offended and became critical. Their relationship became greatly strained. The young man's bishop interviewed him, and shortly thereafter he was called on a mission. When he told his mother, she was irate. She said she would not give him one penny of support. When he left home to travel to Manila to the Missionary Training Center, he had no money. He took a taxi from the airport to the MTC. He had no money to pay. He offered his watch as payment, and the driver gladly took it. Because he knew he had no money to cover costs at the MTC, he went to a pawnshop, pawned his ring, and then reported at the MTC.

At a zone conference some months later, this wonderful young elder recounted how he had financed his way to the MTC. Then he said with great emotion, "I don't have my graduation watch my mother gave me, and I sold the ring my dad gave me, but I am serving my Savior on a mission, and it is worth it." Our faith is tried in many different ways, but I believe the most difficult trials come when we have to choose between the Savior and His work and our family.

In the following poem, Ella Wheeler Wilcox teaches us that we all will face our "Gethsemanes."

Gethsemane

In golden youth when seems the earth A Summer-land of singing mirth, When souls are glad and hearts are light, And not a shadow lurks in sight, We do not know it, but there lies Somewhere veiled under evening skies A garden which we all must see— The garden of Gethsemane.

With joyous steps we go our ways, Love lends a halo to our days; Light sorrows sail like clouds afar, We laugh, and say how strong we are. We hurry on; and hurrying, go Close to the border-land of woe, That waits for you, and waits for me— For ever waits Gethsemane.

Down shadowy lanes, across strange streams, Bridged over by our broken dreams; Behind the misty caps of years, Beyond the great salt fount of tears, The garden lies. Strive as you may, You cannot miss it in your way. All paths that have been, or shall be, Pass somewhere through Gethsemane.

All those who journey, soon or late, Must pass within the garden's gate; Must kneel alone in darkness there, And battle with some fierce despair. God pity those who cannot say, "Not mine but thine," who only pray, "Let this cup pass," and cannot see The purpose in Gethsemane. (Poems of Power [Chicago: W. B. Conkey Co.], pp. 147-48.)

I do not doubt but what it might be more difficult to keep our second estate than our first. However, when we understand the eternal purpose of pain, trials, testings, and unjust criticism, our souls begin to expand. We develop glorious, tender traits of kindness, thoughtfulness, and understanding. We more easily empathize with others who suffer as we have done. We realize how fragile life can be. We learn to understand the delicate balance that weighs sometimes for, sometimes against, us.

The Lord gave His children resiliency. Job loved and honored God as few men ever have. Even when he seemed to lose hope in ever again finding peace in this life, he never lost his faith in God. His mental anguish at the loss of all of his sons and daughters after the wind caused the house to collapse must have been almost as much as mortals can bear. His loss of earthly wealth would have staggered the most solid. Afflictions came in the form of boils, yet he uttered not one negative word against his God. So great was his faith that, millennia later when the Prophet Joseph would cry out from Liberty Jail, "Oh, God, where art thou?" the Lord told Joseph, "Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job." (D&C 121:10.)

When we ponder Job's affliction, we must consider the loss of his family, his herds and flocks, and his health. When the Savior comforted Joseph Smith, He focused on Job's friends abandoning him and accusing him falsely of transgression. Is there a message for us to learn here? I think so. Perhaps this lesson hearkens back to His statement, "I have trodden the wine-press alone." (D&C 133:5.) No one could have helped Him or could even begin to understand the total abandonment and loneliness that the Atonement would bring.

I believe that Jesus knew that physical pain and financial reverses were temporary but that false accusations and having friends turn against us were lifelong maladies from which few would escape. He reminded those who would follow Him, "Judge not that ye be not judged." (Matthew 7:1.) We do not know the smallest part of the Atonement's full effects.

The widow or widower, the orphan, the divorced person—all suffer excruciatingly. There is comfort to know that He has suffered for the afflictions and illnesses of the world. He reminds us of this part of His ministry in these words: "Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified." (D&C 45:3-4.)

An advocate is an intercessor. The great intercessory prayer, as recorded in John 17, provides a profound example: "These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven." (Verse 1.) Eyes lifted heavenward often show equally as great humility as those closed with bowed head. In this position He humbly pled, "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee." (Verse 1.) What a great lesson in humility and meekness! When we receive glory—that is, attention and honor—in our callings or for a given performance, should we not desire the glory only insofar as it glorifies our Lord or His Church?

Christ's divine prayer continued: "As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him." (Verse 2.) Baptism ties directly to the Atonement. When we have received baptism, we are His. We partake of the sacrament, the ordinance which ties most directly to the Atonement, to renew our covenants and to acknowledge by our own volition that we are His and will live in accordance to His commandments.

Then He gives us the great key to eternal life: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (Verse 3.) He refers to Himself in His God-ordained role as the Christ. Knowing God is more than just having read about His life or even having lived His commandments and served faithfully in the Church. All these things are essential, but to really know a person is greater than even those things. We know that each member of the Godhead knows us. There is no faÃ§ade for them; no inner thought not perceived; no motivation, doubt, fear, faith, love; no act—however pure or vile—nothing we have ever done in our lifetime that is not known to Them. We all stand as transparent crystal before Them, and They see our innermost recesses.

When we come to know the Master as a friend and we comprehend His stature in the eternities; when we understand the Atonement, His condescensions, His love, His sacrifice and spotless life; when we clearly perceive that all this has been given for the benefit of mankind—when we come to this point, then we begin to know Him. The Nephites with whom He spent a significant period of time looked "upon him as if they would ask him to tarry a little longer with them." (3 Nephi 17:5.) One who truly knows Him does not—nor cannot, nor will not—forget Him, ever. Whatever daily task, pleasure, sport, or activity we may be involved in, His desires are supreme in our lives. If we become careless in the way we wear the garment, haphazardly use the Lord's name, or serve only socially in the Church, we clearly do not "know" the Master. We might even know the Church is true, but actually knowing Jesus Christ would dramatically change our conduct. We would no longer have a disposition to do evil; rather, we would feel absolutely submissive to His will and turn our lives over to Him. Knowing Him is much, much more than knowing about Him. And eternal life is to know Him and His Father. A cross-reference to this verse leads us back to John 10, where the Savior teaches, "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me." (Verse 27.) That is the answer: to know Him is to follow Him. He continues, "I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand." (Verse 28.)

In the fourth verse of John 17, Jesus declared, "I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do." He had put a cause in motion that could not change course; Gethsemane and Calvary still lay ahead, but the work was finished.

And so He continued with His great intercessory prayer: "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee . . . and they have believed that thou didst send me. . . . I pray for them . . . for they are thine. And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves." (John 17:6-9, 13.)

This is an interesting consideration on the Master's part. What does it mean to have his "joy fulfilled in themselves"? Could it possibly mean the joy we feel as a convert comes into the Church, a wayward son or daughter returns home, or a family we have taught is sealed at the altar in the temple? Could He mean that we see our children serve and love Him or feel the joy of caring for the widow, the orphan, the poor, the sick, and all others who touch our lives? I am persuaded that there is no joy in this life comparable to the joy of the Lord.

Later, in verses 16 and 17, we read: "They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth."

Remember our earlier discussion on truth. Sanctification means to be made pure and spotless and holy. Truth can sanctify us if we abide in it. Truth purges falsehoods, misconceptions, errors, lies, evil, lusting, and other perverse behaviors from our lives. Truth is greater than the sword. Jesus' prayer to His Father included the admission that "thy word is truth." All truth emanates from God. Truth is eternal and absolute, and it sanctifies those who receive it.

Verse 19 states: "And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth." The footnote attached to the word sanctify in this verse refers the reader to the Topical Guide entry entitled "Jesus Christ, Atonement through." Most of us who have faith in Christ go through a sanctification when we suffer physically or mentally.

Note how the intercessory prayer anticipates the Atonement and Christ's suffering in Gethsemane.

The Atonement and sanctification wrap themselves around the believer. Christ prayed: "Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us." (Verse 20.) And then the Master explains the great purpose in this unity: "That the world may believe that thou hast sent me." (Verse 20.)

This great truth about unity was of such consequence that it was one of the major things for which Christ prayed in His intercessory prayer. We do not yet comprehend the power and the spiritual strength that will come to the Church when we are totally united in truth and have become sanctified. A power surge would come from this Church that would startle the world and reach into every nation, state, community, village, and home, as it did in the days of Enoch and as it will yet happen during the millennial reign.

The Savior concludes His great prayer with these words: "O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known thee and these have known that thou hast sent me. And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them." (Verses 25-26.)

As we read the intercessory prayer, we receive some small understanding of what it means to "know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (Verse 3.)

The apostles who knelt with Christ at the Last Supper had the glorious opportunity of having God the Son, the Redeemer, pray for them. Can we conceive of this magnificent experience? As recorded in 3 Nephi, two thousand five hundred souls exclaimed: "And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father. And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of praying unto the Father, he arose; but so great was the joy of the multitude that they were overcome." (3 Nephi 17: 17-18.)

Joy, truth, sanctification, unity, salvation, and exaltation are all tied to the Atonement. Justice and mercy are fulfilled because He, the Master of heaven and earth, the Only Begotten, trod the winepress alone. Of all who walked the earth, He alone qualified to satisfy the eternal demands of justice. We—all of humanity—stood by helplessly as He alone faced that most excruciating trial. Many of us would have given our lives to have accompanied Him through that agonizing hour, but, alas, not one other was qualified. We praise His name forever and forever—and pray that we will be worthy to know Him.
