Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Four

Who Is This Jesus?

A few years ago, I was in Canada at a "Nathan Eldon Tanner" camp. This experience paralleled the Boy Scout training that we provide at Philmont, except that we took the training to the good Saints of Canada instead of having them travel all the way to New Mexico. We even brought with us our own instructors and youth leaders.

During that week the staff organized a "Polar Bear" club. In order to qualify, a person had to swim at six o'clock four mornings in a row in the cold Elbow River. It had just snowed eight inches at an elevation just one thousand feet higher than our camp. The first morning I went down to the river with the group. I have always had a difficult time wading into a lake or river slowly. I would rather have one giant, breathtaking shock than the dozens of painful ones that come from slowly wading into the river. I filled my lungs with all the air they could hold so I could not suck in anything else when the shock of the cold water caused me to catch my breath, then dived in—it was ice cold! Without wasting any time, I swam out to the middle of the river, where the water was almost chest deep.

In a moment a stake president dove in and swam up right beside me. After the shock of the cold wore off a bit, he said, "Did I have my glasses on?" I replied, "I don't know, did you?" He said he thought he had, so I told him I thought he should swim back to the bank and see. In a moment he came back and replied, "I did have them on." The Elbow River was flowing about ten to twelve miles an hour, I estimated. I was sure that his glasses were now on their way down the river toward Calgary.

My heart went out to him. Here was a stake president who had spent hundreds of dollars to drive from western Canada to Calgary, bringing his whole family in an older, wood-paneled station wagon, as I recall. He had all the expenses of gasoline, lodging, and meals coming, as well as the training fees. I knew the camp must have been a terrific financial strain on him. Certainly he could not afford $200 or $300 for a new pair of glasses.

I walked upstream about thirty or forty feet. Offering a prayer, I asked God to help me find those glasses. Mind you, it was six o'clock in the morning; the water was cold and clear and flowing relatively fast. I lay down on my back and floated downstream. Suddenly I had an impression and stopped. When I stood up, I looked down at the water and thought I could see something glistening on the bottom of the river. Quickly I dove down and came up with the stake president's glasses.

Who is this Jesus who not only created the earth but also takes such a personal interest in His friends and servants that He would help find a pair of glasses for a stake president?

One day Elder Ted E. Brewerton and I were talking. He had made some calculations. He had determined that a million seconds is twelve days; a billion seconds is thirty-two years. This started me thinking about a talk I had given. Astronomers claim that we can see approximately 5,000 stars with the naked eye on a clear night with no moon. We can see 50,000 stars with a pair of binoculars. With a high-powered telescope we can see across our galaxy. We are on the outside edge of the Milky Way galaxy, which astronomers estimate has 600 billion stars and is hundreds of billions of miles across. On a clear night, we can see something of the pattern created by these billions of stars. But we are not alone: astronomers have discovered twenty-one additional galaxies.

The book of Moses states:

And he [Moses] beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.

And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof.

And it came to pass that Moses called upon God, saying: Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them? (Moses 1:28-30.)

Later, in chapter 7 of Moses, verses 28-30, Enoch revealed the vastness and the numbers of the Lord's creations:

And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains?

And Enoch said unto the Lord: How is it that thou canst weep, seeing thou art holy, and from all eternity to all eternity?

And were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations; and thy curtains are stretched out still; and yet thou art there, and thy bosom is there; and also thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever.

If we could "number the particles of the earth, yea millions of earths . . . it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations." We have to surrender our puny understandings to an incomprehensible totality of creations by the Creator. Including every blade of grass, every flower, tree, shrub, animal, fish, insect, such a vision reaches far beyond our mortal ability to understand or comprehend.

And yet He touches our individual lives. At a recent zone conference, a young missionary stood and thanked me for blessing the missionaries and their parents, brothers, sisters, and other family members. He thanked the Lord for the blessing that his mother and other family members would not go hungry while he was on a mission. He was grateful for the blessing of protection on his loved ones. Then with great feeling, this wonderful young elder said, "My mother is a single parent. She works long hours to support two missionaries in the field." Then he told of having a sister also on a mission and explained that his mother faithfully sent money to the bishop every month to support her missionary children. I felt a rush of love and tenderness for that wonderful woman who was providing for a family at home, paying her tithing, and supporting two missionaries. I imagine it has been a long time since she has bought anything for herself. But she knows the Master and He knows her. He knows her heart and the extent of her faith.

The Master is able to enlist not only this wonderful woman who would sacrifice and give all that she had but also all of the hosts of the earth who call themselves Christians. Again we ask, "Who is this Jesus who causes us to do—and feel it a rare privilege—what no other power on the earth can do?"

The scientist in all his wisdom and intellectual capacity can make a seed that looks like a seed of grass. It is identical as far as the eye is concerned. You could not tell the real grass seed from the scientist-created one. Yet if you put both into the ground, only one would grow. In one is the seed of life, but not in the other.

Who is this Creator? It is my conviction that He who created worlds without number can also give power to His righteous, pure servants to heal the sick and bless the lives of people. Through His almighty power, the blind can and do see, the deaf hear, and the incurable become rid of hopeless disease.

This Jesus Christ whom we worship stands on the right hand of the Eternal God of the heavens and all earths. The supreme power in all that we comprehend and beyond is the great God of heaven, and Jesus is His Only Begotten Son.

How easily and simply some try to bring Him down to their level. Most Christians admit that Christ was a great prophet, the greatest teacher ever, the king of this world, and even the Savior. Few believe that He was literally, physically the Son of God. We do not understand the condescension of God, but we have the absolute witness that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten of the Father. No member of this Church who studies the scriptures and understands the doctrine could ever think less.

What are God's limits? What are the bounds of His creations? What is the extent of His knowledge? What are the extremities of His compassion? Though some may attempt to place limits or bounds on Deity, what is that to God? No determination by mortals will ever change the absoluteness and totality of all that God is. We may not understand, but that is exactly what the problem is—we do not understand. That lack of understanding is by design, for thus we learn humility and faith. For now it is enough to know that there are absolute truths, and His perfection is absolute.

What are the capacities of Jesus Christ? We have the Light of Christ in our lives, as does every soul who ever has or does or will walk the earth.

Section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants parts the veil for a small glimmer of the immortal Christ. Verse 6 describes Him as "He that ascended up on high." Begotten by God, our Heavenly Father, Creator of innumerable stars and planets, He is the second Being we worship in all of eternity. The verse goes on to state that "also he descended below all things." During the acts of the Atonement and the Crucifixion He suffered more than other mortals could bear: "How sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not." (D&C 19:15.) The combined weight of the transgression of the world and the full debt to satisfy justice were combined with the trials, diseases, and sicknesses of the world. No repentant sinner or innocent sufferer will ever be alone in that suffering. He has descended below all and knows every pang of sorrow, heartache, or remorse which we feel. The adulterer, homosexual, drug addict, thief, liar—all have the way opened to "turn from blotted archives of the past, and find the future's pages white as snow." ("Opportunity," in Ralph L. Woods, ed., A Treasury of Inspiration [New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1951], p. 83.) Thus He becomes our advocate with the Father:

Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—

Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified;

Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life. (D&C 45:3-5.)

We will not and cannot ever face a trial or sickness, transgression or trouble that He does not comprehend and understand. All these things He suffered vicariously; thus He became our advocate not only in repentance but also in trial.

Continuing verse 6 of Doctrine and Covenants 88, "Comprehended all things" means that He has perfect understanding in all things. Only in this way can He "be in all and through all things, the light of truth. Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ." (D&C 88:6-7.) Doctrine and Covenants 84:45 helps us to understand that "the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ." Section 131, verse 7, states, "There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure."

"Also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made." (D&C 88:7.) The sun is 93 million miles from the earth. Imagine the energy that the sun perpetually produces. It takes the light from the sun a little less than eight and a half minutes to get to the earth. What power there is in the sun no mortal can possibly comprehend. Christ's power is not only in the light of the sun—it is also the power by which it was made. What knowledge must one have to create a sphere as large as the sun and put power into it, not for an hour or a day or one giant explosion, but for time unknown. What creative abilities did this Jesus have who could control the energy of the sun so it would be consistent from day to day, year to year, even millennium to millennium and beyond. As President Harold B. Lee stated, "The sun ripens the smallest bunch of grapes as though it had nothing else to do." We honor and glorify inventors of laser instruments, spacecrafts, heat-seeking missiles, atomic power facilities, television, and a multitude of other inventions. What are they compared to the sun, the earth, the moon, and the stars?

Verse 8 (D&C 88) states, "He is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made." In verse 9 He is described as "the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made." This statement is one about which we can only stand in total awe. What power is in this Jesus Christ that He created all these and remains as the power that governs their every movement?

"And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings; which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space." (Verses 11-12.) Truth is light. Truth and light fill the immensity of space. Man in his puny effort cannot comprehend the smallest part of the power and glory and wisdom and knowledge of God. The prophets who have increased understanding cannot describe adequately the wonders of our God, this Jesus whom we worship.

What powers belonged to the premortal Jehovah as He stood as the Morning Star, the Day Star, and the Evening Star? What glorious powers did He receive as the Only Begotten of the Father? As the God of the Israelites and the whole of the Old Testament, what powers were His? What power would it take to part the waters of the Red Sea in an instant? Man in all his wisdom cannot do what to Christ is elementary, even rudimentary. Who among us can cause the earth or sun to not rotate so that there is a day and a night and a day without darkness? Who could save three Hebrew lads from a burning, fiery furnace once they had been cast into it?

Who is this God who can cause rivers to flow upstream, who can bring drought or floods of rain? Who is this Christ who can probe the eternities of space and yet penetrate the heart of mortals and cause it "to quake" and "pierce them to the very soul?" (3 Nephi 11:3.)

How would we refer to Him if we had been in His presence? Isaiah declared, "His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isaiah 9:6.) The Nephites described Him thus: "They saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another." (3 Nephi 11:8.)

They stood in absolute reverence before the very Son of God. Later they declared:

The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father;

And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father." (3 Nephi 17:16-17.)

In one seemingly obscure record it states: "And when he [Jesus] had said these words, he wept, and the multitude bare record of it." (3 Nephi 17:21.)

Have you ever wondered what feelings would come to the heart of one who witnessed Jesus weep? I have wept often at the tears of others, both of joy and sorrow, pain and suffering. What effect would the tears of Jesus have upon us—this Being with power to create and organize galaxies and yet so filled with compassion that He could weep in behalf of a small flock of His "other sheep"?

The Lord can touch the eyes of our understanding as He did for Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon: "The glory of the Lord shown round about [them]. And [they] beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness." (D&C 76:19-20.) They "saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever." (Verse 21.) Consequent to this experience, these two prophets declared: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:22-24.)

By Him and through Him and of Him the worlds are and were created. His creations continue. Again we ask with childlike innocence, "Who is this Jesus?"

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery described Him in these words:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. (D&C 110:1-4.)

Of course His countenance was brighter than the sun! He is the power by which the sun was made; His is the power by which it brings life and light to our planet. He was slain yet lives again; He is our eternal advocate with the Father.

Joseph and Oliver were told, "Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me; therefore, lift up your heads and rejoice." (D&C 110:5.)

We do not understand fully how repentance works, but it does work. God, who can behold "worlds pass away," can, through His pure love and atonement, cleanse us from our sins, satisfying justice and extending mercy. Who is this Jesus who can satisfy the demands of justice collectively for all of the children of God who will come unto Him and repent?

Jesus the Christ is Lord and Creator, Redeemer and Atoner, Deliverer and Exemplar, Chief Cornerstone and Judge, King and Lamb of God, Messiah and Comforter, Prophet and Teacher, and the Great Jehovah; He is the only true and Begotten Son of God, our Eternal Father. It is through His almighty power and His limitless love that we "live, and move, and have our being." (Acts 17:28.) It is He who strides the heavens, who oversees and governs the innumerable suns and stars and worlds. In this life, we who have accepted Him as Lord and King and Divine Ruler of our destinies humbly bow in absolute submissiveness before His holy throne and declare, "Hosanna, hosanna to God and the Lamb, forever and forever and forever!"
