Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Six

The Master and Emotions

As a Church leader I am exposed every day of every week to marvelous, wonderful, effective people. On the other hand, as General Authorities we meet members who through their conduct have brought the most grievous kinds of consequences into their lives. These sad and sorry experiences test us greatly. It is hard to imagine a transgression or problem that is new or different from what we have seen over and over. Yet somehow it seems to happen each day—always there seems to be some sin or a twist to transgression that we have not encountered before.

After seeing so many experiences of the Saints being tested in every possible way, our own emotions are held under control better.

I want to share with you some of the personal insights that I have discovered always bring about an emotional response that generally involves tears of gladness or sorrow. The Church has a classic video production entitled How Rare a Possession. When it was previewed by the Brethren, I was away from the office on a mission tour. Later it was distributed to the stakes, and a special Sunday night was suggested when the Saints would come together and view it.

The meeting at our stake center was scheduled for 6:00 p.m. I returned home from a stake conference at 5:55 p.m. and went straight to the stake center. President Roylance invited me to sit on the stand. He said, "Would you mind saying a few words when the videotape is over?" Of course I said that I would.

When the time came in the meeting to watch the movie, I went down into the congregation. I will never forget that experience as long as I live. As Vincenzo di Francesca found the Book of Mormon discarded in a waste container—no title page, the name on the cover worn away, some of the pages covered with mold or some other substance—I had an emotional experience. As he cleaned the pages and began to read, my emotions heightened. Somehow my own great love for the Book of Mormon paralleled what I was seeing portrayed on the screen. As Vincenzo stood before the council with absolute integrity and would not put the Book of Mormon aside, burn it, nor cease to read it, I became very emotional.

His life was tried as he went to Australia, to war, back to Italy—always and everlastingly searching for the church that published the book with no name. When he finally discovered the Church, wrote to BYU for information, and then received a reply from President Heber J. Grant, I was more touched. Even after he found the Church, world conditions and other problems kept him from being baptized. Finally, as you recall, Dr. John A. Widtsoe of the Quorum of the Twelve arranged for the local mission president to travel to Vincenzo's village and baptize him. The fulfillment of the accumulated longing and disappointments for years rested upon me. I vicariously knew what that moment of baptism meant to this great man. The tears flowed—I could hardly stop crying. The temple endowment in his life and the conclusion that he died ten years after having gone to the temple, true to his conviction, were overwhelming to me.

As the videotape concluded and I was invited to speak, I had one of the most difficult times I have ever had behind a pulpit. Every particle of my soul was filled with an immense gratitude for God's love for His children. My words were emotional and fell far short of the feelings in my heart. I had been humbled to the dust of the earth and had not the ability to express the feelings of my soul.

Years ago the Church produced another movie entitled The Windows of Heaven. I shall never forget the Spirit I felt as I watched Francis Urry portray the part of Lorenzo Snow, this beloved, saintly prophet making his way on primitive transportation the great distance to St. George. It was another emotional experience—the marvelous stake president watering every corn plant by hand from a bucket because a prophet had promised that "the latter rains would come." It took great faith by people who had little else. When the rains came, the little family ran into the rain and knelt in thanks to God with upturned faces.

President Snow, learning of the rain, walking tiredly upstairs where he knelt by his bed and in grand but simple eloquence of gratitude prayed, "Father, please show me something I can do to express my great love for thee." We have experiences like that which are emotional and unforgettable.

Since we have served in the Philippines we have learned much and had many emotional experiences. After a stake conference I was privileged to drive a priesthood leader to his home. It took about two hours. On the way we stopped to visit one of the bishops and saw his humble home. You could put his home inside my office at work. Then we went on to the priesthood leader's home. He was so proud of it. It was old and had block walls and cement floors, and its four or five rooms were meagerly adorned by humble furniture. He introduced me to his family. I signed their scriptures upon request and felt as if I were on the holy ground of God Himself as I stood conversing with them. When I tried to tell my wife about it, I could hardly do it for the emotion. I have been in far more humble homes before many times. I do not know why I became so emotional, except that he was so terribly proud of his home. His entire home would have fit in the living and dining room of our apartment.

A new convert of the Church and her children had not attended Church for several months. The bishop rode out to her home in a jeepney. It took three separate rides to get there. He expected he would find her bitter and unresponsive to his visit and assumed they had gone back to their old ways. The woman warmly welcomed him and took him inside her sweet little nipa hut. She apologized for not coming to church. She said they could not afford the fare for the jeepneys for her and her children. However, she did want the bishop to know they were having family prayer, holding family home evening, studying the scriptures daily, living the Word of Wisdom, and saving their tithing. Then she again humbly apologized for not coming to church.

A recent birthday was my most emotional one. My wife, Merlene, had preceded me back to Salt Lake City. On 26 March, Gale and Carolu Wilson delivered a gift from my wife that she had them hold until my birthday. Along with it was a birthday card. It was simple and inexpensive.

Let me digress for a moment and say it is not easy to be the wife of a General Authority. Many major occurrences and problems happen when I am not around. Even when we are home, our time is not our own. We are called upon to move to distant states and lands. Merlene has had to speak in large regional meetings. Once when I told her she was invited to speak at a regional conference at BYU where there must have been 25,000 or more in the congregation, she said, "I would rather scrub the Marriott Center with a toothbrush than speak there."

The children are often expected to live "General Authority" lives. The whole family is constantly on display. It is not an easy life. I have often wondered if my wife had known when we got married what she knows now whether she would not have selected some wonderful, good man who would work eight hours a day, be home in the evenings, and go to church with her each Sunday.

Now back to the birthday card. I opened the envelope and read on the front of the card the simple phrase, "With all my love." Inside on the left-hand side were these words, "It means so much to have a love that seems just meant to be." On the right-hand page she had written, "Dear Vaughn." Then these words were on the card: "If I had to do it all over again, I know that I'd choose you. . . . Now that I know the joy that is you, all of the warmth and the love that is you, now that I know how good life can be having you there to share it with me, I know in my heart even more than before, I'd choose you all over again. Happy birthday!" Then these words were written by her: "I guess the greatest, sweetest lessons in this life I have learned from you in a Christ-like way. I love you dearly. Thank you for letting me go home early. Have a great day. All my love, Merlene."

I suppose the reason why it was such a special and emotional experience was that her feelings paralleled mine so exactly.

In the movie Chariots of Fire, Eric Lyddel, world-class sprinter from Great Britain, had chosen not to run on Sunday due to his reverence for God and his religion. He was unwilling to compromise his principles even for the leaders of the nation and love of his country. It was decided that he would run in a different event that was scheduled on a day other than Sunday. As he was coming to the mark to get ready to run, Jackson Schultz from the United States slipped a note into his hand that quoted from the Old Testament, "Those who honor God, God will honor." Integrity practiced truly is always an emotional experience for me. Integrity demands enough character and trust in self and God to stand alone in spite of the consequences. We all must do this in our personal lives, business affairs, and families. This is especially true when it costs us something, such as a promotion, image, friends, or future opportunities. There is little testing of our integrity when nothing is lost.

John Yardley is the stake president in Panguitch, Utah. He is a splendid young man who is absolutely pure in heart. He loves youth and children. He loves sports and activities. He came to Philmont Scout Ranch with his family in 1989, as I recall. During the training we showed a videotape produced by the Boy Scouts of America entitled A Time to Tell. It is about pedophilia. Often men's perverse behavior leads them to involve boys and young men in sexual indulgences. This videotape portrayed several case studies to demonstrate how a deviant adult might lure young men into a perverted sexual relationship.

In the middle of the videotape John Yardley got up and walked out of the room. After the meeting I said to him, "Is everything all right? Are you okay?" He responded, "I'm fine. I just couldn't stand to watch a man with those evil intentions, even on videotape." He said, "I was getting sick to my stomach; I had to leave." God bless the pure in heart. I became emotional as I thought about this sweet young stake president's purity.

We have a videotape of the movie Dead Poets Society. It has been edited for TV use. Robin Williams portrays an English teacher who awakens a sense of experiencing, feeling, and applying poetry in the lives of his students. Most of the students begin to grow and flourish, to feel and sense a great inner awakening of suppressed talents and abilities. But due to the suicide of a young man at school, Robin Williams becomes the whipping boy and is terminated from his teaching position. There are times in the movie when different characters are awakened in various ways. In each of those awakenings I became emotional. At the end of the movie, one young man dares to stand alone and honor his captain—the rejected teacher who had taught him to open his eyes and his heart. His action in turn brought courage to others, who then stand with him.

I wish I could put my finger on what it is that brings great rushes of emotion to my soul. But in my weakness with words, I stand too often helpless. Nonetheless, I would like to share some thoughts and hope that somehow you can feel what I am trying to say.

I always become emotional when I become aware of a truly repentant one. Bravery, loyalty, and integrity in spite of consequence touch me deeply, as do genuine acts of Christian service— noble and great people stopping to help a child, great leaders who are not above hard and menial labor to serve another; forgiveness by those who truly have something to forgive; someone rescuing another person from a humiliating experience; people who suffer in silence; seeing someone overcome a lifelong habit to join the Church or to become active; watching someone go through the conversion process; observing someone with the "prodigal's" father's compassion; standing alone for right when others buckle under pressure; defending someone who is being criticized but does not deserve the criticism; a truly humble, sincere prayer; sacred music; sincere, humble expressions of gratitude; great concepts and principles.

Abraham Lincoln declared that no enemy or foreign power would ever take one drink out of the Missouri River by force. This statement brings a flood of emotions to me. President Ezra Taft Benson said, "When the second coming takes place, the flag of the United States of America will still be flying over this land." Victor Hugo wrote, "The shepherd does not recoil from the diseased sheep." President Spencer W. Kimball declared, "Make no small plans; they have no magic to stir men's souls." Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "No other talent exceeds spirituality."

We might well determine that the things which touch us most deeply are the things which we value most. As we are involved in the arts, music, writing, painting, poetry, and the like, we reflect our innermost feelings in what we create. I wrote the following poem as I sat in a zone conference one day. It focuses on the things I love most.

Who Follow in the Steps He Trod

February 5, 1985

I met a man the other day Who faced endless problems on his way. His heart was sad, all hope was gone; He walked in night from dark to dawn. The emptiness that ruled his life Remained through all his toil and strife. The barren deserts seemed less bleak Than the life he lived from week to week.

The years were multiplied to ten— I met this selfsame man again. This time he seemed a different soul: In every way he had control. His step was light, his heart was gay, He always had kind words to say. He blessed the lives of all he met; Not one escaped his cast-out net.

The stranger was a welcome friend; Each broken heart he set to mend. Nor forgot he still the orphan boy Or the lonely widow who felt no joy. No heartsick soul escaped his glance, Nor did he leave their case to chance. His worldly wealth he soon spread thin; No troubled soul he took not in.

And so from dawn to dusk he shared; All who knew him said he cared. And so a life of little worth Became a servant to all the earth. This empty life we see thus changed Seemed almost by his God arranged. And true it is and ever so, The Master's touch on all below Who follow in the steps he trod Will turn the hearts of men to God.

I think we honor our Holy Father and Christ best by serving His children. He honors us most when we serve in a great or small way. The following words are put into verse. I wrote them to reflect my feelings of honoring my Master. He means everything in this world and more to me. I love Him and honor Him more than aught else in this world.

Master

His realms are those of the heavens; The earth is His footstool and more. His mercy is endless and eternal; His Godhood assured long before. His countenance shines with pure whiteness, His eyes like a fire of flame. He dwells in the Father's bosom; The Great I Am is His name.

His work is that of the priesthood; His glory is that of the sun. His wisdom is greater than wise men; His justice leaves nothing undone. His blessings pour down like the rain; His love is extended to all. He shepherds us through every trial; He cradles us close when we fall.

He heals the lame, blind, and leper; He brings peace to the deeply distressed. His work is with the orphan and widow; He seeks out the poor and oppressed. As the mediator of God, He's rejected;" His ministry was a perpetual strife. Gethsemane's garden was His great test; Golgotha's cross cost His life.

His blood flowed like wine from the winepress; His body was nailed on the cross. His heart sorrowed almost to breaking While angels mourned the great loss. God is His name and God He will be, His course never changing direction. His compassion, love, and long-suffering Reflect in His spotless perfection.

The Redeemer, the Atoner, our Savior, The Messiah, the Comforter, and Lord. The Only Begotten of the Father, The Holy One, our King, and "The Word." The Rock, our Teacher, our Mediator, The Exemplar, the Advocate, the Anointed. Jehovah, Lord God, and Light of the World, Our Master, Our Christ, God's appointed.
