Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Seven

To Pray through Christ, Our Advocate

As a young boy going to Primary, I was taught to pray. I did not know how to pray, but I accepted the fact that I should pray. Somehow in my young mind I felt to memorize the Lord's Prayer. Once it was memorized, I used His prayer as though it were mine. At night I would go out on our front porch, then look heavenward and say the Lord's Prayer. If I didn't feel that I was spiritual enough or that my prayer had gotten through, I would simply say it again.

One night I felt I was really praying and that the Lord's Prayer had become mine. All I did was add four additional words, something that multitudes of others have done. As I closed the Lord's Prayer, I said, "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever" and then added the words, "and forever and ever, amen." I suppose it was a feeling of reverence for God that I was offering in my young mind by adding "and forever and ever."

Thank goodness for prayers that lift us upward even when we are unskilled and untrained but reverent.

During World War II, great lessons were learned in 1943 and 1944. I was a deacon. Many of the young men who had sat at the sacrament table had been drafted or had joined the armed services. The bishopric had a framed board with the names of all of the men and women who were in the military. When a young man was killed in action, a gold star was placed by his name; a white star was placed if he was missing in action; and a red star if he was wounded. Every Sunday I would check out the board, soberly and humbly as any twelve- or thirteen-year-old boy might do. The names represented men and women whom I loved and looked up to. I always felt a deep, penetrating hurt when I would see a new gold, white, or red star by a name.

The Sunday before Thanksgiving a member of our bishopric came to the quorum meeting. He talked about the war and about "our boys" in the service, and then he went to the blackboard. He said, "I hope every young man in this quorum, along with his family, will have a special Thanksgiving prayer on Thursday." Then he asked us what we should express thanks for in our prayer. Of course we all said our country, our freedom; and then individually we made other suggestions, such as the men and women fighting for our country, food, shelter, our flag, and so on. At the close of his discussion, this good man said, "We ought to all remember these things in our Thanksgiving prayer on Thursday."

My heart ached; we had never said a prayer or blessing of any kind in our home. I thought, "Well, I guess we can't have a Thanksgiving prayer at our house." I knew I was too timid and shy to suggest it.

In those days sacrament meeting was at six-thirty on Sunday evening. We had a wonderful sacrament meeting, mostly directed toward Thanksgiving. Near the close of the meeting, our good and wonderful bishop stood up. He talked about our abundant blessings and about the men and women from the ward who were in the military. He tenderly talked about those men who had lost their lives, the wounded, and the missing in action. I remember he talked about liberty and freedom and our country; and then he said, "I hope every single family in this ward will bow in prayer before their Thanksgiving dinner and express gratitude for all we have and this great country and pray that God will help keep us free."

His talk caused a burning desire to pray like I had never felt before. I knew it was hopeless. How could we pray? My dad would probably come home inebriated, if he even came home. I hardly slept Sunday night, worrying about how we could have prayer. It bothered me all day Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. Wednesday night my dad did not come home until the middle of the night—drunk. There was a terrible quarrel. That seemed to destroy all hope of having a prayer.

The next morning my four brothers and I went to a nearby field where we could dig a deep hole to work up a terrific appetite. We did not eat breakfast so that we would really be able to stow away the food. With every shovelful of dirt I threw out of the hole, I thought about how we could possibly have a Thanksgiving prayer. I remember thinking that my older brother was brave and not as shy, and maybe he would suggest it. I realize now he probably felt as shy and awkward about asking to pray as I did. We worked up a tremendous appetite.

About two-thirty in the afternoon, our mom called us home and said that dinner was ready. Somehow we had a turkey, mashed potatoes and gravy, hot rolls, yams, dressing, and all else. We all got cleaned up and sat down around the table. Mom and Dad were not speaking to each other. I remember thinking, "Please, God, let us have a prayer. Please somehow let us do what our bishop asked us to do." The food was passed around the table, and then all of a sudden everyone just started to eat. It was too late. I didn't want to eat; I wasn't hungry. I wanted to pray as much as I have ever wanted anything in my life.

That day I made a commitment that no son or daughter of mine would ever want to pray for Thanksgiving and not have that privilege and blessing. As you can imagine, every Thanksgiving prayer is special at our home. We have a twenty-minute program to sing and talk about our country and our freedoms, and then we have a Thanksgiving prayer.

Prayer is not without its hazards, however. Through the years my wife and I and our children have prayed together. One night when Merlene and I were kneeling beside our bed saying our prayers, I was voice—and I was exhausted. Have you ever gone to sleep when you were voice during a prayer? Well, I did on this night. All of a sudden I awoke and heard Merlene laughing. With all the dignity I could muster, I concluded our prayer. When I finished, I asked her, "What were you laughing at?" She said, "When I heard you say 'and God bless Paul [our youngest son] with life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,' I knew you were gone."

As a young man I memorized the Sermon on the Mount. The Sermon on the Mount is the greatest sermon ever given. When you memorize something, it is as though it becomes part of you. The difficulty is in making time to regularly review all you memorize so it is not slowly forgotten. Forty years later I still essentially have the Sermon on the Mount memorized, although it might not be in the correct order; however, its principles and message are still fresh in my mind.

In this great and wonderful message, the Master said this about prayer:

And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.

But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.

But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.

After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.

Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.

And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.

For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you:

But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. (Matthew 6:5-15.)

When we pray in secret, "the Father seeth in secret and shall reward [us] openly." The Lord expressly instructs us not to use "vain repetitions, as the heathen," and I would add "as some Christians do," "for they think they will be heard for their much speaking." It sounds as if the Master has two concerns about repetition. The first is vain repetition. I assume that this refers to saying the same thing in every prayer without thought or feeling. The poet said:

You might as well pray to a God of stone As offer to the living God a prayer of words alone.

In any conversation, who would have much interest if the same phrases and statements were made over and over again without even concentrating the mind on them? I have memorized much—verses, scripture, poetry, and the like. I can rehearse them to myself and think other thoughts at the same time. While my mind is reviewing one thing, I find that I can also consider what I am going to rehearse next or review something on my schedule. (Sometimes if I do this too intensely, I find myself mentally stumbling over what I am rehearsing.) I think we have all had the experience of saying one thing and thinking something else. Unfortunately, our prayers can be much like that. We may be saying the words in a prayer, but much of our concentration is elsewhere. Sometimes we cannot remember whether we even prayed.

It has been my experience that I often pray more thoughtfully in public. This is especially true when I have been called upon to pray at general conference or in meetings with the other General Authorities. The reason why the Savior disapproved of the hypocrites' prayers, it appears, was that their motivation was wrong: "They love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men." (Matthew 5:5.) Prayers we offer publicly are, for most of us, a real challenge. I think we are not so much interested in impressing people as in trying not to be embarrassed or thoughtless. In the Church, I firmly believe that few prayers are offered with the intent of impressing people more than God. Perhaps this is because we have the true concept of God and His Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ. When we have God's image in our mind while we are praying, we are more thoughtful, humble, meek, and charitable. As we close our prayers in the name of Jesus Christ and we consider that He is our Master, our Advocate, the one spotless Lamb in all of humanity, then vanity and pride flee from us.

We ought to be aware of our prayers when we pray publicly. We should consider our thoughts and purposes and make certain we pray in reverent humility. We have not instructed the Saints much in public prayer. There is a need to teach a few principles. Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "The present practice in the Church is the interpretation of the doctrine." Following are guidelines to consider when we pray in conferences, sacrament meetings, and other public or church activities:

Â Prayers in sacrament meeting and stake conference should generally not exceed two minutes.

Â We do not commence our prayers with the statement "Let us pray."

Â We specifically pray for the fulfillment of the purposes of that particular meeting, that is, we pray that we will partake of the sacrament worthily, that the speakers will be inspired, that we will desire to go to the temple, or that we will better prepare for missions. We want to pray for the members and those who have special needs. We need to be aware of the time. Prayer is not a sermon or a call to repentance. It is a sacred communication with God.

Â We avoid the more familiar terms of you and your. When we address Deity in prayer, we use Thee, Thou, Thy, Thine. Addressing God our Father in this way shows great respect and reverence.

Â The person giving the opening prayer should be on the stand at the commencement of the meeting.

Â The congregation should say a loud amen at the conclusion of a talk, sermon, or prayer. President Harold B. Lee said, "It is spiritual applause." A loud amen is our acceptance and our involvement in the prayer. The person saying the prayer is praying in behalf of all of those who are in attendance.

Now, the Lord taught us to pray in secret. What happens to us when we pray in secret? First, our faith is put to the test. How foolish people would feel who pray alone and really do not believe in God. We can pray in public and people might think we believe, but praying alone takes faith. When we pray alone, there is no one to impress with our command of the language, with our beautiful phrases or eloquence. We simply talk with a loving, interested Father about what is troubling us most. We take problems that no one else, not another living soul, can help us with. We become like little children, feeling a dependence and need for someone wiser and with power and influence. We do not have to worry about embarrassment if our prayers are not answered the way we think they should be, because only we and God know for what we pray. When tears come, there is no embarrassment. We can be totally honest, knowing that we cannot lie to or deceive the Spirit or God. He knows us for our real worth. He knows who and what we really are, not what we seem to be. When we have personal problems or struggles, we can pray and know that these things are kept totally confidential. We can discuss our weaknesses, our sins, our frustrations, our needs, and know that He will listen and respond.

We can learn a great deal about a person by the way he or she prays in private. A hurried, get-it-done attitude in private prayer shows a lack of reverence for God and demonstrates that perhaps that person does pray to be heard of men.

The hymn recalls, "There is an hour of peace and rest, unmarred by earthly care; 'tis when before the Lord I go, and kneel in secret prayer." The last verse reminds us of the comfort we receive: "When thorns are strewn along my path, and foes my feet ensnare, my Savior to my aid will come, if sought in secret prayer." (Hans Peterson, "Secret Prayer," Hymns, no. 144.)

The Lord also taught the righteous Nephites who had gathered at the temple in Bountiful how to pray, as recorded in 3 Nephi 13:9: "Our Father who art in heaven." With our understanding, we pray "who art in heaven," not "which art in heaven" (see Matthew 6:9). Our concept of God teaches us this simple truth. Continuing, we pray, "Hallowed be thy name." In Matthew the phrase "Thy kingdom come" precedes "Thy will be done," but this phrase is missing in 3 Nephi. It commences instead, "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." (Verse 10.) What a blessing if all people truly prayed that God's will would be done on earth! That will happen sometime in the not-too-distant future. What a glorious day that will be! This sentence also teaches us about heaven. God's will is done in heaven. What a blessing to know that God, with absolute knowledge and wisdom, who understands justice and mercy, will have His will done in heaven.

We are taught in Matthew to pray for food: "Give us this day our daily bread." (Verse 11.) This is not included in 3 Nephi. One woman I met in the Philippines said, "I am glad I am poor; I have to depend on God every day to provide food for my family." It is appropriate to pray for food.

"And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." (Verse 12.) Much of the heartache in the world and in the Church comes to those who are unable to do this. We pray "forgive us our debts" and leave the rest of the sentence unspoken.

In the Sermon on the Mount, the Savior taught, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." (Matthew 5:7.) And in this dispensation, He further stated, "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D&C 64:10.) This is a beautiful phrase in the prayer, "Forgive us our debts," the qualifier being "as we forgive our debtors."

"And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." (Verse 13.) Joseph Smith corrected the phrase to read "and suffer us not to be led into temptation." It is actually exactly the same in 3 Nephi 13:12 as in Matthew. It should not test anyone's faith but should be an additional witness of the Book of Mormon. The Savior gave identical counsel on both continents. Joseph's translation simply clarifies it for us.

Next the Savior taught that we need to pray to be delivered from evil. In Mosiah 4:29, King Benjamin instructs, "And finally, I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many that I cannot number them." Then in verse 30 he counsels, "Watch yourselves, and your thoughts, and your words, and your deeds, and observe the commandments of God, and continue in the faith." In this one phrase, "Deliver us from evil," we ask the Lord to keep us from all the ways we may sin.

Finally the Master gives us the assurance of the authority of God: "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever." (Verse 13.) How small we are in our relationship to Him, and yet we are His children with seeds of divinity and potentiality in us to become like Him. His love for us is eternal and limitless; it is unconditional and will reach out to all.

The Lord's Prayer is simple yet profound. A child can understand its phrases. The intellectual can be challenged by its implications and the profound truths found therein.

James Montgomery seems to catch the spirit of humble prayer in these words:

Prayer is the soul's sincere desire, Uttered or unexpressed, The motion of a hidden fire That trembles in the breast.

Prayer is the burden of a sigh, The falling of a tear, The upward glancing of an eye When none but God is near. ("Prayer Is the Soul's Sincere Desire," Hymns, no. 145.)

What a marvelous spiritual revival we would have if the Saints would pray sincerely and humbly to God—the One Being in all of eternity who is available to every soul who walks the earth, every moment of every day. None are exempt save it be by their conduct and choosing. Oh, how we ought to love and worship our God and His Son. Oh, what an answer to the trials, frustrations, and perplexities of life. Peace and blessings come to the contrite soul who approaches God with a broken heart.

This is also what the Savior taught in the parable of the two men who went up to the temple to pray, describing the publican as "standing afar off, [he] would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner."

The Lord described this man as going "down to his house justified." (Luke 18:13-14.)

Let us be most earnest, humble, sincere, forgiving, and filled with charity as we pray. Peace will come, answers will be given, promises will be fulfilled; and the soul will be satisfied. Prayer is the righteous soul's sincere desire.
