Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Eight

Christ, the Light of Worlds without Number

I'd like to begin this chapter with a review of some figures discussed in an earlier chapter. (See chapter 4, "Who Is This Jesus?") One million seconds is twelve days. One billion seconds is thirty-two years, and a trillion seconds is 32,000 years. With the naked eye we can see approximately 5,000 stars on a clear night when there is no moon. With a pair of binoculars we can see nearly 50,000 stars. Using a high-powered telescope we can see beyond the Milky Way galaxy. The earth is part of the Milky Way galaxy. We are on the far outside edge. Astronomers tell us that the Milky Way galaxy has 600 billion stars and is something like 400 billion miles across. They have identified twenty-one other galaxies as large as the Milky Way and suggest there may be as many as hundreds of billions of galaxies. The mind of man can hardly wrap itself around such thoughts or possibilities.

W. W. Phelps understood in a profound way what the world does not yet understand. Consider the powerful concepts in his lyrics:

If you could hie to Kolob In the twinkling of an eye, And then continue onward With that same speed to fly, Do you think that you could ever, Through all eternity, Find out the generation Where Gods began to be?

Or see the grand beginning, Where space did not extend? Or view the last creation, Where Gods and matter end? Methinks the Spirit whispers," "No man has found 'pure space,' Nor seen the outside curtains, Where nothing has a place."

The works of God continue, And worlds and lives abound; Improvement and progression Have one eternal round. There is no end to matter; There is no end to space; There is no end to spirit; There is no end to race. ("If You Could Hie to Kolob," Hymns, no. 284.)

The Hubble telescope can probe 14 billion light years into space. Imagine that! Consider that light travels at 186,000 miles a second. Multiply 186,000 by 60 seconds by 60 minutes by 24 hours by 365.25 days, and that is one light year. Do you know how far 14 billion light years actually is? One day I figured it out. It is approximately 82 trillion, 175 billion million actual miles, or almost 900,000 times the distance to the sun. The sun is 93,000,000 miles from the earth.

Scientists and astronomers have supposedly been able to identify black holes. The Washington Post stated, "A black hole is thought to be a collapsing object (such as a star) whose gravitational pull is so powerful that nothing—not even light—can come out again once it has crossed the hole's threshold." The same article suggests, "Evidence reveals a black hole 3 million times the mass of the sun lurking in earth's backyard." The article claims that the Hubble telescope and the Compton gamma ray observatory have used advanced technology to reveal evidence of at least a dozen black holes. (Pacific Stars and Stripes, June 2, 1992.)

The prophets Enoch, Abraham, and Joseph Smith have unquestionably understood more about the celestial realms of the extensive heavens than all the noted astronomers from time immemorial. Imagine if we could discern the wonders of the universe with spiritual eyes aided by the powers of God. What have the prophets known? What have they understood?

In section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Prophet Joseph recorded "the Lord's message of peace to us," also called "the olive leaf." In this great revelation we begin to discern the smallest part of the eternal power and authority of the Savior, both in this world and the galaxies beyond. It is difficult for us to comprehend the majesty of Christ. As we consider galaxies and stars, light and black holes, the earth and other planets, we must consider the power of Him who made them.

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth;

Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (D&C 88:6-13.)

No wonder we come to temples for light and knowledge. Temples are "Holiness to the Lord" edifices dedicated to the Savior. He is "the light of the sun, the moon, and the stars, and the very power thereof by which they were made." Imagine the "light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, by which all things are governed, even by the power of God."

Considering the source of all truth and light, is it possible that truth can have a tangible effect upon us? It does. "The Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit." (D&C 84:46.)

Thus we see that light cleaveth unto light and truth cleaveth unto truth. Mankind can receive light. The Lord said, " And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light." (D&C 88:67.) In Proverbs we read that "the spirit of man is the candle of the Lord." (Proverbs 20:27.) Righteous men and women do give off an aura of light. At a funeral service once I heard President Hugh B. Brown say, "Death is not the end; it is putting out the candle because the dawn has come." Compare the light of a candle to the immensity and glory of the dawning of a new day. Surely our light is limited compared to the light of Christ; nevertheless, He said to His disciples, "Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:14-16.)

We begin to understand how light works when we have "spiritually been born of God . . . [and] received his image in [our] countenance." (Alma 5:14.)

Those who are worthy when they attend the temple have His image in their countenance. His light is in them and through them. When they choose to be obedient, to sustain and follow the prophets of the living God, the light reaches into their marital relations, family responsibilities, Church callings, and workday activities.

The light and understanding that our temples provide regarding marriage alone are wonderful. A young couple gave birth to a son. They named him "Amazing," hoping that somehow he would live up to his name and do something great. Actually, he never did. In fact, all that he did was rather mundane. He never really accomplished anything great. He married, lived on the family farm, raised a family, and was the brunt of jokes all his life because of his name.

Finally, as he grew old, he said to his wife, "When I die, please do not put my name on the gravemarker; maybe that will stop all the jokes." Later he died, and she was true to her promise but decided she ought to have something inscribed. She had them put, "Here lies a man who for sixty years loved and was faithful to his wife." And now people read the inscription, then point and say, "That's amazing." Marriages in the temple endure not just for sixty years but for an eternity.

That person who responds to and is filled with the light of Christ can be a marvelous influence for good. "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.) We receive light and truth in the holy temples, not only through the endowment but also from the light and intelligence that flow naturally to us as we seek the "blessings of the fathers." (Abraham 1:2.)

Light comes to us from God in many ways. In the dedicatory prayer at the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith prayed (which prayer was given to him by revelation): "And in a manner that we may be found worthy, in thy sight, to secure a fulfillment of the promises which thou hast made unto us, thy people, in the revelations given unto us; That thy glory may rest down upon thy people, and upon this thy house, which we now dedicate to thee, that it may be sanctified and consecrated to be holy, and that thy holy presence may be continually in this house." (D&C 109:11-12.)

Consider the words that increase our light and knowledge such as revelation, glory, intelligence, glorious tidings, truth, holiness, shine forth as fair as the moon and clear as the sun; our garments may be made pure, spotless, white; and even the bright shining seraphs. Seraphim are angelic beings mentioned in Isaiah's vision. Cherubim, according to the LDS Bible Dictionary, are figures representing heavenly creatures. Angels, including cherubim and seraphim, are beings of light.

Orson F. Whitney said:

Latter-day Saints, it was for this purpose that you gathered to Zion. Young men and young women of this people, it was for this purpose that you were born upon this favored land, the land upon which God intends to build the city of Zion, to erect His holy Temple, upon which the glory of God will rest, and reflect from the towers of the city, from the spires of the Temple, from the hearts and minds of the pure, the noble and the righteous, to give joy to all the world. Then will be fulfilled the words of the Prophet Isaiah, who spake concerning Zion:

"Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising." (Isaiah 60:1-3.)

This is no dream, brethren and sisters. It is no whim or fancy of men. It is an inspired utterance, the heaven-born thought of a holy man of God, who spake as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And this is a portion of the destiny of this people—to build up such a Zion; and not only to build a city—that I conceive to be a comparatively insignificant portion of the great mission devolving upon us—but to prepare a people, the pure in heart, for the coming of the Lord Jesus to reign in His glory. ("Zion and Her Redemption," Discourse, September 22, 1889.)

In my mind I see the darkness of the whole earth and one great shining city of light, a city that will be a light to the world. The light will start with our temples and radiate into the hearts of the people, and this people will then be a light to the world. That city will be Salt Lake City and its suburbs—east, west, north, and south. There is sublime joy as we obtain light. The law of the Lord shall go forth from Zion through His holy prophets and apostles, and none shall prevail against them. The faithful Saints will gather as modern Israel and dispel the darkness of the world. Truly—

The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day, Majestic rises on the world. (Parley P. Pratt, "The Morning Breaks," Hymns, no. 1)

I thank God for the light I have received from the prophets, from the Book of Mormon, from the commandments, and from our "Holiness to the Lord" edifices. This is God's work, and all is light and truth through His Holy Son, Jesus the Christ.
