Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Nine

The Incomparable Christ, His Disciples, and Easter Morn

One dimension of those who truly possess charity is that they will come to the aid of those who are humiliated, embarrassed, shy, or timid.

When our son Paul was a senior high school student, he was running for senior class president. One day during the lunch hour, a student came through the lunch line at the cafeteria. As she came to the dining room, she tripped and fell into her tray of food. Many of the students around her began to laugh and make comments. It was an extremely humiliating experience. Paul went to her, helped her up, wiped off her clothes, reached into his pocket, and gave her his dollar for lunch money. He told her that he would clean up the floor and suggested she go get another tray of food. The student left the place of embarrassment, and Paul cleaned up the mess. We assume he went without lunch that day.

Paul never told us about this experience; we got a phone call from a mother in our ward whose daughter had seen it take place. I was humbled and felt I would rather have Paul do that any day than be elected to a position based largely on popularity and school politics.

In a special book I have, Happy Homes and the Hearts That Make Them, Samuel Smiles relates an experience in the life of Sir Walter Scott.

Sir Walter Scott was a gentleman's gentleman. He was successful and had a marvelous reputation. Men of high position enjoyed being with him and sought him out. He made them feel important and always lifted those with whom he met or conversed. Women of any station felt at ease with him and secure in his presence. People gravitated to him. Nor was it just adults; youth and children were likewise attracted to this noble man and never felt intimidated or ill at ease. They loved being with him, and he communicated on their level with such elegant simplicity that they adored him.

Someone asked him how it was that he had such a special way with everyone and anyone he met. Said the inquirer, " You must have had a wonderful mother who taught you to love and enjoy people." Sir Walter Scott confessed that he had a wonderful mother but said that he had learned how to love and serve people from an experience in his boyhood. A stray dog was in the neighborhood. Young Walter decided he would scare it away. He picked up a large stone and threw it at the dog. He had not intended to hit the dog but rather to frighten it. The rock hit one of the dog's legs and broke it. The dog fell to its knees, crawled up to young Walter, and licked his shoes. He learned from a stray dog the great lesson of his feelings for people. (P. 515.)

Vorris Tenney, a former mission president and descendant of Jacob Hamblin, told us the following experience as related by Jacob Hamblin, I believe:

A little girl, a daughter of a family crossing the plains, had one precious possession that she loved with all her heart. It was a stick doll. The mother had made a little dress and bonnet for it. She held it to her bosom, she cradled and cuddled it constantly. One morning before the wagons began to move, the little girl played with her doll, then she put it to sleep in a little bed of pine branches and leaves. She forgot the doll as the wagons rolled westward. That night she cried uncontrollably. The father came back to her. He took her in his arms and kissed her and loved her and said, "Don't worry, honey; I will go back and get your doll." He left immediately and walked the 15 miles back to retrieve her doll and then returned the 15 miles and arrived back to the wagon train just before dawn. He presented his daughter with her doll and prepared to "move out" with the rest of the wagon train.

The greatness in that story comes as you ponder the situation. Here was a man, a real pioneer, who would have worked and walked almost to exhaustion every single day. When we become exhausted and fatigue takes over, our bodies plead for rest. Mentally we waver; we lack enthusiasm, strength, and commitment; we need rest.

The doll was of little economic value—a substitute could have been made. A great deal of justifiable rationalization could have been considered. How deep is the love of a sweet, gentle father who would walk thirty miles when he was exhausted to soothe his brokenhearted little daughter! This is one of the sweet stories of sacrifice that will never make it into the popular history books where great and mighty deeds are recorded. But I promise you it will be emblazoned in gold on Judgment Day, and a little girl who grew up will never forget a father's love for her.

All of these examples of love, charity, and service lead into why we celebrate Easter. Christ's entire ministry came to one pivotal moment in time, a time that would include Gethsemane, scourging, abuse, scorn, and Golgotha's cross. The above are examples of wonderful Saints who suffer and sacrifice following His lonely example.

Easter morning is the one time when heaven's veil seems most transparent. The celebration of the Resurrection is as irresistible as the dawning of a new day. President Ezra Taft Benson stated, "The greatest events of history are those that affect the greatest number for the longest periods. By this standard, no event could be more important to individuals or nations than the resurrection of the Master." (Come Unto Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983], p. 4.) The Resurrection involves all mankind. Easter Sunday is a time of triumph and jubilation. It is a time of rejoicing and celebration. It is a time of renewed life springing forth. Buds burst forth from branches in their time of awakening. Most of us, the believer and unbeliever alike, feel something special about Easter. It may well be that the Light of Christ that enlightens every person brings remembrance to our spirits of that glorious day of our Lord's resurrection.

On that day nearly two millennia ago, surely all the hosts of heaven—those who had not yet come to earth as well as those who had already experienced mortality—shouted with eternal praises for our Lord Jehovah. The Resurrection is of such consequence that every spiritual child of God must knowingly and unknowingly feel a swelling of rapture. The gift is to all.

On Easter morning we wash and scrub ourselves clean, we put on our best—sometimes a new Easter outfit—and we go to church. Always to the believer, Easter Sunday is a memorable one. We prepare for Easter. Now contemplate with me the Master's preparation.

Isaiah foretold the Resurrection: "He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces." (Isaiah 25:8.) Job, in his powerful testimony, proclaimed words that have endured through the centuries: "Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book! That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever! For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God." (Job 19:23-26.)

Job used the term redeemer. He knew that Jesus would redeem us from the grave. He also knew that he (Job) would see this Christ in the latter days.

During the latter part of His ministry, the Savior knew that His time was short. "From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day." (Matthew 16:21.)

We cannot fathom the mind of the Christ, but we sense again a loneliness and abandonment which He must have felt during His final hours. He prophesied that He would be betrayed and be crucified. (See Matthew 20:19.) Days before the crucifixion took place, He told of the manner of death He would suffer. As He pondered the things that would transpire in the last hours of His life, it appears that He was troubled most by His false accusers, including Judas, the chief priest, and the scribes. (See Matthew 20:18.)

The Master could have been preoccupied with the coming, ominous events that would test even the Son of God. Somehow in the compression of the activities during the Master's final hours, He still reached out with compassion.

As the company left Jericho, two blind men sitting by the wayside heard that Jesus had passed. They cried out, "Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. And the multitude rebuked them, . . . but they cried the more saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you? They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight." (Matthew 20:30-34.)

We assume these men had been blind from birth. Imagine that the first person they saw after having received their sight was the Son of God. Consider the dual sensation of being able to see and then beholding the Christ. The Savior knew of their suffering, worthiness, and simple faith. He granted the blessing immediately. Someone said, "You can see further through a teardrop than a telescope." Surely joy and tears, happiness and exquisite relief rushed into their souls. The final sentence in Matthew 20 states, "And they [the two blind men] followed him."

Now, Jesus' triumphal entry to Jerusalem was next. A great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees and strewed them in the way.

The throngs and multitude of people went before Him, and others followed. All cried out in honor of Him, "Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest." (Matthew 21:9.) We refer to this as His triumphal entry into Jerusalem. The believers banded together to declare their allegiance and to call Him the prophet of Nazareth. (Verse 11.) His indignation against the profiteers, "all them that sold and bought in the temple" (verse 12), caused Him to overthrow the tables of the moneychangers and other merchants. This temple was His holy house, a "Holiness to the Lord" edifice. We imagine the power of the rebuke by the lawful owner and the subsequent anger of those who had perverted the rites of the temple. They would become enemies.

However, "the blind and the lame came to him in the temple" and were healed. (Verse 14.) "The chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna." (Verse 15.) Such an experience should melt the heart of the hardest disbeliever. Imagine the majesty of the miracle of seeing the lame walk and the blind see. What profound joy to those healed as well as their families and loved ones, yet the chief priests and scribes were extremely displeased. Satan had power over them, and they resented the miracles Jesus wrought.

Jesus later described those scribes and Pharisees. He said they "sit in Moses' seat" (Matthew 23:2), which "connotes a chair of judgment and instruction" (footnote 2b in the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible). He further said, "They bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers." (Verse 4.) Further, they do works to be seen of men, love the uppermost rooms and the chief seats, and shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; they devour widows' houses, and for pretence make long prayers, act as hypocrites who pay tithing but neglect the weightier matters, strain at a goat and swallow a camel, and commit extortion and excess. Incredibly, the Master still loves those listed above. What does it take to understand and comprehend the condescensions of Christ? He enabled every soul who ever lives in this second estate to be resurrected—a universal gift of God provided through His justice and mercy.

The Master gave His life, a spotless offering, for all mankind. Even sons of perdition will be resurrected. We proclaim it is only just that men should not be held accountable for Adam's transgression—thus the Atonement and Crucifixion, leading to the full redemption of the Fall for all humanity. We cannot comprehend this priceless gift. If we did, we would surely stand in absolute awe at the wonders of the Resurrection. It is glorious to think of a resurrected body free from pain, illness, disease, aging, or deformity. There must be other side benefits to the Resurrection that would thrill us. With a resurrected body, our minds will undoubtedly function better; our comprehension, understanding, memory, recollection, knowledge, retention, intelligence, and wisdom will all be enhanced.

With a resurrected body, we will be relieved of the present limitations placed on us; we will move and act and feel quicker, better, and more deeply. Our love and compassion will be expanded; our fears and frustrations will be lessened. All of our senses of touch, sight, hearing, tasting, and smelling will improve beyond our comprehension. Life in a resurrected body will be glorious.

These gifts all come from a loving Christ. Even those who inherit the telestial kingdom would hardly dare believe the joys and beauties that await them by and by. Even those who ridiculed and rejected their Savior will have the glorious blessing of resurrection.

The final hours of the Master's life bring much into focus for His disciples. The sacrament was instituted by the Lord Himself. Of all the ordinances in the Church, baptism and partaking of the sacrament tie most closely to the Atonement. Would to God that every member of this Church could understand the sacramental ordinance. Those who live the gospel from week to week, who do not commit transgressions serious enough to bring them before a common judge, have a continuous opportunity to be forgiven. All who partake of the sacrament with humble hearts and contrite spirits, who may have erred or offended during the week, can find forgiveness. Of course, repentance is also required to obtain forgiveness for each sin. Each member who renews his or her covenants through the sacrament feels the healing blessing of forgiveness. Each week we strive for a slightly loftier level of Christ-like living. We need not be baptized every year or two to receive continued forgiveness. We need only approach the sacramental ordinance in a contrite, repentant, humble way in order to receive the forgiveness we desire.

In his final hours, the Master washed the feet of His apostles, including Judas.

Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am.

If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet.

For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. (John 13:13-16.)

How often have we read the words "a new commandment I give unto you"? The Ten Commandments had sounded down through the millennia since Moses' time, and now an additional commandment came from the Master: "That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another." (John 13:34.)

Only those who are true possessors of charity can measure up to the full stature of this new commandment. This is the commandment that lifts us to the more noble and virtuous life. We cannot nor ever will love one another as He has loved us until we exercise in our own lives the full dimensions of charity. Those who practice charity may not always receive the promised benefits and ultimate successes. Ours is a different time schedule, but by and by we will all learn and know that "charity never faileth." (1 Corinthians 13:8.) The pure love of Christ will eventually triumph over all the evils, including power, pride, boasting, worldly acclaim, cruelty, wars, perversion, sadness, and heartache. The Lord through His servants has promised that charity will never fail. One day charity, the pure love of Christ, will triumph over all the world. Those who are possessors of charity will triumph over all evil and will dwell with the author of this "new commandment" forever and forever.

Before the Master's mortal life was over, He would teach his disciples of His Father's house and the many mansions that He would prepare for them. He promised that the Comforter whom the Father would send would teach them all things and bring all things to their remembrance. Again, the Holy Ghost was sent in His name. Is it little wonder the penalty is so severe for those who deny the Holy Ghost?

The Master taught them about peace, the true vine, greater love, prayer and intercession, unity, and sanctification; then the hour for Gethsemane arrived. He went over the brook Kedron, where there was a garden into which He entered. It is doubtful that any living soul will ever comprehend the least particle of suffering in Gethsemane. The collective balance of all of the evil, hurt, suffering, illnesses, and sicknesses of every being was on one arm of the scale demanding justice; and Jesus, the Son of God, satisfying every slightest demand of that justice, was on the other. Justice was satisfied for all those who truly come unto Him and keep His commandments. There is hardly any more beautiful concept on the earth than mercy and justice fully satisfied, fulfilled, and extended to the righteous.

President J. Reuben Clark said in essence that when the Lord metes out punishment for the things we do wrong, He will mete out the least possible punishment to satisfy justice, and when He metes out blessings for the things we do right, He will mete out the greatest blessings possible. (Conference Report, April 1958, pp. 48-49.)

As discussed elsewhere in this book, Gethsemane was the most severe experience of pain, suffering, and mental agony ever experienced. (See chapter 3, "The Master, the Winepress, and Us.") The demands physically, mentally, and spiritually were incomparable to any ever known in eternity. The magnificent Christ not only endured the physical trials, more than man can bear, but indeed also had reserve strength to continue through the last trying hours of His life. He was examined, mistreated, abused, scourged, mocked, and judged. His final treading of the winepress came on the cross. Compassion was His even in the darkest hour of His life. It was, as Shakespeare said, "the thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to" (Hamlet 3.1.62-63) or, as Crowell stated, "All the ills that men endure." It was all this and much, much more. Finally, it was finished. Jesus Christ, Jehovah, Lord God, laid down His life of His own volition.

But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre,

And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.

And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.

And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.

Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.

Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni; which is to say, Master.

Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God. (John 20:11-17.)

The Son of God was the firstfruits of the Resurrection. On Easter morning we have a jubilee celebration in honor of Him. Every soul that ever has or will live will follow Him and be resurrected to some state of glory forever and ever. President Benson declared, "No event could be more important to individuals or nations than the resurrection of the Master."

Easter's Resurrection

The day grew dark and dreary, the earth a shudder gave. The temple veil was rent in twain; the elements did rave. A torn and bruised and battered body hung on a lonely cross, While blood and sweat with holy tears bore witness of the loss. Brutal men with evil thorns bedecked His head with crown. Crude soldiers bartered for His robe, still others kneeled down. Some friends stood beneath the cross, while others stood afar. The door of death was near at hand, resurrection's door ajar. Evil and vicious men rejoiced; holy men in sorrow bowed. The Father's Spirit had withdrawn as if behind a shroud. With vinegar and gall they ministered, nor friends did intercede. They pierced his side with sharpened sword, an ugly final deed. Beyond all pain His body hung; the Son of God was dead. Disciples wept in silence; His blood was scarlet red. But rise again He promised, and rise again He did. All He had been commanded, all His father bid. Withholding naught, nor pride, nor pain, nor even life was spared, Nor glory did He ever seek, nor was His suffering shared. The resurrected Christ, the risen Lord, our King of kings and God— For all will follow Him and find the resurrection's path He trod.

Christ has risen, hope is renewed, death's grip has lost its power, and man will live again. Hosanna, hosanna to God and to the spotless incomparable Savior of the world.
