Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

PART TWO

OUR MODEL

Chapter Ten

His Mercy Endureth Forever

Every Latter-day Saint who has come to know the Master understands fully the statement in James 5:11 "that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy." In this sense, pitiful does not mean "a person or thing deserving of pity," as we tend to think; rather, in the LDS edition of the Bible, the footnote connected to the word pitiful directs the reader to the entry "Compassion" in the Topical Guide.

Never was an act of mercy so eternally compassionate as Jesus Christ's atonement and His suffering on the cross. That act of love and mercy was the single most significant extension of mercy—and pity, if you will—in all of eternity. It was absolutely essential to our eternal joy and destiny.

Amulek taught:

And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice. (Alma 34:15-16.)

Amulek was quick to remind us that mercy can satisfy the demands of justice only as we exercise faith unto repentance. In chapter 2 we examined justice according to the supreme goodness of God. I thank God every day of my life for justice. Alma helps us see properly the balance between justice and mercy:

And now, there was no means to reclaim men from this fallen state, which man had brought upon himself because of his own disobedience;

Therefore, according to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God. (Alma 42:12-13.)

Then the prophet declared: "And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also." (Verse 15.)

What a wonderfully merciful blessing the Atonement is! Consider, as Alma stated, that mercy cannot be extended to a person unless that person comes unto Christ. Acceptance of the conditions of the Atonement are personal. The submissive, meek, and obedient who keep the commandments will rejoice in the mercy of our Redeemer.

There is an old epitaph that states:

Here lies David Elginbrod Have mercy on him, God. As he would do if he were God And you were David Elginbrod.

We are all exposed to angels of mercy. We see them in all walks of life. A marvelous Relief Society president was having dinner with her family. All of a sudden she jumped up and headed for the door. Her husband asked, "What is this all about?" She said, "I'll tell you later." She was gone in an instant. The husband and family finished eating; they cleaned up the table, put the food away, and did the dishes. About half an hour later, this good woman returned. Her husband asked immediately and with some concern, "What was so urgent?" She explained that she had had the strongest feelings that she needed to go to the bishop's home. When she arrived, she knocked on the door, and the bishop's wife answered. The Relief Society president said simply, "I am here; how can I help?" The bishop's wife burst into tears.

She explained that she had thought about her great husband and how much the people in the ward loved him. They talked with him, called him, thanked him in their testimonies on fast Sunday. She said, "He's wonderful and everybody loves him." Then she wondered about herself. She was not important; no one even knew she was around. She said she even doubted that God knew about her or even cared. She knelt down and prayed, "Heavenly Father, if you know that I exist, or if you even care or know I am here, please let me know." Just then the doorbell rang. When she answered the door, the Relief Society president was there to say, "I am here; how can I help?" They embraced. Through the mercy of a loving God, a sweet bishop's wife received an assurance of His love for her.

Elder J Ballard Washburn is serving as one of the Seventy. Not only is he a General Authority, he is one of the most Christ-like men I have ever met. He is, as someone described, "a man of steel and velvet." He was once a stake president in Page, Arizona. His stake included part of the Indian reservation. His counselor in the stake presidency was his home teaching companion, at least during one memorable experience that this counselor shared with me. He and President Washburn went into a hogan. There they found three children alone. The mother and father had not been home for two or three days, apparently on a drinking binge. As I recall, there was an eight-year-old boy, a five-year-old girl, and a two-year-old boy. The hogan was messy and the stench terrible. The two-year-old had a diaper on that hadn't been changed in three days. The excrement had caked and dried on his bottom, leaving it clearly irritated and possibly infected.

The counselor related, "I stayed in the hogan as long as I could stand it, then I had to leave." He went outside and took several deep breaths of fresh air. Then he waited and waited. President Washburn did not come out of the hogan, so his counselor went back in. President Washburn had sent the eight-year-old for a basin of water. He carefully removed the baby's diaper and then soaked the dried excrement until it could be softened; then he tenderly removed it. He cleaned up the little boy's bottom and gently dried it. He sent the brother for another towel. When he returned, Elder Washburn pinned the towel on in place of the diaper, and then he picked the Indian boy up in his arms and loved and kissed him. What a sweet and merciful thing to do! There are many opportunities for each of us to extend mercy to someone in need.

In this light, James Kavanaugh composed an interesting poem entitled "Will You Be My Friend?"

Will You Be My Friend?

Will you be my friend? There are so many reasons why you never should: I'm sometimes sullen, often shy, acutely sensitive. My fear erupts as anger, I find it hard to give. I talk about myself when I'm afraid And often spend a day without anything to say. But I will make you laugh And love you quite a bit And hold you when you're sad. I cry a little almost every day Because I'm more caring than the strangers ever know. And, if at times, I show my tender side (The soft and warmer part I hide) I wonder, Will you be my friend? A friend Who far beyond the feebleness of any vow or tie Will touch the secret place where I am really I. To know the pain of lips that plead and eyes that weep, Who will not run away when you find me in the street Alone and lying mangled by my quota of defeats But will stop and stay—to tell me of another day When I was beautiful.

Will you be my friend? There are so many reasons why you never should: Often I'm too serious, seldom predictably the same, Sometimes cold and distant, probably I'll always change. I bluster and brag, seek attention like a child, I brood and pout, my anger can be wild. But I will make you laugh And love you quite a bit And be near when you're afraid. I shake a little almost every day Because I'm more frightened than the strangers ever know And if at times I show my trembling side (The anxious, fearful part I hide) I wonder, Will you be my friend? A friend Who, when I fear your closeness, feels me push away And stubbornly will stay to share what's left on such a day, Who, when no one knows my name or calls me on the phone, When there's no concern for me—what I have or haven't done— And those I've helped and counted on have, oh so deftly, run, Who, when there's nothing left but me, stripped of charm and subtlety, Will nonetheless remain.

Will you be my friend? For no reason that I know Except I want you so.

I have a wonderful friend named Margie Harward, from Salina, Utah. Years ago she came to my office for a special blessing and has kept in touch since then. Although she is a wonderful, loving, kind friend to many people, life has not been kind to her. She has suffered greatly all her adult life. It seems as though she barely gets through one serious health problem when another immediately besets her.

I have learned that Margie is far more concerned about others than she is about herself. She has blessed the lives of a multitude of people, often when she herself is not well. In her exuberance to lift others' loads, she rarely thinks of herself. When she dies, it will probably be from a broken heart—she hurts intensely when others suffer. Her tender, sensitive, and merciful heart is obvious. I have confidence that the Lord, in His great mercy, will cradle and watch over her and compensate her for every moment of her own personal suffering. Has he not taught, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy"? (Matthew 5:7.)

Quite often as we read about mercy, we think of love, charity, kindness, and understanding. There are few places where we come to understand this better than in the hymn "How Firm a Foundation." Review the last four verses with me:

When through the deep waters I call thee to go, The rivers of sorrow shall not thee o'erflow, For I will be with thee, thy troubles to bless, And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress.

When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My grace, all sufficient, shall be thy supply. The flame shall not hurt thee; I only design Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine.

E'en down to old age, all my people shall prove My sov'reign, eternal, unchangeable love; And then, when gray hair shall their temples adorn, Like lambs shall they still in my bosom be borne.

The soul that on Jesus hath leaned for repose I will not, I cannot, desert to his foes; That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake, I'll never, no never, no never forsake! (Hymns, no. 85.)

I believe those beautiful lyrics reflect the feelings and love of the Savior. In another place we see the depth of the Savior's mercy:

And it came to pass that when Jesus had thus spoken, he cast his eyes round about again on the multitude, and beheld they were in tears, and did look steadfastly upon him as if they would ask him to tarry a little longer with them.

And he said unto them: Behold, my bowels are filled with compassion towards you.

Have ye any that are sick among you? Bring them hither. Have ye any that are lame, or blind, or halt, or maimed, or leprous, or that are withered, or that are deaf, or that are afflicted in any manner? Bring them hither and I will heal them, for I have compassion upon you; my bowels are filled with mercy. (3 Nephi 17:5-7; emphasis added.)

I find this phrase, "my bowels are filled with mercy," to be fraught with power and beauty. Mercy and compassion come from the heart and are born deep inside us. Because of His mercy, as verses 9-10 of this same chapter state,

when he had thus spoken, all the multitude, with one accord, did go forth with their sick and their afflicted, and their lame, and with their blind, and with their dumb, and with all them that were afflicted in any manner; and he did heal them every one as they were brought forth unto him.

And they did all, both they who had been healed and they who were whole, bow down at his feet, and did worship him; and as many as could come for the multitude did kiss his feet, insomuch that they did bathe his feet with their tears.

Mercy takes away our inhibitions. Those who were healed and those who brought them forth impulsively kissed the Master's feet. J Ballard Washburn changed a humble Indian boy's diaper. The promise is sure and true: "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." (Matthew 5:7.)

Although mercy cannot take away our pain and our grief, nor can it always remove trials from our path, it is always there to soften, modify, and suffer with us. Many of us would gladly suffer pain personally rather than see a loved one go through it. Fortunately, the Lord does not grant us the request to transfer another's pain and grief to ourselves, regardless of how feverishly we plead. On the other hand, though we are not able to lift totally another's burden—nor should we—sometimes sharing that burden does bring a sweet, spiritual, partial relief to those who are being tried desperately and who are suffering exquisitely. Many find it easier to get through trials when they know that they are not alone and that others they know would be willing to take upon themselves all their pain, if it were possible.

Elder Orson F. Whitney stated: "No pain that we suffer, no trial that we experience is wasted. It ministers to our education, to the development of such qualities as patience, faith, fortitude and humility. All that we suffer and all that we endure, especially when we endure it patiently, builds up our characters, purifies our hearts, expands our souls, and makes us more tender and charitable, more worthy to be called the children of God . . . and it is through sorrow and suffering, toil and tribulation, that we gain the education that we come here to acquire and which will make us more like our Father and Mother in heaven." (Dennis D. Flake, "Orson F. Whitney's Philosophy of Education," p. 96.)

God would not be merciful if He deprived us of the painful and sorrowful experiences of life. Mercy must hold itself in check sometimes and watch from a distance so that those who suffer may grow. The great Elohim in His wonderful mercy watched from a distance while His Only Begotten, Beloved Son suffered in Gethsemane and was hung cruelly on a cross. The mercy that God the Father must have shown after His Son's death on the cross is incomprehensible to the most spiritual of us.

The Savior said to Mary, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father." (John 20:17.) He then went to His Father, the great God Elohim. What sweetness, what pleasure, what exquisite, supernal joy! How could man or woman conceive of the tender, beautiful experience as Son returned to Father and reported that the most difficult task in time or in eternity by man or God had been completed? Imagine the Father taking His Son to His bosom while speaking the words, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." Only the merciful can begin to comprehend such a glorious experience.

King Benjamin, I believe, gave the second greatest recorded discourse in the history of man. The Sermon on the Mount, of course, is the greatest. King Benjamin spoke with such spiritual power that the people "had viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth. And they all cried aloud with one voice, saying: O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things; who shall come down among the children of men." (Mosiah 4:2.)

"Have mercy," they declared, "that we may receive forgiveness of our sins." The process of applying mercy in order to receive a forgiveness of our sins ties directly to the Atonement. Without the Atonement, mercy could not be extended in a way that could bring about the satisfying of the demands of justice. As the people began to understand and feel that God would grant them mercy, King Benjamin said:

I say unto you, if ye have come to a knowledge of the goodness of God, and his matchless power, and his wisdom, and his patience, and his long-suffering towards the children of men; and also, the atonement which has been prepared from the foundation of the world, that thereby salvation might come to him that should put his trust in the Lord, and should be diligent in keeping his commandments, and continue in the faith even unto the end of his life, I mean the life of the mortal body—

I say, that this is the man who receiveth salvation, through the atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the world for all mankind, which ever were since the fall of Adam, or who are, or who ever shall be, even unto the end of the world.

And this is the means whereby salvation cometh. And there is none other salvation save this which hath been spoken of; neither are there any conditions whereby man can be saved except the conditions which I have told you. (Mosiah 4:6-8.)

The conditions are clear: repentance with a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

Once the people had felt the mercy of Christ and understood how it was extended to each of them, then King Benjamin taught them—and us—all a great and true principle of mercy:

And also, ye yourselves will succor those that stand in need of your succor; ye will administer of your substance unto him that standeth in need; and ye will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain, and turn him out to perish.

Perhaps thou shalt say: The man has brought upon himself his misery; therefore I will stay my hand, and will not give unto him of my food, nor impart unto him of my substance that he may not suffer, for his punishments are just—

But I say unto you, O man, whosoever doeth this the same hath great cause to repent; and except he repenteth of that which he hath done he perisheth forever, and hath no interest in the kingdom of God.

For behold, are we not all beggars? Do we not all depend upon the same Being, even God, for all the substance which we have, for both food and raiment, and for gold, and for silver, and for all the riches which we have of every kind?

And behold, even at this time, ye have been calling on his name, and begging for a remission of your sins. And has he suffered that ye have begged in vain? Nay; he has poured out his Spirit upon you, and has caused that your hearts should be filled with joy, and has caused that your mouths should be stopped that ye could not find utterance, so exceedingly great was your joy.

And now, if God, who has created you, on whom you are dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another. (Mosiah 4:16-21.)

Verse 20 refers to the exceedingly great joy that came to them after they felt mercy. Mercy is a heartfelt emotion. It comes from deep within us. The Savior's reference to His bowels being filled with mercy is significant. When we feel mercy for someone, we don't get a headache; we hurt inside.

Emotions are felt in the breast, not the head. Peace and a burning in the bosom are heartfelt emotions. The merciful always have Christ-like feelings and emotions as they witness the hurt, sorrows, and heartaches of others. The Savior exemplified His own teachings as He extended His mercy to the woman taken in adultery, the widow of Nain, the man with palsy, and so many others.

We must always remember the Lord's promise, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." Our salvation is at least somewhat dependent on this principle. Mercy is a divine gift. If we would be merciful, we must act as Christ would act. In addition to keeping the Ten Commandments, we must obey the eleventh commandment, which is His "new commandment": "As I have loved you, . . . love one another." (John 13:34.)

May we all become possessors and givers of mercy to those around us; if we will do so, we will in turn "obtain mercy" ourselves from Him whose right it is to give.
