Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Eleven

Charity Is Greater Than Faith

And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity." (1 Corinthians 13:13.) If Paul is correct, and I believe he is, then charity is greater than faith. That is quite a declaration when we consider what can be accomplished by faith. Those who have sufficient faith—such as the brother of Jared and Joseph Smith—can part the veil. Those who have faith can move mountains, rebuke the storms, control the elements, divide the waters, and turn rivers upstream. Through faith the blind are able to see, the deaf have their ears opened and can hear, the dead are raised, and the diseased are healed; and through faith the transgressor may be cleansed every whit.

Ammon declared that it was by faith that thousands were brought to the redeeming love of the Master. (Alma 26:22.)

Abraham Maslow claimed that self-actualization is the pinnacle of motivations. The scriptures and modern prophets, however, make it clear that faith in Christ is greater. How is it, then, that charity could be greater than faith? In the thirteenth chapter of 1 Corinthians, Paul describes what those with faith may accomplish and still not possess charity. Through faith we can speak with the tongues of men and of angels. We can have the gift of prophecy, bestow our goods to the poor, give our bodies to be burned—and still not possess charity. We can have the ministering of angels and see visions. Can charity be greater than all of these? Indeed it is. Charity is the very essence of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is the very conduct and total being of the Savior. Charity is the pure love of Christ. Those who have charity are directed by it in everything they do. It becomes the central motivation for their living and being.

All who would be disciples of Christ desire to possess the gift of charity. As I have wrestled over the years with what charity is, I have always come up short. As I now grow older, I think I am gaining some slight additional insight. It cannot be explained in words, only in deeds. Let me share a few examples.

A Relief Society president of whom I am aware awakened her husband and family at 2:30 a.m. so they could go to the temple to be sealed. They arrived at the temple early in the morning for an appointment with the mission president to sign their temple recommends. The mission president must have forgotten the appointment. The family waited at the temple. All morning they waited; then all afternoon. Someone must have asked them for whom they were waiting. Just before the second to last session of the day began, the mission president came, interviewed them, and signed their recommends. They quietly went into the temple, received their endowments, and were sealed as a family. Not one negative word or judgment came from their mouths. They thought only of the great joy and excitement that came from being sealed as a family for eternity.

Charity is not finding fault, even when you are offended. Charity includes keeping the objective of your life—such as the family above who focused on being sealed—predominant over all other frustrations and considerations.

Charity also includes your attitude toward those who have not. In all of my reading, I cannot recall one experience of the Savior asking a man whether he was working, whether he would have worked if he had a job, or even whether he was worthy to receive charity. He seemed to never have a concern about inappropriate begging. Consider the palsied man who was lowered through the roof, the two blind men calling to Him during His triumphal entry to Jerusalem, or the Canaanite woman. When He fed the five thousand and the seven thousand, He did not ask how many had personal supplies or who had eaten most recently; he gave freely to all. Sometimes when we are accosted by panhandlers, beggars, or the poor, we have excuses why we will not give. These excuses are often legitimate. The recipient might be going right back into a bar or liquor store; he or she might indeed be part of a syndicate; a woman might be carrying another's infant or child merely to evoke sympathy. Maybe the emergency for which they need financial help is fabricated. But then again, maybe not. What if we truly turn away the needy? If we give to the poor and the panhandler, the beggar and the widow—deserving or undeserving—it will be accounted unto us as righteousness. Charity, in my humble opinion, would suggest that it does not make any difference. In fact, I believe that those who best exemplify charity do not think about worthiness; they simply give.

Elder Collado, our regional representative in the Philippines, said about one man, "He has the quickest draw in the West when it comes to reaching for his wallet to give to the poor." Could we ever be justifiably accused of having such a quick draw?

The widow contributing her mite to the treasury represented charity. She knew that the treasury was just that—the treasury of the synagogue—and that many contributed in a great or ordinary way. The Lord truly did not need her mite, but He got it. She simply cast in her all.

Charity is a motivating force so powerful that it overrides all selfishness, vanity, false pity, arrogance, pride, deceit, and desire for praise. "Charity never faileth." As we begin to understand charity, we find that it affects all that we do.

Sometimes charity gives the appearance of indulgence. For example, sometimes General Authorities encounter situations such as the following: Leaders of a stake far from Salt Lake City spend days, even weeks, in preparation for a visiting authority; he arrives and is revered as God's servant. Everyone wants him to be as comfortable and cared for as possible. A nice room has been reserved at a hotel, and special dinners have been arranged. How would those leaders feel if the authority arrived and promptly said, "This is too nice a room; put me in a simple one, please." And then what if he were to cancel a dinner that had been in preparation for several days so he could go to his room and save his hosts the trouble of dinner. Sometimes we bless the lives of marvelous, sweet, simple souls by accepting with gratitude what they have done. Remember that when the woman washed the Savior's feet and began to anoint them with costly oil, the Savior did not forbid her.

Sometimes we as General Authorities, if we are to show true charity, must simply let the Saints receive the deep and wonderful pleasure they feel from serving those who have been called as the Lord's ministers to the world. To do otherwise might be more of an affront to the Lord and the Saints, who have such great love for the Lord's servants. We all know that we are on the Lord's errand. We know that the Lord, not us as individuals, is the focus of attention and affection when people make such great preparations.

Each of us has likely been criticized unjustly at least once. Furthermore, sometimes other people take the credit for our work or success. Often we are misjudged for our motives. Some take offense when we intend none. A few may judge us inaccurately or misunderstand our attitude. To all of these, the person who truly has charity is forgiving. He or she simply knows that the person finding fault may be in some way pleading for help. It may be a lack of self-esteem, a constant measuring of oneself against everyone else and forever falling short, or a similar lack of achievement or success. Charity would dictate that we try to see all that is good and holy and light in the offending one, and then return good for evil.

Is it truly possible to understand charity? I have thought much about this. I now believe that this is an impossible task, but with the help of the Savior, who is the author and distributor of charity, we may increase our understanding. Charity must be an absolute and total submission of mind and heart in a completely selfless way so that we can serve every other human soul with the purest of motives. We cannot expect appreciation, gratitude, or any kind of reward except the natural consequences of blessing another's life.

Vanity would prevent all but the pure in heart from the above attitude. In his epistle to Titus, Paul stated, "Unto the pure all things are pure." (Titus 1:15.) Purity ties directly to charity. All of my life these two—charity and purity—have been a compelling mental crusade. I have written several books—three of them are Charity Never Faileth, Purity of Heart, and More Purity Give Me—and still a full understanding and comprehension eludes me. I try in vain to write "the smallest part" of what I feel about charity and purity. My personal quest since I was a young man was to strive to have absolute charity and be completely pure. As I sat down to write this time, I thought my effort might be more fruitful, but again I fall short in defining charity. However, I do know when I see it, for I see examples every day, usually manifest in small or seemingly insignificant experiences.

Charity gets no pleasure out of humiliation, embarrassment, jealousy, revenge, undeserved praise, or unearned titles or positions. We all encounter embarrassment at some time or another, whether it be inadvertently tipping over a glass at dinnertime or getting to the checkstand with more groceries than money. Grateful I am that I have seen and known of several of the latter instances happening, and in each case someone who was waiting reached hurriedly into his wallet and made up the deficit. I can think of little that exemplifies spontaneous charity as well as such moments.

"Charity suffereth long, and is kind." (1 Corinthians 13:4.) Every member of the Church would do well to be kind. The more kindly people are, the nearer they come to charity. The American College Dictionary makes this statement about the word kind: "Kind implies a deep-seated characteristic shown either habitually or on occasion by considerate behavior." A kind person is good and has a benevolent nature and disposition. If we would possess charity, we would be kind.

Lest any misunderstand, we can all have a great deal of faith—as Paul suggested in 1 Corinthians 13—and perform great miracles and do many wonderful things and not yet possess charity. However, there are those who speak with tongues of men and angels and do have charity. It has been my experience that those who have great knowledge, who possess faith to move mountains, who bestow their goods to feed the poor, and who will walk unhesitatingly into the jaws of hell if necessary to save a soul almost always possess charity.

The following teachings from the Master best represent charity to me. They help us understand the full dimension of Christ's life:

Â "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." (John 8:11.)

Â "Blessed are the poor in spirit . . . [and] they that mourn." (Matthew 5:3-4.)

Â "Blessed are the meek . . . [and] they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness." (Matthew 5:5-6.)

Â "Blessed are the merciful, . . . the pure in heart, . . . the peacemakers." (Matthew 5:7-9.)

Â "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.)

Â "Peace be unto thy soul." (D&C 121:7.)

Â "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matthew 11:28.)

Â "And now the year of my redeemed is come; and they shall mention the loving kindness of their Lord, and all that he has bestowed upon them according to his goodness, and according to his loving kindness, forever and ever." (D&C 133:52.)

Â "And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain." (Revelation 21:4.)

Â "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends." (John 15:13-14.)

Â "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isaiah 1:18.)

Â "If I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Malachi 3:10.)

Â "Forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

Â "Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." (D&C 45:5.)

Â Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live." (3 Nephi 15:9.)

Â "And no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father." (3 Nephi 17:17.)

Â "And when he had said these words, he wept." (3 Nephi 17:21.)

We could continue with an endless list of scriptures that reflect the Savior's charity. Jesus taught much, but the supreme virtue of charity He especially exemplified. He is the one perfect model of all righteousness and charity.

Paul taught, "Now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known." (1 Corinthians 13:12.) What a blessing it will be in the eternal world to know each person's heart and mind and for them in turn to know our very thoughts and reasons. We will be like transparent crystal. We will know the deepest motivation, the unspoken words, even those thoughts we do not have the ability to communicate. Imagine the day that will come when all of the beautiful unspoken phrases, words, and utterances that should have been spoken will all be understood.

The greatest and most blessed character virtue in all of humanity is charity. It is the main fabric through which all other virtues weave to make a perfect tapestry of life. However, in order to possess charity, we must be pure in heart, chaste, and filled with faith; we must abide in hope, serve spontaneously with love, lift, bless, obey, wear out our lives in service, respond, give to the poor, bless the widow and orphan, clothe the naked, feed the hungry, judge not, seek not for glory or praise, forgive without reservation, and love with all of our hearts—only then do we begin to approach charity. Remember, "charity never faileth"—not ever.

And ultimately, if we are possessors of charity, we will be possessed by Him who is the author of charity.
