Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Twelve

Leaders Tread with Courage Where Christ Would Have Us Tread

In chapter 54 of Alma, Captain Moroni negotiated with Ammoron for an exchange of prisoners. Because the Nephites did not take women and children as prisoners, Moroni demanded an exchange only on the basis that a Nephite prisoner, his wife, and his children be traded for one Lamanite prisoner.

Ammoron, the leader of the Lamanites, agreed to this only because it would preserve his food. However, Moroni also made another demand as a prerequisite to exchanging prisoners, a demand that Ammoron would not meet. That demand was that Ammoron would withdraw from his wicked purposes.

In verses 12-14, Captain Moroni's "treatise" to Ammoron states:

If ye do not this, I will come against you with my armies; yea, even I will arm my women and my children, and I will come against you, and I will follow you even into your own land, which is the land of our first inheritance; yea, and it shall be blood for blood, yea, life for life; and I will give you battle even until you are destroyed from off the face of the earth.

Behold, I am in my anger, and also my people; ye have sought to murder us, and we have only sought to defend ourselves. But behold, if ye seek to destroy us more we will seek to destroy you; yea, and we will seek our land, the land of our first inheritance.

Now I close my epistle. I am Moroni; I am a leader. (Emphasis added.)

In my copy of the Book of Mormon I have written in the margin, "Never have truer words been spoken than when Moroni declared, 'I am a leader.'" What a leader!

Many years later, Moroni was described in these words: "If all men had been, and were, and ever would be, like unto Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil would never have power over the hearts of the children of men." (Alma 48:17.)

When Moroni was chief commander over the Nephite armies:

He rent his coat; and he took a piece thereof, and wrote upon it—In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children—and he fastened it upon the end of a pole.

And he fastened on his headplate, and his breastplate, and his shields, and girded on his armor about his loins; and he took the pole, which had on the end thereof his rent coat, (and he called it the title of liberty) and he bowed himself to the earth, and he prayed mightily unto his God for the blessings of liberty to rest upon his brethren, so long as there should a band of Christians remain to possess the land. (Alma 46:12-13.)

There was no question in Moroni's mind that he was a leader. He knew his role, and he intended to fulfill it. He lined up in the right direction with his whole soul. He put his faith to work by action and by kneeling in prayer, and he wasn't ashamed to do either publicly.

Moroni was an undaunted leader with an unconquerable spirit. His heart and soul were in a cause greater than himself; he felt not one particle of fear. Whenever I read about Captain Moroni, a fire burns in the very marrow of my bones. What would you give to fight side by side with a man such as this?

Men, women, and youth will always rally to a cause when they have a leader; however, it is difficult for God or any organization to use a reluctant leader.

Take note of how Captain Moroni led. First, he set a standard and called it "Title of Liberty." It included the things that matter most: "our God and our freedom, our wives and our children." Then he enlisted the help of the Almighty God of heaven. He asked that the powers of heaven would rest upon him and his people as long as there remained a "band of Christians to possess the land." (Alma 46:13.)

No wonder that men such as Helaman, Teancum, Lehi, and others rallied to the cause. A leader of Captain Moroni's stature has a plan, makes a commitment, and then—with his total will and the help of God—marches forth into battle. It is also interesting that he had to "clean house" among the Nephites before he moved against the Lamanites. A leader knows that unity in a cause is essential. Internal rot and disease must be removed before an army moves forth to do battle with the enemy.

I am certain that Moroni did not really know how great he was. I doubt that he ever studied a leadership principle from a popular book or costly seminar. There simply came a great need, and Moroni, in his purity and confidence, stepped forward and allowed the Lord to use him.

In the Church, we are all leaders and followers. The Church is so organized that even the least among us leads during his or her life. This leadership might take the form of a few families to home teach, or it might be a stake, region, or even an area calling; it may be a class of Young Women, or it may be all the young women in the Church.

Because we must all face leadership, I would like to focus on the foundation pillars for gospel leaders who would follow Christ.

President Harold B. Lee suggested that only as we make ourselves totally available can we become worthy disciples of Christ. Interestingly, lack of self-confidence or feelings of unworthiness do not conflict with this thought. Moses and Enoch both were "slow of speech" and wondered at the call. We may feel inadequate, but when there is a job to do, someone needs to step forward and do it.

The fourth section of the Doctrine and Covenants states, "If ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work." (Verse 3.) Quite often we get confused semantically by this phrase. To a servant of God, leadership means service. In the Lord's affairs, His great leaders are those who are servants of all. The Master Himself performed the greatest act in time or in eternity. The act was so profound and terrible to contemplate that even He shrunk "and would that [He] might not drink the bitter cup." His leadership as a servant and His absolute obedience to His Father took him along dark, bitter paths. He described His suffering as "sore," "exquisite," and "hard to bear"; it caused Him to tremble because of the pain and to bleed at every pore. (D&C 19:18.) Jesus said, "I have overcome and have trodden the winepress alone, even the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of the Almighty God." (D&C 76:107.) He knew that there was no other way, nor had there ever been—nor would there ever be on this earth—any other soul who could satisfy the demands of justice.

The necessity of an atonement was part of God's eternal plan of salvation and exaltation. God's program provided the eternal laws and also the obedience that would bring consequential blessings. Their violation would bring down the strong hand of justice. There is always a consequence when we violate the laws of God through disobedience or inaction (sins of omission). It is an eternal principle that justice must be satisfied. Justice is a great bene factor to the righteous but a terrible taskmaster to those who transgress. It is a wonderful relief to those who suffer for righteousness' sake through illness, death, divorce, handicap, or affliction. We will suffer no trial in this life that the Savior has not experienced vicariously. That is why the Savior counseled, "Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified." (D&C 45:3-4.)

You will note that sufferings is plural in His prayer. He can and will be the advocate for all those who suffer or who transgress and truly repent. What greater role could a true servant-leader play in all of eternity?

A righteous leader who makes himself or herself available will accomplish great and noble things. I remember talking to Elder Mechalek, a stake president and then regional representative in Argentina. His brother also served as a high councilor and as a stake president. When they were boys, they overheard the missionaries who had baptized them talking about their missions. One of the missionaries said, "Is it really worth it? We have spent thirty months in Argentina. It has required a lot of money to support us." They could have added that they had put off their schooling and marriage and worked hard. The only success they had was baptizing the Mechalek brothers. Was it worth it?

Both of the brothers grew up and went on missions in South American countries. Both of them baptized over a hundred converts. Many of their converts have now been on missions, and some of those have baptized hundreds. Now some of their converts have been on missions and baptized great numbers. Someone said, "You can count the seeds in an apple, but you cannot count the apples in a seed." Who knows what the eventual numbers may be?

The two missionaries performed a wondrous work by simply making themselves available. Was it worth it? Unquestionably! Ted Olsen said:

And ninety and nine are with dreams content, but the hope of a world made new

Is the hundredth man who is grimly bent on making the dream come true.

All who make themselves available and have willing hearts will be called to lead. It is part of the gospel plan.

We have been privileged to live in an interesting time in the history of the world. Tremendous things are taking place. Richard Kostsya, in a talk in British Columbia on 1 May 1990, made the following observations:

The real beginning of a direct-broadcast satellite [DBS] era in the United States was announced earlier this year. N.B.C. Cablevision, Murdock's new corporation, and Hughes Communication have pooled $1 billion to launch sky cable . . . a system that will employ high-powered satellites to beam 108 channels to households all over America. This time the DBS receiving dishes will be widely affordable—only $200 to $300. It is 12 inches across and can be inconspicuously installed on walls or window ledges.

Previous efforts to launch DBS services were costly failures . . . but those failures are similar to early attempts to build a workable airplane . . . they're the trials and errors necessary to build a successful machine. . . .

DBS could completely obviate need for cable systems and television stations. I couldn't begin to contemplate the kind of changes our industry would undergo at that point. (Vital Speeches, October 1990, p. 22.)

Later in his talk he suggested that the television itself will become something quite different in the not-too-distant future as the simple TV set is replaced by a video communications center.

Such is the vision one man has for television and the media communications field. As overwhelming as that vision might seem, it is relatively insignificant when compared to the great, eternal vision our modern prophets have for this church and its members. I bear a witness borne of experience that when a General Authority receives the mantle of his calling, he has additional vision and insight.

When I served as general president of the Young Men, I could almost hear a clarion call to the young men of the Church. I could see them coming in bands of thousands and tens of thousands to fulfill their sacred callings in the Aaronic Priesthood. I had a feeling everywhere I went, every time I spoke, that there were young men and young women in the congregation who would do magnificent and marvelous things. I often wondered whether the young man that would be the prophet of the Church thirty or forty or fifty years from now was in the congregation. I wondered if there were young men in those meetings who would sit among the Twelve or the Seventy. I always tried to teach well and warn these and all future leaders to stay clean and sweet and pure.

A leader must be able to have a vision of the work. President Spencer W. Kimball, at the April 1974 regional representatives training seminar, gave such a powerful vision of missionary work that I leaned over to Elder H. Burke Peterson and said, "I believe President Kimball has had a personal priesthood interview with the Savior." Whether that was the case, I have no way of knowing, but I do believe that President Kimball could envision a great flood of missionaries covering the earth. Within two years we had almost doubled the number of missionaries in the field—that was only the beginning of his vision.

President Ezra Taft Benson had a vision of the destiny of the Book of Mormon ministry. The first time I heard him talk about his vision of the Book of Mormon, I thought his whole statement should be included in the Doctrine and Covenants.

I once heard President Howard W. Hunter speak of a holy hand that is involved in this work. If ever anyone on the face of the earth represented the sweet, gentle, kind, wonderful traits of Jesus, it was Howard W. Hunter. I felt a vision of the love the Master must have for us as I observed President Hunter. The Saints referred to Elder LeGrand Richards as their "Beloved Apostle," and indeed he was. I believe in time they will refer to President Howard W. Hunter as the "Apostle of Love."

President Gordon B. Hinckley has had a unique ministry in the Church. He has served as counselor to three prophets in this dispensation. President Kimball, President Benson, and President Hunter were able to function only in a limited way during the latter part of their ministry. Much of the weight of responsibility carried by the First Presidency has rested on President Hinckley's capable shoulders. He has dedicated over half of the temples built in this dispensation. He has carefully monitored the finances and building program of the Church. He has a special understanding and vision of the individual members of the Church. He has a vision of the image that the Church must eventually present to the world—a Church dressed in its beautiful garments. He gave a talk at the University of Utah, giving a vision of interfaith unity and the value of the Church in the Utah community. He did so in a spiritually brilliant way, giving no offense. His masterful discourse has helped improve the image of the Church. I believe President Hinckley has a vision of the Church becoming fair as the sun and clear as the moon.

President Thomas S. Monson is a marvel. He has a remarkable vision of the Master's true ministry—welfare as the essence of the gospel. President Monson understands not only the welfare programs as few do in the Church today, but he also understands the Master's ministry of compassion for the poor, the widow, the orphan, the suffering. He is a gentle spiritual giant. He is a man for all seasons. President Monson has a brilliant mind with memory capabilities that could come only through an endowment from God. All who have ever known him or met him have a feeling that he is their personal friend. President Monson's vision of this great latter-day work comes from his vast experience and his tremendous leadership capabilities. He is the kind of a leader for whom people gladly put their total heart and soul into the work.

We have recently sustained President James E. Faust, this gentle giant of the Lord. His wisdom and judgment are constant. He has an understanding of the principle of righteousness. He is selfless in all his service. What a marvelous work he will accomplish! His legal background and his lifetime of Church leadership have prepared him for this very hour. He is a holy servant of God. He is thoughtful and concerned about the women and children of this church.

"Where there is no vision, the people perish," but they also do not perform. (Proverbs 29:18.) They have no heart for the work and will inevitably impair rather than assist. Similarly, a leader with no vision will dramatically limit his effectiveness.

Habbakuk had a vision of the work. "Behold," said he, "ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously: for I will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it be told you." (Habbakuk 1:5.)

If vision is so important, how do we gain it? Those who have vision have many things in common:

Â They see the total work before them.

Â They visualize what must happen in order to get the results they desire.

Â They consider all of their resources, potentials, and capabilities collectively.

Â They see in their mind what marvelous and magnificent things could happen when the total work force is mobilized unitedly.

Â They then go to work to accomplish their goal.

Â They have the ability to communicate their vision to those around them in a convincing way so that others are enlisted also.

Â They see what they are doing as a cause, not a project.

Â Religious leaders feel a "holy hand" assisting in the work.

President Kimball had a vision that we would need to put forth a tremendous effort to prepare native missionaries for the day when foreign missionaries would not be permitted to enter those countries. Already this has taken place in several countries, and the proselyting work continues because of the vision of one holy man.

In the most simple way, a Sunday School teacher can have a vision of every one of his or her class members growing up in faith and going to the temple. People must also have a vision of their own personal lives—a humble, sweet belief that God intended us to do something larger and greater.

President Joseph F. Smith said:

After we have done all we could do for the cause of truth, and withstood the evil that men have brought upon us, and we have been overwhelmed by their wrongs, it is still our duty to stand. We cannot give up; we must not lie down. Great causes are not won in a single generation. To stand firm in the face of overwhelming opposition, when you have done all you can, is the courage of faith. The courage of faith is the courage of progress. Men who possess that divine quality go on; they are not permitted to stand still if they would. They are not simply the creatures of their own power and wisdom; they are instrumentalities of a higher law and a divine purpose. (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], p. 119.)

Imagine with me the magnitude of the cause in which we are engaged. We have been given the keys, the priesthood, and the program for the greatest cause in eternity. We alone of all God's children have the keys of knowledge of salvation and exaltation. All the myriad souls who ever have or do now or will walk the earth must be taught the gospel of Jesus Christ. They must, if they desire exaltation and are accountable, accept that gospel and be baptized into His only true Church. This Church alone holds the keys of sealing husbands and wives and their children together as families for all eternity.

The cause is greater than men or prophets. It is the cause of the Savior. It is the cause of God the Eternal Father. By enlisting in His cause and faithfully enduring, we will be the recipients of all we are teaching and sharing. A verse we quote so often, sometimes without much thought, is "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Imagine a cause with eternal implications and consequences, a cause so great that all eternity hangs in the balance as we accept or reject it. We do not fully comprehend what a magnificent privilege it is to be fully enlisted.

This one great cause has a thousand and one—or more—subsidiary causes. We can each be part of at least one of these great causes.

When I walked down the jetway in San Antonio, Texas, as a new mission president, I was met by Elder James A. Cullimore and two mission assistants. After Elder Cullimore had oriented me and left the mission, the assistants said, "President, how do you feel about memorizing the discussions?" I replied, "Elders, we are going to have the greatest teaching missionaries in the Church." That night they enlisted in that particular cause. We decided we would be a Spartan mission—disciplined, obedient, frugal, spiritual, and willing to sacrifice. We wanted to be a mission that would be totally obedient and bring down the blessings from heaven to assist us in the work.

A quorum or class can have a cause—missionary work, welfare activities, activation of all quorum members, temple preparation, the bonds of brotherhood or sisterhood (unity), and dozens more. When we are involved in a united way, we achieve results we hardly dare dream.

The things we love most have the ability to become truly great causes. Families, religion, country, rights, freedoms, liberty, agency, and work—most of us prize these things dearly. In the recent war in the Persian Gulf we watched nations uniting to free Kuwait. An aggressive nation had conquered it, and the nations of the earth drove the enemy in shame back to its own homeland. On television, after Kuwait City had been freed from the ruthless enemy, there was dancing and singing, flag waving and cheering in the streets. Freedom is never so dear as when it has been taken by force. We then realize that this wonderful God-endowed blessing of liberty is more important to us than life itself.

Brave men and women from all over the world bonded together in the common cause of freedom for Kuwait. At the time this took place, I watched television news broadcasts from the distant land of the Philippines. When President Bush concluded his monumental "cease fire" speech, he said these words: "God bless all of you, and God bless the United States of America." My soul responded to that prayer.

Many of us would gladly give our lives for our countries, wherever they might be on this constantly shrinking globe.

The cause to which we throw ourselves must be real and of great worth; it cannot be fabricated. The Lord offers us many individual causes, such as baptism into the only true Church, temple sealings, eternal family relationships, missionary work, care of the needy, and our own sense of destiny, with the potential of exaltation.

When David, ancient king of Israel, was but a lad, he went to take supplies to his brothers who were warring against the Philistines. As the men of Israel explained to this young man regarding the giant of Gath, the Philistine named Goliath, and how he had defied Israel's army and Israel's God and had shamed the soldiers before each other through his challenge, David responded, "Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?" (1 Samuel 17:26.)

David's older brother was close enough to hear David's utterance as he spoke. "And Eliab's anger was kindled against David." (Verse 28.) His anger might really have been kindled against himself when David's statement penetrated to the core of his heart. I wonder if he did not feel his own cowardice in not being willing to step forth. He vented his feelings on David, who seemed fearless. "And he said, Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle." (Verse 28.) David could have responded, "What battle? In forty days not you or anyone else here has dared to raise a sword." He might also have said, "How much longer will ye let the giant curse our God and humiliate the Lord's army? What has happened to the army of Israel, the army of Jehovah Himself? What kind of weak-kneed, cowering, sorry lot of soldiers are you?" He did not say these things. What he did say was, "What have I now done? Is there not a cause?" (Verse 29.) Indeed what a cause, but David was the only one who was willing to live or die for the cause. Only a lad, but in a short few moments he changed the attitude of the army of Israel because he reminded them of the cause. (1 Samuel 17:29.) A leader must sometimes speak with fire in his words, words that set the spirits of other men and women aflame. There must be a cause worthy of enlisting all who dare, who only need a leader and a cause.

In Roget's International Thesaurus under cause there are words such as these: prime mover, movement, crusade, burning issue, campaign, call forth, evoke, determine, advance forward, march under the banner of, and fight the good fight.

The cause is never so great as when it is based on God's eternal truths and principles. In Abraham Maslow's pyramid of what he calls the hierarchy of needs, he lists the pinnacle of motivation as self-actualization. This may be true for the outside world, but to the religious person, faith in God is the greatest motivator.

Dr. Hugh Nibley delivered an address at Brigham Young University that he entitled "Leadership versus Management." He gave the address at commencement services on 19 August 1983. It gives insight into one of the most basic needs in the Church today. The role of this Church is one of leadership. The role of the priesthood is one of leadership.

In his talk Dr. Nibley said:

What took place in the Greco-Roman as in the modern Christian world was that fatal shift from leadership to management that marks the decline and fall of civilizations.

At the present time, Captain Grace Hopper, that grand old lady of the Navy, is calling our attention to the contrasting and conflicting natures of management and leadership. No one, she says, ever managed men into battle, and she wants more emphasis on teaching leadership. But leadership can no more be taught than creativity or how to be a genius. The Generalstab tried desperately for a hundred years to train up a generation of leaders for the German army, but it never worked, because the men who delighted their superiors (the managers) got the high commands, while the men who delighted the lower ranks (the leaders) got reprimands. Leaders are movers and shakers, original, inventive, unpredictable, imaginative, full of surprises that discomfit the enemy in war and the main office in peace. Managers, on the other hand, are safe, conservative, predictable, conforming organizational men and team players, dedicated to the establishment.

The leader, for example, has a passion for equality. We think of great generals from David and Alexander on down, sharing their beans or maza with their men, calling them by their first names, marching along with them in the heat, sleeping on the ground and being first over the wall. A famous ode by a long-suffering Greek soldier named Archilochus reminds us that the men in the ranks are not fooled for an instant by the executive type who thinks he is a leader.

For the manager, on the other hand, the idea of equality is repugnant and indeed counterproductive. Where promotion, perks, privilege, and power are the name of the game, awe and reverence for rank is everything and becomes the inspiration and motivation of all good men. Where would management be without the inflexible paper processing, dress standards, attention to proper social, political and religious affiliation, vigilant watch over habits and attitudes, etc., that gratify the stockholders and satisfy Security?

"If you love me," said the greatest of all leaders, "you will keep my commandments." "If you know what is good for you," says the manager, "you will keep my commandments—and not make waves." . . .

To Parkinson's Law, which shows how management gobbles up everything else, its originator added what he calls the "Law of Injelitance": Managers do not promote individuals whose competence might threaten their own position, and so as the power of management spreads ever wider, the quality deteriorates, if that is possible. In short, while management shuns equality, it feeds on mediocrity.

On the other hand, leadership is escape from mediocrity. The qualities of leadership are the same in all fields, the leader being simply the one who sets the highest example; and to do that and open the way to greater light and knowledge, the leader must break the mold. "A ship in port is safe," says Captain Hopper, speaking of management. "But that is not what ships were built for," she adds calling for leadership.

To paraphrase one of the greatest of leaders, the founder of this institution: "There is too much of a sameness among our people. . . . I do not like stereotyped Mormons—away with stereotyped Mormons!" (Journal of Discourses, 13:153, 8:185.) True leaders are inspiring because they are inspired, caught up in a higher purpose, devoid of personal ambition, idealistic and incorruptible." (BYU Today, February 1984, pp. 19, 45.)

Dr. Nibley's masterful address focuses on example. The leader must be exemplary. Years ago one young elder driving a '37 Plymouth had a flat tire on the way to the temple. He had neither a spare tire nor any time to get his tire fixed and make it to the temple. The problem occurred on 1300 East and South Temple in Salt Lake City. The young elder knew the session started in about fifteen minutes, and it was the last session for the evening. He reached into the back seat, grabbed his coat and suitcase containing his temple clothes, and started running down South Temple. He felt conspicuous and humiliated running down the street, but he arrived just in time at the temple.

He went through the endowment session and then took a bus home after. You do not have to do much persuading in the elders quorum to get quorum members to follow a leader like that. A leader should not expect others to do that which he would not do. In fact, just the reverse is true. He expects more from himself than anyone else and generally does not look back to see who follows.

Example is in all we do. In this the leader is constant. He cannot be one level of character on the battlefield and another level when he is alone.

Dr. Nibley gives us a powerful contrast between leadership and management as he reviews Captain Moroni's attitudes and drives: "History abounds in dramatic confrontations between managers and leaders, but none is more stirring than the epic story of the collision between Moroni and Amalickiah, the one the most charismatic leader, the other the most skillful manager in the Book of Mormon. We are often reminded that Moroni 'did not delight in the shedding of blood' and would do anything to avoid it, repeatedly urging his people to make covenants of peace and to preserve them by faith and prayer. He refused to talk about 'the enemy.' For him they were always 'our brethren,' misled by the traditions of their fathers." (Ibid., p. 45.)

Isn't this a marvelous concept? He refused to talk about "the enemy": for him they were always "our brethren." The leader, even when he is criticized or hated, is still able to see the value of the person behind the attitude.

Words could not describe Captain Moroni more accurately. Again his statement, "I am Moroni; I am a leader." Dr. Nibley goes on to describe Moroni:

He fought them only with heavy reluctance, and he never invaded their lands, even when they threatened invasion of his own, for he never felt threatened since he trusted absolutely in the Lord.

At the slightest sign of weakening by an enemy in battle, Moroni would instantly propose a discussion to put an end to the fighting. The idea of total victory was alien to him—no revenge, no punishment, no reprisals, no reparations, even for an aggressor who had ravaged his country. He would send the beaten enemy home after the battle, accepting their word for good behavior or inviting them to settle on Nephite lands, even when he knew he was taking a risk. Even his countrymen who fought against him lost their lives only while opposing him on the field of battle. There were no firing squads, and conspirators and traitors had only to agree to support his popular army to be reinstated. With Alma, Moroni insisted that conscientious objectors keep their oaths and not go to war even when he desperately needed their help. Always concerned to do the decent thing, he would never take what he called unfair advantage of an enemy. Devoid of personal ambition, the moment the war was over he "yielded up the command of his armies . . . and retired to his own house . . . in peace" (Alma 62:43), though as the national hero he could have had any office or honor. His motto was, "I seek not for power," and as to rank he thought of himself only as one of the despised and outcast of Israel. If all this sounds a bit too idealistic, may I remind you that there really have been such men in history, hard as that is to imagine today.

Above all, Moroni was the charismatic leader, personally going about to rally the people, who came running together spontaneously to his "Title of Liberty," the banner of the poor and downtrodden of Israel (Alma 46:12, 19-21). He had little patience with management and let himself get carried away and wrote tactless and angry letters to the big men sitting "upon [their] thrones in a state of thoughtless stupor" back in the capital (see Alma 60:7). And when it was necessary he bypassed the whole system, "altering the management of the affairs of the Nephites" to counter Amalickiah's managerial skill (Alma 49:11). Yet he could apologize handsomely when he learned that he had been wrong, led by his generous impulses to an exaggerated contempt for management, and he gladly shared with Pahoran the glory of the final victory—one thing that ambitious generals jealously reserve for themselves. (Ibid., p. 45.)

I agree with Dr. Nibley regarding the qualities of a Christ-like leader compared to the motives of most managers. Dr. Nibley states, "The manager knows the price of everything and the value of nothing, because for him the value is the price." (Ibid., p. 46.)

Years ago, before I was called to become a General Authority, we had a top-level security expert speak to the high-level executives in our company. He made one statement that shouted volumes: "Every man or woman in this world has his or her price. It may be money, possessions, power, position, influence, riches, or something else, but everyone has his or her price." I thought of the great leaders in the Church at that time and decided the security expert was wrong. Not every man or woman has a price, but I decided he did. He had apparently seen examples of notable citizens and others who had compromised their values and principles when someone offered them "their price." Even he himself admitted that he could be bought.

Lately I have felt a great concern regarding leadership in the Church. Some local leaders in the Church seem overly interested in providing the same opportunities for all. They practice a principle illustrated by a story that I recently read. Although I do not remember the details exactly, the story went something like this:

There was an athletic competition for all the animals. There were many events sponsored. Those who organized the events felt that it was not fair that the same animals should always win particular events.

It was decided that inasmuch as the thoroughbred horse always won the sprint, he would be excluded from that event. Only turtles, beavers, armadillos, and others could enter the sprint. The thoroughbred horses and the greyhound dogs would have to enter the diving event. However, the eagles, ducks, and beavers were excluded from water events because they always won medals in swimming and diving. The kangaroos and leopards, bears and tigers were entered in weight lifting instead of the high jump. The mouse, rabbit, and raccoon were assigned the high jump, which they had never done well before. The elephant, who was great at weight lifting and always won a gold medal, was assigned to gymnastics. The giraffe was assigned to wrestling, and the cats were assigned to swim.

Every animal had the opportunity to participate in an event which they had never entered before. They were not comfortable because their attempts were contrary to their physical natures. They did not do well, and certainly no records were broken. The spectators showed no excitement because nothing spectacular happened. Medals were awarded as winners stood on the pedestal, but there was little applause and little pride felt by the animal athletes.

All the animals participated, but all were performing in events which were contrary to their God-endowed prowess.

Do you see the moral of this simple tale? We ought to let leaders lead and others serve where they perform best.

This is the Lord's work. It must move forward. The Lord endows men and women with talents, and those talents and leadership abilities ought to be put to use where they can bring about the greatest results. Knowing that God gives such gifts might be why I feel so strongly about leadership. Remember what Dr. Hugh Nibley said regarding leaders and managers: "Men who delighted their superiors (the managers) got the high commands, while the men who delighted the lower ranks (the leaders) got reprimands. Leaders are movers and shakers, original, inventive, unpredictable, imaginative, full of surprises that discomfit the enemy in war and the main office in peace." Always the leaders will get the job done. They lift all around them. David was a leader and changed the cowardice of an entire army to courage. Captain Moroni was a leader and was willing to go to battle to protect his people.

J. C. Penney made the statement that "when the solution to any problem would come, it would always come in the form of a human being."

Great leaders will always be the solution. Leaders delight to see people who have more talent than they have. They see the outstanding traits in everyone, and they use men or women where they can accomplish the very most for the cause.

What great corporation in the world—IBM, General Motors, American Stores, Sears, McDonnell Douglas, and others—would ever take a mediocre executive and make him or her chairman of the board or president of the company? The stockholders would be incensed beyond belief! Businesses want leaders, people who are results oriented, to get the job done for them. Businesses want leaders, and they expect them to use all their talents, skills, and abilities and plumb to the depths of their energy to lead the corporation to greater productivity and profits. That requires leaders.

We ought to pray for spiritual leaders who will lift and motivate people, who will increase activity levels and performances. Why should we use a reluctant or mediocre member when we can draw from the elect and those whom God stood among and called his leaders?

Years ago I heard a story about President David O. McKay attending the dedication of a meetinghouse in Wyoming. He went into the restroom and found that members had carelessly let tissues and papers fall to the floor. Though he was dressed in his white suit, as he often was in those days, he stooped down and picked up every tissue and paper from the floor. Not a word was spoken to anyone. I do not have any idea how many lives that one story has touched, but I do know of one—mine. I think I have not been in a restroom in any meetinghouse that I have not stooped down and picked up any fallen papers from the floor. I have always wiped off the sink and counter after washing my hands. And I have told of President McKay's wonderful servant-leadership example at every meetinghouse I have dedicated.

We will find that those who have the most profound impact on our lives are those who use their leadership roles to serve. Those who are selfish, arrogant, or prideful are loathe to serve but quick to seize power. They love control, domination, and obedience by compulsion.

The Master taught the true heavenly order of priesthood leadership to His first latter-day prophet, Joseph Smith:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly. (D&C 121:41-45.)

When we analyze the principles in this wondrous counsel, we see that it is in great contrast to the world's commonly held view of leadership. To lead people by persuasion is a holy order of God. Persuasion suggests a regeneration, a change of heart, conviction, or renewal. Persuasion brings those we are leading to the same level of understanding that we have. It does not force people against their will but helps willing disciples to change; thus, the will of the persuader and the will of the persuaded become one.

Long-suffering suggests that God wants us to realize that His way in leadership is not a quick fix. We teach, train, and retrain, and then we patiently wait for the results we desired. Long-suffering is deeper than just being patient. It requires empathetic feelings and the realization that each person is different. Some may not mentally grasp a concept or principle; others may not agree and so need persuasion; still others may lack motivation. The long-suffering leader is more interested in developing and training souls than in getting the job done quicker or in some other way, or by someone else.

President Harold B. Lee often focused our attention on one word in the Lord's admonition to "let every man learn his duty." (D&C 107:99.) The word was let. The Christ-like life requires constant seeking and growth. Mortality provides the opportunity to gain knowledge and improve our skills. So often the best of us err but then fully realize it and are wont to change. A long-suffering leader will understand that often the process is as important as the result. This is certainly true in the life of every full-time missionary. At the close of his or her mission, the achievement of completing a full-term mission brings great satisfaction; however, the great blessing is the growth consequent to two years of varied spiritual and service experiences. It was the process that was valuable, not the goal achieved.

Gentleness is a word the Lord uses to describe a necessary trait for one who would use the priesthood. Usually we think of gentleness as a womanly trait. Gentleness is inoffensive, is kind, and has a softening way about it. Think of a gentle touch until you can almost feel it. In leadership, often a gentle touch creates discipleship whereas an iron hand creates rebellion. When we perform the ordinances of the priesthood—such as administering to the sick, giving blessings, ordaining or setting apart, baptizing, or preparing the sacrament—physical and spiritual gentleness is always called for.

Meekness is equally necessary. Those who are meek are absolutely submissive to God. They are teachable and have humble hearts. They are modest in their dress, speech, and service. The meek readily take on the servant-leader role. Righteousness and wisdom may come from any source, even from the lowliest among those whom they lead, and the meek acknowledge and accept it. Meekness causes us to focus on principles, that is, what is right and not who is most influential. The meek feel no need to receive credit; rather they desire to give it to those who may need it.

Love unfeigned suggests genuineness. There is no deceit, ploy, self-serving, spurious attitude in the person whose love is unfeigned. This is the type of love leaders must have. Those who exercise unfeigned love are authentic, genuine, natural, sincere, and honest. They do not flatter, nor do they distort. They are, as someone has said, "all wool and a yard wide."

To be a leader with unfeigned love has such great consequences that becoming one is in itself a supreme motivator. The Savior represented this principle in every act. Such love is a rare quality even in the Church, but it is indispensable to righteously functioning in the priesthood.

Consider again these words from Doctrine and Covenants 121:42: "kindness and pure knowledge." How can kindness and pure knowledge "greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy and without guile"? The term pure knowledge implies that all facts are uncluttered and true, with inaccuracies removed. A leader who has pure knowledge will not blunder or knowingly offend. Pure knowledge presupposes the application of justice and mercy. An effective priesthood leader must be just, and this is possible only from the vantage point of pure knowledge. Nor is mercy excluded from one who has pure knowledge. A prime example is the adulterous woman taken "in the very act," and yet mercy was extended.

Other phrases include, "Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men and to the household of faith." (Verse 45.) Also such words follow as virtue, confidence, and doctrine of the priesthood. These are the qualities to be desired by a leader in the kingdom of God. However, we must first desire to truly serve people before these qualities can become part of the fabric of our robe of leadership.

I am fond of a quotation that I used in another of my books. It came to me from a great Scouter, Bill (William) Gay. Bill has served on the National Executive Board of the Boy Scouts of America for years. In a talk that he gave at a national meeting, he quoted this statement by FranÃ§ois RenÃ© de Chateaubriand:

In the days of service all things are founded. In the days of special privilege they deteriorate. And in the days of vanity, they are destroyed.

Robert Greenleaf, in his book on servant leadership, leads us through this great concept. Of course, it is not new; the prophets have always understood, valued, and followed it. Indeed, the Savior taught His Twelve Apostles: "Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them. But so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister: And whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all." (Mark 10:42-44.)

Servant leadership is based on a profound respect for the children of men. It requires leadership traits that do not demean, debase, or otherwise cause those we lead to feel inferior. Servant leadership lifts, blesses, and changes lives in a positive way.

Years ago I was touring a mission in the South. The ward Relief Society sisters had provided a lunch. They had set up more than a hundred chairs along with the tables. Decorations adorned each table, which were covered with paper. At the end of the lunch, the missionaries were all standing in the cultural hall visiting. The custodian, who was a woman, came in and began to clean up. She started folding chairs and putting them away. I watched for a moment to see if any elder would assist her. No one did. I went to her and told her we would put the chairs away. She seemed relieved. I began to fold chairs and put them away. Within moments the mission president and twenty to thirty missionaries had joined me. We had the chairs and tables stored and the room cleaned within minutes.

There may be some who would say, "What is a General Authority doing putting away chairs?" I would respond, "I was helping a dear sister with a needed task." The question might also be asked, "Then why didn't you just assign the elders to do it?" Again I would respond, "No one had to be told; each one out of his own volition chose to assist." Isn't that servant leadership? Even if not one other elder would have assisted, my own personal standards would not have let me stand by while this sister performed such a heavy labor alone.

Servant-leaders exercise the following traits and practices in their roles. They:

Â Understand the value of every human soul.

Â Have an inborn or developed sense of caring for others.

Â Are quick to volunteer to take pressure off someone else.

Â Rush to the aid of someone who is going through an embarrassing or humiliating experience.

Â Treat all people on a basis of equality.

Â Do not feel that tasks they expect others to do are too demeaning for themselves.

Â Are not offended by disruptions of people who are themselves going through emotional traumas or stress.

Â Expect more from themselves than they do from anyone else.

Â Are quick to compliment, give credit, and build up those who perform a given task.

Â Judge people by their potential, not necessarily by one single negative experience.

Â Do not take credit for someone else's achievements and love to share credit for any of their own accomplishments.

Â Get the facts before finding fault or criticizing another person.

Â Help all people feel they had a real part in the success of a project.

Â Detest practical jokes or statements that focus humiliation or attention on one soul.

Â Always constructively criticize in private and compliment in public.

Â Are absolutely honest in their work.

Â Are equally fair with all under their direction.

Â Are always willing to listen to both sides of a quarrel, discussion, or issue. They know it is a pretty thin pancake that has only one side.

Â Set an example in controlling costs and are conservative.

Â Make themselves accessible to all, not just those with position or power.

True servant-leaders do not need a checklist of these character traits, for they live them daily. I feel strongly about the necessity of servant-leaders treating all with equality. I have heard some secretaries who have been instructed that when the phone rings, they are to first find out who is calling. If the caller has the right name or position, then he or she is permitted to speak with the secretary's boss. However, if the caller lacks influence or is unknown, he or she is not permitted that privilege. Some aspiring leaders are available only to those over them or those who can influence their future. To avoid this appearance, I have always made it a practice to have my secretary not ask a caller's name until after she has informed the caller whether I am in and available. If I am in a meeting, she takes a message and says, "He will call you back as soon as he can." If I am available, she says, "Yes, I will put you through. May I tell him who is calling?"

I know of cases where a young missionary needing a visit with a priesthood leader has come to his office for an appointment. The missionary sat waiting outside the office three hours after his appointment was scheduled. Whenever anyone makes an appointment with a servant-leader, that time belongs to that person. I treat a transgressing missionary with the same respect as I do a stake president. I would not keep a stake president waiting, and I will not keep the missionary waiting either. The fact that a person has been less faithful in keeping his or her covenants than another does not give me license to treat him or her with less consideration. Of course, the counseling will be different, but a person is a person, created in the image of Almighty God. (Lest I be misunderstood , I realize that emergencies can come up that legitimately must alter scheduled appointments on occasion, but even then consideration should be extended to those involved as explanations are given and rescheduling taken care of.)

President Howard W. Hunter was a tremendous servant-leader. I recall Elder Neal A. Maxwell's telling of being in Israel with President Hunter. He awakened at an early hour to find President Hunter shining Elder Maxwell's shoes for him. President Hunter's total life was one of servant leadership. It was contrary to his nature to be authoritative, dictatorial, unfair, critical, or prejudiced.

So many people imposed or seemed to impose on the Master's time and energies. Consider the palsied man who could not get into the house because it was full. They took the palsied one up on the housetop, "and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus." (Luke 5:19.)

Who may know what Jesus was teaching at that precise moment? Undoubtedly it would have been some pearl of great price. Those who lowered the man with palsy before Jesus apparently had not considered anyone but their friend. They did not hesitate to interrupt the Master Teacher, disrupt all who had gathered to hear the message, and remove part of the roof tile to lower the man through. A modern-day equivalent might be someone bursting into a meeting of the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve, and other General Authorities to seek help for a personal need. Yet the Savior showed no anger, no offense. He knew the hearts of these people, so he healed the man and told him to take up his couch and go to his home.

Servant-leaders are leaders because they are servants first of all. Servant-leaders might not be properly recognized by those of greater influence and might even be ridiculed as was Jesus for healing the palsied man. Nevertheless, the people always know who the real leaders are.

Servant-leaders also understand the uniqueness and individualism of each person. Years ago I remember hearing the Greek legend of Procrustes. The legend referred to a "Bed of Procrustes." It was six feet long. Those who were not six feet tall were stretched to fit the bed. Those who were over six feet had the excess inches lopped off. Everyone was expected to fit the Procrustean Bed. That is fortunately not the way of the Lord or His kingdom. He has always called uncommon men and women with great integrity, ambition, discipline, and faith in Christ. Not all will fit in the same size bed, nor will all fit into the same callings.

Everyone will not—and should not—be the pinnacle leader at the ward, stake, or general Church level, but everyone can make his or her maximum contributions as a servant-leader in a particular calling and circumstance. And that is all the Savior expects of us—our very best, wherever we are.
