Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Thirteen

To Touch the Hem of His Garment

Oh, what a blessing God gave to us through His Only Begotten! No one who ever brushes against the teachings and ministry of Jesus will ever be the same. They may choose not to accept His gifts beyond measure, but they will never forget Him.

I would like to share some thoughts about an issue of blood and an issue of tears. One of the most touching of all Jesus' miracles came as a result of hearing of miracles. A woman had had an issue of blood for twelve years. I think of this story often because of the tenderness of the situation. (Luke 8:43-48.) Imagine any human soul having a constant fountain of bleeding. Consider the physical limitations this would place on the one so afflicted, the draining of her energy and health day after day, year after year. The woman must have been weak, pale, and anemic. She had been to various physicians over the years, none of whom had brought relief. She had spent all of her money and undoubtedly was nearly destitute.

She may well have come near losing all hope. When hope dies, we die. Hope is essential to life's continuance. In our mind's eye we may catch a glimpse of her in her home. We see her desperate, heartsick, weak, and ill. Even she must have questioned why she had to go on living.

Somehow in this final state of hopelessness, she heard about one Jesus of Nazareth who was healing the sick, causing the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the leprous to be cleansed. A fountain of hope must have sprung up inside her heart. She learned of His being nearby. Surely, she put on the best of her poverty-governed wardrobe and hurried to where He was supposed to be. At last, she saw Him amid the throngs of people. The disciples were near Him, and everyone was jostling, pushing, trying to get closer. Some were curious; others loved Him and followed out of reverence; still others hoped for a blessing.

This woman, seeing the Master, thought, "If I but touch the hem of His garment, I will be healed." How it was that she mustered the strength to push through the crowd to get close enough to touch Him, we may never know. Drawing close, she reached out and was able to do no more than touch His garment. Immediately the blood was stanched. We picture the woman, sinking back into the crowd and perhaps even dropping to her knees in gratitude. The Savior halted and said, "Who touched me?" Everywhere people were pressing and pushing, brushing against him constantly, and so the disciples responded that many people had touched Him, for they were pressing on all sides. However, only one had really touched Him. He turned and saw the woman, who must have known He was questioning after her. I suppose the suddenness of the blood being stanched, the Master's stopping, the crowd quieting down to hear what He was saying, and the full attention being drawn to this woman would have been more than she could bear. She must have felt as if she were spotlighted on center stage. Rapt attention of all the crowd focused on her. She may even have felt guilty.

Luke's record of the event states, "Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me." (Luke 8:46.) Again we consider Jesus' sensitivity to know and feel a "healing" virtue leave Him. He knew that someone had, through faith, drawn healing from the well of His soul and had more than brushed against Him.

"And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately." (Verse 47.)

He undoubtedly detected her guilt, embarrassment, or humiliation and said, "Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace." (Verse 48.)

What a comfort, what solace, what power in the few simple words of the Master of heaven and earth! The peace she received may have been equal to the healing blessing. When the Son of God blesses with peace, it is an absolute fact that peace will come. Nor could the crowd find fault, for He said, "Go in peace."

Though not recorded in scripture, undoubtedly the halting of the issue of blood was followed by an outpouring of an issue of tears. It usually takes an issue of tears to prepare us for the benefits of the Atonement. It would be a blessing to all of us if somehow we could close out the final pages of our book of life without ever having smudged or otherwise marred the pages. Too often, though, we find those who have been involved in serious transgression. Furthermore, all of us sin to a greater or lesser degree, and we will all be tried.

President Harold B. Lee shared a great truth during his conference talk in April 1950. He said: "It is my conviction that every man who will be called to a high place in this Church will have to pass these tests not devised by human hands, by which our Father numbers them as a united group of leaders willing to follow the prophets of the Living God and be loyal and true as witnesses and exemplars of the truths they teach." (Conference Report, April 1950, p. 101.)

The Apostle Paul gave us a lifeline as he declared in 1 Corinthians 10:13: "There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it."

What did President Lee mean when he said that we "will have to pass through tests not devised by human hands"? What does it mean to "make a way to escape"? This life provides an opportunity for us to use our agency. It appears from President Lee's statement that there will be a special testing for those who will walk in high places. The testing may well be unique to us. And, of course, the greatest trials we face have to do with the things we love the most—our families, our church, our religion, our leaders, our country, and our friends. These things have the potential of hurting us most.

"Not devised by human hands" suggests that the Lord has His own program for purifying and preparing His leaders. Many of us feel that we have been refined in the Lord's crucible more often than we would want, had we a choice. It is not easy to be between the hammer and the anvil. But we must remember always what Paul said: "[God] will with the temptation make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." It is my opinion that this same principle applies to tests and trials we face. They will never be greater than we can withstand.

We find how resilient our souls are. We find out how far we can bend and still not break. The Lord knows us better than we know ourselves, and He is constantly molding us to the grand design of His great expectation and divine destiny. We will always come through testings as a more valued human soul. Each trial brings out the "steel and velvet" in us, as someone has said. Our commitment to the absolute truths of the gospel puts a steel in us that can endure tremendous pressure. On the other hand, the suffering brings about a velvet softness, a Christ-like charity. Suffering or testing, trials or troubles, sinsickness or soulsickness—all take us through our own personal issue of tears.

Years ago I was at an inn in Tennessee. The inn had a special hall where world-renowned Tennesseeans were honored. The walls were covered with plaques and portraits of the men and women who had left an impression on the past and were honored and beloved in the present. One of those men was Walter Malone, who had written a poem entitled "Opportunity." May I share it with you?

Opportunity

They do me wrong who say I come no more When once I knock and fail to find you in, For every day I stand outside your door And bid you wake, and rise to fight and win.

Wail not for precious chances passed away, Weep not for golden ages on the wane! Each night I burn the records of the day; At sunrise every soul is born again.

Laugh like a boy at splendors that have sped, To vanished joys be blind and deaf and dumb; My judgments seal the dead past with its dead, But never bind a moment yet to come.

Though deep in mire, wring not your hands and weep; I lend my arm to all who say "I can!" No shamefaced outcast ever sank so deep But yet might rise and be again a man.

Dost thou behold thy lost youth all aghast? Dost reel from righteous retribution's blow? Then turn from blotted archives of the past And find the future's pages white as snow.

Art thou a mourner? Rouse thee from thy spell; Art thou a sinner? Sins may be forgiven; Each morning gives thee wings to flee from hell, Each night a star to guide thy feet to heaven. (In Ralph L. Woods, ed., A Treasury of Inspiration [New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1951], p. 83.)

I have quoted portions of this poem to members of the Church the world over. I believe with all my heart in its principles. The star of hope is essential in the eyes of all humanity. It may dim and flicker, but it must remain if we are to survive. Walter Malone's marvelous poem provides hope and teaches eternal truths. It is a special gift for all who feel inadequate, unloved, unwanted, or unimportant. John Wesley quoted his mother, I believe, who said to him:

Do all the good you can, By all the means you can, In all the ways you can, In all the places you can, At all the times you can, To all the people you can, As long as ever you can.

This is another gift we all can give. There is no qualifier in this marvelous statement regarding those whom we serve—just everyone, all the time, with all we have. Certain truths ring to the center of our beings. The statement by John Wesley is one of them.

In Mark 10:29-30 the Lord talks to the unwearying Saints who serve: "There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's, but he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life."

C. S. Lewis gave a gift to all who are endlessly doing good and blessing their children, and who later find the children blaming their faults and weaknesses on Mom and Dad. Those children put us on a guilt trip and lay a shadow on our heart that is with us twenty-four hours a day. In his book The Great Divorce, Lewis taught a principle that is a blessing to myriads of souls: pity and guilt cannot forever hold us hostage. There are those who wallow in their pity. The only misplaced joy they get is in the guilt they can place on others. This happens in unhappy marriages, those who transgress and rebel, those who commit suicide. They get even by laying guilt on all those they leave behind. The only satisfaction they get is knowing that husbands and wives, fathers or mothers, teachers or bishops will forever have a void that guilt or pity places on them. (P. 12.)

C. S. Lewis suggested that the demand of the loveless and self-imprisoned cannot be allowed or permitted to blackmail the universe or hold others at hostage until they consent to be happy. This, they suppose, has to be on their terms, not anyone else's, that somehow hell should be able to veto heaven's blessings.

Could it be that after we have done all we can to reconcile and make peace with those we may have offended that there does come a time when their tyranny will have no power over us? This may sound cruel when we think of a son or daughter—a Laman or Lemuel, Absalom or Cain—but even those we love most dearly, our family members, must not have power to forever darken our joy. One day we will have God's love, which is eternal love. There can be no shadow that would or could darken our joy for eternity, for that would not be just. What a marvelous gift that concept is. We can begin to practice it in righteousness in this life. The Master said, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.)

Another marvelous gift is that of life itself. The Savior of heaven and earth was born in what was described as a lowly stable. He was "wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger." (Luke 2:7.) As humble as that beginning was for Jesus, we have births as humble today. Jesus was loved by Mary and Joseph. Mary knew that he was physically, literally, the Son of God. Joseph had had a heavenly manifestation that let him know of the divine destiny of this babe born of his espoused wife. We suppose Joseph would lay clean hay or straw down as well as make everything as comfortable as possible.

I once read in the newspaper of two births. One of the babies, a girl, was put into a plastic bag and stuffed into a garbage can. The other was discarded similarly in a trash bin. Both babies were found only hours after birth and survived.

Just after the turn of the century, Brother Cobbley in Pleasant Grove, Utah, was working in his yard. It was the fall of the year. He was raking leaves. The previous year Brother and Sister Cobbley's teenaged son was killed. Sister Cobbley grieved greatly and could not get his death off her heart. Brother Cobbley, while raking the yard, noticed a burlap sack that someone had thrown over the fence into his garden. He took his pitchfork and was about to run it through the sack to throw it onto the pile of leaves, when suddenly he heard a muffled sound. He opened the sack, and there was a beautiful baby girl just a few hours old. He took her into the house. The mother, who had been grieving, had her heart healed by the spirit of mercy that overwhelmed her. She said, "This is our gift from God."

They had ten or twelve children. They put the name of each child into a hat. The child whose name was drawn out would have the privilege of naming the baby. The fifteen-year-old son's name was drawn. He must have obtained a book of names and name meanings. When he made his decision, he said, "We will call her Dorothy because Dorothy means 'gift of God.'"

This little soul grew up in the Cobbley home. She was loved without measure. They said she was like Pollyanna—she was always happy. She was a vivacious, healthy child in grade school and was popular in high school. Many said she was one of the most beautiful girls in the school. She was always kind and warm to everyone.

She also had the good sense to date young men with promise and a love for the Lord. She married one of these in the Salt Lake Temple. When they came out of the temple, they walked down to the A&W root beer stand on Fifth South and State Street (I believe), and had a five-cent root beer and a hamburger. That was their wedding breakfast. Then the couple went to eastern Idaho, where the new husband went into the grocery business.

Years later this young man and his father had several stores in the Northwest. They sold them, and he went to work for Safeway. One day the founder of Safeway, L. S. Skaggs, called this man into his office. He made Dorothy's husband an offer that reflected on the value of the man. He gave him a check for one million dollars and told him they were going into business together. He said they would share the profits fifty-fifty. L. S. Skaggs was to furnish the money, and Dorothy's husband was to manage the business. It was a great success. Dorothy's husband became wealthy. He never forgot the Church. He served as a stake president, a regional representative, a temple president, and a General Authority of the Church. Dorothy Cobbley had married O. Leslie Stone, who served as an Assistant to the Twelve and as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy. What a great and precious gift is the gift of life, however humble the beginning.

Another special gift I would wish for each of us is the gift of sight and the use of it. We see much in this life. How we use this precious gift of sight is part of our gift to God.

If You Know a Tall Man

If you know a tall man out ahead of the crowd, A leader of men marching fearless and proud, And you know a tale which the mere telling aloud Would cause his proud head in shame to be bowed, It's a pretty good plan to forget it.

If you know of a skeleton hidden away in a closet, Guarded and kept from the day in the dark, Whose showing, whose sudden display, Would cause grief and sorrow and lifelong dismay, It's a pretty good plan to forget it.

If you know of a spot in the life of a friend, We all have such spots concealed world without end, Which the shame of its telling no grieving could mend, It's a pretty good thing to forget it.

If you know of a thing that would darken the joy, Of a man or a woman, a girl or a boy, That would sadden or in the least way Annoy a fellow or cause gladness to stray, It's a pretty good plan to forget it. (Anonymous.)

We see much of what people do. Some things are not worthy of them. We might occasionally see conduct not becoming a Latter-day Saint. Do we also see all of the wonderful things that people do around us? There is so much good in people. If we are watching for that goodness, we will see it. If we watch for faults, we will see them. How much better to look for the good. We ought to use our sight to the greatest advantage.

Reading is a marvelous gift. When we read, we can be in an instant at the temple in the land of Bountiful or at the foot of King Benjamin's tower. We can stand shoulder to shoulder with Captain Moroni with our own "title of liberty." We can be in a sacred grove with Joseph Smith or at Christ's birth with Mary and Joseph.

We can see in our mind's eye all the great goodness of God's creations, traveling by book from one land to another. We can stand with Winston Churchill during World War II or walk onto the shore with General Douglas MacArthur and General Carlos Romulo when he returned to the Philippines. What a blessing it is to read!

Elder Marion D. Hanks stated that on a tombstone in a cemetery in Switzerland is an epitaph that reads: "Here lies a man who was straight and true and wise as a chest of old books."

The lyrics in the "Blind Plowman" speak of "God, who took away my sight that my soul might see." But God should not have to take away our sight for us to receive spiritual insight. Rather, let us use both types of sight to bless others.

Another gift, when used properly, is our ability to communicate. Oh, what power and sweetness, what love and strength is in the human voice! We have the potential to speak and bless so many lives. J. S. Lewis shared with us a song that has been a gift to all who have heard it:

Oh, I Had Such a Pretty Dream, Mama

Oh I had such a pretty dream, Mama, Such pleasant and beautiful things; Of a dear little nest, In the meadows of rest, Where the birdie his lullaby sings.

A dear little stream full of lilies, Crept over the green merry stones, And just where I lay, Its thin sparkling spray Sang sweetly in delicate tones.

And as it flowed on toward the ocean, Thro' shadows and pretty sunbeams, Each note grew more deep, And I soon fell asleep And was off to the island of dreams.

I saw there a beautiful angel, With crown all bespangled with dew; She touched me and spoke, And I quickly awoke, And found there, dear Mama, 'twas you." (J. S. Lewis, Deseret Sunday School Songs, p. 184.)

We can make such beautiful memories with words, even though there are some things that cannot be described: "No tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak." (3 Nephi 17:17.)

"Memories" as someone has said, "come surging back into the heart to make it clean or to accuse it."

We may speak a word of comfort to someone struggling that may be more important than we would ever suppose. Each Christmas I consider and ponder deeply over the gifts of God. Usually I speak somewhere to some group, as much for me as for them. It is in the preparation of Christmas talks that I feel deeply of the Spirit.

Our family has Christmas traditions, as do you. Some are recognized and are labeled as Christmas traditions. Some are repeated year after year but somehow are not gathered onto a list of our traditions.

Like many people, we decorate our house inside and out. We have three wise men, wonderfully created and standing about eighteen- to twenty-four inches tall. They have been part of our decorations for about thirty years. We keep them in a large trunk at home. One year when our daughter was staying in our house, she found them and put them on the piano for Christmas. That is where we generally put them. Their faces are sculptured and detailed, filled with character. She knew that was what her mom would want.

We decorate the railings and have manger scenes, wreaths, other miniature Christmas scenes, and all else that an imaginative and creative woman can dream up during the year.

On Christmas Eve we read from the second chapter of Luke and The Other Wise Man, by Henry Van Dyke.

Some of us who no longer have to put toys together will watch a videotape or a television program of Handel's Messiah. We will watch It's a Wonderful Life, starring Jimmy Stewart, and shed a few tears. We will see Mr. Krueger's Christmas and hopefully The Miracle on 34th Street. Cookies and 7-Up will be prepared for Santa Claus (he doesn't like milk at our house). There are also some traditional (not on the list) things that I do. I always love to listen to "O Holy Night," "The Holy City," and "Ave Maria" (in our Church the lyrics are "Heavenly Father"). I love the smell of cinnamon rolls baking early in the day and a turkey baking on Christmas Eve. I like to be at home on Christmas Eve, so we go visiting, delivering gifts, and singing carols a few days before.

I also like to have some calorie-loaded eggnog and Mrs. Cavanaugh's chocolates, and I love when it snows. I like to sit up late with a fire in the fireplace, just content not to have to do a great deal. That is also a gift we earn.

No Place to Go

The happiest nights I ever know Are those when I've No place to go, And the missus says When the day is through: "To-night we haven't A thing to do."

Oh, the joy of it, And the peace untold Of sitting 'round In my slippers old, With my [favorite] book In my easy chair, Knowing I needn't Go anywhere.

Needn't hurry My evening meal Nor force the smiles That I do not feel, But can grab a book From a near-by shelf, And drop all sham And be myself.

Oh, the joy of it, Oh, the comfort rare, Nothing on this earth To it can compare. And I'm sorry for him Who doesn't know The joy of having No place to go. (Edgar A. Guest, A Heap o' Livin' [Chicago: Reilly and Lee Co., 1916], pp. 110-11.)

I am convinced that the gift of peace to enjoy a time when you can relax is also a gift of God. There is a sweet time of rest for the laborer.

Let me conclude with a final gift we all have—the gift of friends. Oh, what a blessing it is to have a good friend! In section 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord responds to Joseph Smith's humble pleading and praying that the Lord, with his "sword [would] avenge us of our wrongs" and that "thy suffering saints . . . will rejoice in thy name forever." (D&C 121:5-6.) The Savior comforted Joseph and referred to Job's trials. Job had lost his camels, his sheep, his asses, and much more. He had lost all of his children when the wind blew down his house. He also suffered carbuncles and boils. However, the thing that the Lord focused on when comforting Joseph was that "thy friends do not contend against thee . . . as they did Job." (D&C 121:10; emphasis added.)

Friends are essential, and blessed is the man or woman who has close friends. We had a dear friend who was also our bishop. His name was Paul Pehrson. He was a "man after [God's] own heart," as David was described. (1 Samuel 13:14.)

We had a young man in our ward named Dan Baker. Dan was a teenager. He lived with a younger sister and his mother. I believe his parents were divorced. They went through some difficult times. Dan played the piano, and he played it well. He was not just talented but exceptionally so. The mother had to sell the piano when conditions grew tough financially. Dan did not complain, although it nearly broke his heart. But it broke his mother's heart a thousand times more. She knew what the piano meant to the life of a boy without a father and with a poor self-image. However, she had no choice. In order to survive, they had to sell the piano.

A few days before Christmas a nice used piano was delivered to the home of the Bakers. It was a Christmas present from an anonymous giver. We found out by accident that the giver was our bishop, Paul Pehrson.

That same year we decided we would order Christmas through a catalog. We all selected what we wanted. We sent the order in two or three months before Christmas. The week before Christmas, the order had not yet arrived. About 99 percent of our family's Christmas was on that order. I comforted my wife and told her that the company was a prominent one—they would know that was our Christmas order, and it would be delivered on or before 24 December. It was not. We waited until late in the afternoon, and still there was no delivery. To me it was incomprehensible that such a business would not perform. Merlene and I were aching inside. Somehow I think I felt like my mom did all those Christmases when she couldn't give us everything we ordered or even anything we wanted.

I do not remember whether we had to get Paul Pehrson to open up his hardware store just for us or not. I only remember that we met him there, and we bought gifts for each of our sons, all five of them. I had no way to get the money to him that night; I did not have enough in my account, and no bank was open where I could get a loan. He never even raised the subject—but I did. I asked him if I could pay him after I had obtained a loan. He was kind beyond belief. We had a Christmas that year because of a bishop who was one of the dearest friends we have ever had.

You need only one friend like Paul Pehrson to be endowed with a great gift. I suppose, looking back, that there were hundreds and hundreds of people who felt that Paul Pehrson was a close friend.

The purchases from the catalog never did come. In February we received a letter asking if we still wanted our order filled.

We sometimes sing of the twelve days of Christmas; here are the thirteen gifts that we have considered in this chapter:

Â The gifts of an issue of blood and an issue of tears

Â The gift of testing

Â The gift of having "a way to escape"

Â The gift of the opportunity to start over and be clean

Â The gift of hope

Â The gift of self

Â The gift of being free from guilt that others try to place on us

Â The gift of life itself

Â The gift of sight to see the things of God and to read

Â The gift to communicate and to bless through our words

Â The gift of having traditions, both listed and unspoken

Â The gift of rest for those who deserve it

Â The gift of friends

These are thirteen gifts of Christmas we might consider this year, but the greatest of all God's gifts is eternal life. And that gift is available to all who ever have, do now, or will yet walk the earth. Only a few will receive it. He who trod the winepress alone invites all to enter His Father's kingdom.

What a wondrous announcement a single star hanging over Bethlehem made! What a beautiful concept is a Christ-centered Christmas! Let us give the gifts of Christmas all year round. We may be tested with an issue of blood or an issue of tears, but we will be tested. And when we are, let us always remember that through faith we can reach out, "touch the hem of his garment," and be healed.
