Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Fourteen

Having Christ's Image in Our Countenance

In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it." King Nebuchadnezzar "spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king's seed, and of the princes." (Daniel 1:1, 3.)

Then King Nebuchadnezzar set a standard for the young men to be considered. He wanted "children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured." (Verse 4.) This would suggest he wanted strong, robust young men who were healthy, energetic, and had high energy levels; young men who were well proportioned, with a comely or handsome appearance.

He was also desirous that they be skillful in all wisdom. (Verse 4.) That is quite a requirement for a young man. Elder John H. Vandenberg has said, "Wisdom is the fruit which ripens slowly." (Conference Report, April 1969, pp. 17-18.) However, nearly every community has some young men who seem to have good judgment and more than average wisdom for their age. "Skillful in wisdom " suggests that they would know when and where to use their wisdom. In addition, he wanted them to be "cunning in knowledge." (Verse 4.) To be cunning in knowledge might imply that someone be a plotter or sly in the use of information. Knowledge benefits us most when it can be used properly. Many people have accumulated great amounts of knowledge, but they do not always use it in a positive way. Sometimes their knowledge remains a seldom-used bank of information. Apparently the king wanted knowledgeable young men who also had the wit to use that knowledge for his purposes.

It was necessary, according to the king's standard, that those selected have an understanding of science. (Verse 4.) In the broad sense, the king must have thought of the sciences of earth and nature, heavens and stars, chemistry, language, mathematics, and constant laws of the universe.

King Nebuchadnezzar wanted those who could "stand in the king's palace." (Verse 4.) Those selected would be expected to be confident, assured, dignified, portraying a proper image, and at ease with nobility. Also the king planned on having them learn the "tongue of the Chaldeans." (Verse 4.) A quick and bright intellect with the discipline to study hard would be necessary.

In one paragraph, King Nebuchadnezzar set a high standard for those who would be chosen: "Children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans." (Daniel 1:4.)

The king had a special interest in this group. He appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat and of the wine that he drank: for three years he planned to nourish them in this way so that at the end they might stand before him. (See verse 5.)

Among those selected were the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. Now, the name of Daniel we know, but who were Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah? Actually the prince of the eunuchs gave new names to all four. He changed Daniel's name to Belteshazzar. This seems to have made little difference, for down through the ages, Daniel is the name that follows his prophetic role. The names given to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah were Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Of course, these are the names by which we remember these three Hebrew lads.

Daniel is described as having an "excellent spirit," and indeed he did. He made up his mind that he would not defile himself with the king's meat or the king's wine. This was the finest meat and wine procurable. It was the very food and drink of the king himself. Regularly dining on this bounteous feast was a privilege extended to few in the kingdom.

Daniel went to the prince of the eunuch and requested that he might not be brought to defile himself. (Daniel 1:8.) God had brought Daniel into favor of the prince of the eunuchs. The prince desired to grant Daniel's request, but his fear of the king was greater than his love for Daniel. The eunuch said, "I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king." (Verse 10.)

Then Daniel said to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, "Prove thy servants . . . ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink. Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants." (Verses 12-13.)

Pulse, according to the Bible Dictionary, refers to seeds, including grains of leguminous vegetables or any other edible seeds.

Melzar took away the portion of their meat and the wine that they should drink, and gave them pulse. "As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams." (Verse 17.)

At the end of the allotted time, "the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar. And the king communed with them; and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they before the king. And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm." (Verses 19-20.)

Consider that these four young men were ten times better. They were part of an elite, hand-selected group who were the best of the best. Imagine being ten times better than all the others who were also hand selected.

Nebuchadnezzar then dreamed a dream that troubled his spirit. He was unable to sleep, and he could not recall the dream. He commanded the magicians, the astrologers, and the sorcerers to make known his dream. They responded, "O king, live for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation." (Daniel 2:4.)

But the dream was gone from him. That was part of the problem. King Nebuchadnezzar threatened their lives if they were unable to recall his dream and interpret it. The king could see behind the deceit and cunning of the astrologers and sorcerers. Only he in all the world would know the dream. The astrologers, magicians, and sorcerers had no possible way to find out what the king's dream was. There was no way that chicanery, tricks, or deceit could take place. He would recall the dream when someone through a special power could relate it to him.

When Daniel heard that the decree had gone forth to have the wise men slain, he went to Arioch, captain of the king's guard, who was assigned to slay these wise men. "Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation." (Verse 16.) Then Daniel went to his house and made known to Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego what he had done. They were anxious that the tender mercies of God would reveal the secret that they might not be slain. "Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven." (Verse 19.)

There was only one power on earth or in heaven that could reveal the dream, the God of heaven. Daniel praised His name. Then Daniel taught the overruling power of God and said: "Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his: and he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding: He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him." (Daniel 2:20-22.)

Then Daniel sought Arioch and asked to be brought before the king. The king said to Daniel, "Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?" (Verse 26.)

Daniel wanted the king to remember that the magicians, the astrologers, the sorcerers, and the soothsayers could not know the secret. Then Daniel declared:

But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. . . .

As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.

But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king, . . .

Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof was terrible.

This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,

His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.

Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.

Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.

This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof before the king.

Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

. . . Thou art this head of gold. (Daniel 2:28-38.)

He then describes inferior kingdoms until the last days. Then he envisions our day:

And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

. . . the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure. (Daniel 2:44-45.)

This is a great prophecy for the latter days. King Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, worshipped Daniel, and commanded that great privileges come to him. He also declared to Daniel, "Your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets." (Verse 47.)

Then the scripture states that King Nebuchadnezzar made Daniel a great man. In reality, no one can make someone else great. Daniel was already great, and the king merely honored him. Every time Daniel was honored, he also lifted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.

It is a marvelous privilege to associate with good and holy people, those who have determined their course in life and have the integrity to follow it at all costs. Daniel was living proof to these three young men that God is only a whisper away to his true servants.

In Daniel 3, these three young men would face their own test—life threatening and horrible.

King Nebuchadnezzar made an image of gold. It is likely that he received the idea from his dream. The image was three score cubits high (approximately ninety feet) and six cubits wide (about nine feet). He set it up in the plain of Dura. King Nebuchadnezzar invited all the princes, governors, captains, judges, treasurers, counsellors, sheriffs, and rulers to come to the dedication of the golden image.

When all had gathered, a herald cried aloud, "To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages, that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the golden image." This was followed by a threat that "whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace." (Daniel 3:5-6.)

Everyone complied with the king's decree except Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Certain Chaldeans made this known to the king. They rehearsed the king's decree and punishment and made their accusations against the three Hebrew princes.

King Nebuchadnezzar, in his rage and fury, commanded Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego to be brought before him. The command and threats were reaffirmed. He said, "If ye worship not [the golden image], ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace." And then Nebuchadnezzar taunted them, "And who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?" (Verse 15.) How quickly he had forgotten, and Daniel was not there to remind the king. Indeed who is that God? Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego answered, "We are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve [not just worship] is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up." (Verses 16-18.)

King Nebuchadnezzar was furious; he commanded that the furnace be heated seven times more than it was usually heated. He commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind these three Hebrew princes and cast them into the burning fiery furnace. Then these men were bound in their coats, their hose, their hats, and their other garments, and the three godly men were cast into the midst of the furnace.

The flame was so hot that the men who cast Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were slain by the heat, and these three men fell down in the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

To the king's great astonishment, he saw not only the three young men but also a fourth who was like the "Son of God." (Verse 25.)

Nebuchadnezzar came near to the furnace and spake, "Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither." (Verse 26.) Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego came forth out of the midst of the fire. They had not been harmed; not even a single hair of their head had been singed. Their coats were not changed, and there was no smell of fire.

Then Nebuchadnezzar said, "Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God." (Verse 28.) Then the king made a decree that no one should speak against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.

So much is left unsaid. What about the Chaldean informers? Can you imagine they would creep back into their holes where the jealous, aspiring, prideful, and evil lurk?

Where was Daniel during this great event? There is little question that his presence would have made a difference. However, the Lord in his great love and condescension let Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego go through their own trial of faith. No one has done it better. They were magnificent in defying the king's command even at the peril of their lives.

Remember that when they were selected, they were "children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge . . . and such as had the ability in them to stand in the king's palace." (Daniel 1:4.)

In the end, they were more than that—they stood in royal priesthood dignity before the king and defied him with power and assurance. Not even his kingly authority could force them to compromise the least or greatest commandments of God.

The names Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah will be emblazoned in the eternities for all to honor, for these three great men and Daniel had Christ's image in their countenance and His law in their hearts.
