Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Sixteen

Christ, Our Constant Inspiration

Over the years the Spirit has touched my life. The influence of the Spirit lifts us to more noble deeds and thoughts. That influence can be felt in many ways, and often we struggle to express the deep, sweet, wonderful emotions attendant to the Spirit. In this short chapter, I have assembled a few poems on various themes that attempt to make such expression.

Some years ago I spoke at Brigham Young University about the sufferings of the Martin Handcart Company and other pioneer trials. It inspired me to write this poem:

They All Came Through in Glory

In July's hot sun, The trek begun, The handcart companies toiled. With oxen to goad, And heavy load, Their faces strong and soiled, They built and tooled, They pushed and pulled, Till wearily they fell. They toiled and sweat, Till dripping wet, They bid the past farewell. Up and down, No golden crown, The dust rose up in clouds. From early dawn, They toiled on, The cold around them shrouds. The very best Continued west, With all they owned they came. Proud men, Greater then, Stripped of pride and shame. But the trials grew, The windstorms blew, Came soon the dreadful foe. Ice and cold, Testing young and old, In whiteness fell the snow. After labored breath, With night came death; Brave souls lay in the grave. Free of greed, They shared indeed, But more, their lives they gave. Frostbite came And made some lame; Others never walked again. Laid to sleep, In snow knee deep, The roughest, toughest of men. At night's end, Death was their friend, Nor breathed they evermore. Relief had come, Life was done, Swept to an eternal shore.

Those still spared, Less well they fared, For the crucible was fired white. They wept and froze, In their tattered clothes. Angels blessed them through the night. Food grew scarce, Life more sparse, A moment seemed like a life. Yet they lost not faith While fearing death Of daughter, son, or wife. With rags wrapped 'round Their feet were bound; The penetrating cold still chilled. The wolves came too And dug graves through, Their starving stomachs filled. Then from far away Came help that day, With men, wagons, and supplies. And great tears shed, Over a loaf of bread, While brave rescuers wiped their eyes.

Now saw they light Through darkest night, For the caring brethren came. Westward they streamed, As they had dreamed, Came forth the cold and lame. Through mountains steep Where snow drifts deep, Their goal was almost reached. Soon their valley home, Under heaven's dome, Lay before them on deserts bleached. To the valley floor, Through the open door, To loving homes they came. The pudding and bread, To souls almost dead, Was as manna to their frame. And now the years Have dried the tears Of the pioneer stories we tell. Let us not forget The trials they met Were the bitterest tests of hell. For their faith proved true For me and you, And they all came through in glory. The heart doth melt For the tests they felt In the brave pioneer handcart story.

Over time I have watched the spirit of patriotism wane. Other than at athletic events, we seldom sing patriotic songs, nor do we recite the Pledge of Allegiance. We must teach our children patriotism, a marvelous character trait of great people. The following poem expresses my deep feelings for my homeland. I wrote it taking inspiration from statements by Abraham Lincoln and Captain Moroni, lest we forget.

For Freedom Burned in Heart and Bone (A Call to Patriotism)

Of latter nations on the earth The one to me of greatest worth Is my own dear, beloved land Whose place with ancient empires stand. White stars adorn her noble flag; It will not fade, nor will it sag. For heroes brave have shed their blood And fought in snow and cold and mud.

Young men to battle stations went, While wives and mothers not content To sit and watch their loved ones die, With tear-stained cheek and moistened eye, Became a source of strength ne'er matched By any army ere dispatched. For freedom burned in heart and bone, And brave, great men dared stand alone. And so the patriotic ten Became a hundred million men Who swore before the throne of God That no foreign foot would ever trod By force upon one inch of land Kept sacred by a loyal band Of Christians who were strong and true And did what God would have them do.

So hail our land, long may it be The ensign of our liberty. May every man down to the last Match men of courage from the past. God bless our nation, keep her free, Guard well her human dignity. And grant that we may never falter For brave men's hearts lie on her altar.

The next poem is inspired by my own dear mother. President Benson and his wife, President Hinckley and his wife, and President Monson and his wife all attended the viewing for this beautiful woman I love and honor and call Mother. Many of the Twelve and Seventy attended the funeral of this Saint, insignificant to the world and yet terribly important and loved by eight children. To honor her I wrote these words:

Mothers

Her children were her crown and glory; A simplistic life, a common story. Her silver locks imbued with beauty Golden once, now white from duty. She served in all she did each day The tide of "men" who crossed her way; Her constant caring touched each life In joy or peace or endless strife. She tended children and loved each one, Prepared the meals till day was done. She washed and ironed and ever shared; She swept and vacuumed and always cared. Some good she sought to do each day; Her food she shared in every way. She had little sleep and far less rest, Her life an endless trial and test.

The years extracted from this wife Energy and strength, her very life. And so the motherly gift she'd given Was a golden path that leads to heaven. Her children, friends, and all she met Were swept into her loving net. And when her life's last breath was spent, Her eyes were closed in sweet content. Honored by both the great and small, They came to weep, her friends and all. Another mother's life was o'er, Not rich, not great, but wise and sure. Blessed by God so sweet and fine, A mother pure, God's grand design.

The next verse was inspired by my love for good and righteous leaders. The greatest examples of leadership in my life have come from within this magnificent and wonderful Church.

The Law of the Leader

The law of the leader is irrefutably true; He will accomplish what others dare not do. Where do we find the qualities to lead? The law of the leader says examine the deed. For a leader will always comply with the law Of committing himself with a resolute jaw. He is fearless and tireless; he's faithful and true; He works longer and harder than lesser men do. He breaks not a commitment and always comes through, A "go getter," do better, inspired and true. His law is to succeed whatever his cost, For life to him in the wide world would be lost If he dared not lead out and aid other men To take giant strides and be heroes again.

These next two poems were inspired by Christ's ministry and how it influences our lives. Hopefully, one or more of these might be an inspiration to someone, somewhere, sometime.

The Hope of the World

The light in my life is a constant one, A holiness that shrouds me till daylight is done. It's the warmth in my soul, the light in my eye; It's a fire . . . a shining . . . till the day that I die.

Oh Master, dear Master, how may I show My love, my commitment, my feelings, and oh . . . How then can one who has felt of Thy power Be without it a moment, an instant, an hour?

Thou comfortest my soul; Thy balm's healing love Is distilled on Thy servant like rains from above. Oh Jesus, my Savior, my soul would be lost If Thy light, which surrounds me, o'er my path ne'er crossed.

Thou art my beacon, my light from the shore, The glow in my countenance, my hope evermore. Who am I that can abide in Thy love, Which rests on my soul like a soft cooing dove?

Take me, mold me as clay in Thine hand; Refine me and purge me, help me to stand . . . As a bastion, a pillar, a disciple, and now A pilgrim, a servant, a healer like Thou.

And so as I pray and serve through this life, The depths of my soul, my toil and my strife, Oh help all the helpless, oh bless all the poor; Bless all who would serve Thee with life evermore.

I Met an Old Man (A Poem for Christmas)

I met an old man who was worn out and gray; His eyes were sunken and hollow. And yet there was something in his old withered face That bid to me, come and follow.

I followed by day and I watched by night Till I knew his constant direction. His pathway was set, for always he sought To live charity to its utmost perfection.

Like the other wise men, he had gifts to share; His king he sought through his deeds. Conrad the Cobbler was an inspiration to him; He searched for each soul's urgent needs.

Sir Launful's adventure to search for the grail Kept his footsteps turned toward his Lord. His goodness expanded with each passing day, Ministering by act, deed, and word.

The poor wayfaring man of grief was his theme; He shared bread crust, water, and bed. He attended the lonely, the widow, and orphan Wherever his ministering led.

In Eden's Garden he lay down to sleep; Another dawn he never would see. Then out of the heavens he heard the sweet voice, "Come, sweet Pilgrim, come unto me."

As the Spirit touches us, we soften, modify, change. Our lives become more substantial, and we reach out to all who have loved us or who have needed us or whom we have needed. Our goal is to be "even as He is" and to become brothers and sisters in Christ. How we express that goal and our feelings about it are manifest in many ways. My hope is that these few verses will move you to feel the Spirit more deeply and, in turn, to find some way to express that feeling to lift others around you.
