Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Seventeen

Mormon, A Man of Christ

Perhaps no prophet's name is used for good or evil more than Mormon. The humble, converted Latter-day Saint can hardly receive a greater compliment than to be called a Mormon. To the ignorant, the biased, the wicked, Mormon is a despicable term, a despised people, a feared religion.

Mormon himself was quite a man. He was unique in the annals of history. When he was ten years old, Ammaron, who was the keeper of the sacred records of the Church, visited him. In our day, a boy of ten is in the fourth or fifth grade. He has not yet reached adolescence. Quite often he has never been away from home and may still be afraid of the dark. Ten is a very tender age to be approached by a holy man of God and be given a sacred trust that would carry through his lifetime. Filling that trust would bring him adoration, undying love, and respect; it would also prepare him for his role as prophet-leader.

Ammaron had watched the lad and seemed to know him well. "I perceive that thou art a sober child, and art quick to observe," he said. (Mormon 1:2.) It is my feeling that some traits come trailing down from the premortal life with us. Reverence for God is something that brings the soberness that Ammaron knew was part of Mormon's life, tender as his age was. Ammaron had also described him as being "quick to observe." In my mind I see a boy who is obedient and who tried diligently to do all that his parents, teachers, and other authority figures would have him do. It was unlikely they would have had to labor with him over and over; rather, his young, bright mind must have quickly grasped what he was taught, and he simply believed.

Ammaron charged him, saying, "When ye are about twenty and four years old I would that ye should remember the things that ye have observed concerning this people." (Mormon 1:3.) This says much about the confidence Ammaron had in Mormon. Mormon was supposed to observe, remember, and record what transpired during the next fourteen years. What are the things that would impress a person who is ten, thirteen, seventeen, twenty, twenty-four? How much of the ministry of the kingdom would an adolescent or teenager be involved in or even notice? He would be guided by the things he heard his elders, teachers, and parents discuss, which would then be filtered through his own experiences and observations. Mormon was true to the trust.

Ammaron continued, "When ye are of that age [about twenty-four] go to the land Antum, unto a hill which shall be called Shim; and there I have deposited unto the Lord all the sacred engravings concerning this people . . . and ye shall engrave . . . all the things that ye have observed concerning this people." (Verses 3-4.) At that young age, would our minds have comprehended the implications of this brief charge? Yet Mormon remembered and heeded perfectly Ammaron's words.

To Mormon, this charge or assignment from Ammaron was a commandment. He recorded later what he had observed during those fourteen years. When he was eleven, the family moved to Zarahemla. Young Mormon described what he saw there: the whole face of the land had become covered with buildings, and the population as numerous as the sands of the sea. Apparently during his eleventh year war broke out. His quickness to observe is evident. He stated that the allied forces of the Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, and the Zoramites warred against the Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites. This was over nine hundred years after Lehi had left Jerusalem with his family. The posterity of Nephi, Jacob, Joseph, and Zoram had apparently kept their ties to each other. The descendants of Laman, Lemuel, and Ishmael also banded together. Interesting that a young boy would be aware of the divisions of the warring factions. He then reduced the opposing armies to broader political designations of Nephites and Lamanites. The Nephite army of 30,000 slew many Lamanites in that battle.

For four years, Mormon recorded, there was peace. It was an uneasy peace, however, as this young lad showed his spiritual awareness by declaring that "wickedness" prevailed. Miracles and healings ceased because of the iniquity of the people. That is extremely insightful for a young teenager. Mormon said, "There were no gifts from the Lord, and the Holy Ghost did not come upon any, because of their wickedness and unbelief." (Verse 14.) Not unlike Joseph the Prophet, when Mormon was fifteen, "he was visited of the Lord, and tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus." (Verse 15.)

Mormon attempted to preach, but he was forbidden because the people had willfully rebelled against God. The three Nephite disciples were taken away out of the land because of the people's iniquity. It thrills me that Mormon called them "beloved" disciples. He undoubtedly knew them, and they knew him. He must have had a special reverence for them. They probably personally told him they were leaving. They must have known the charge that had been given to young Mormon by Ammaron. It brings joy to my soul to know that Mormon brushed against these three holy men of God other times during his ministry.

The Gadianton band of robbers was revived by the master of secret combinations to work its evil purposes. Mormon in his youth described treasures that had become "slippery"; sorcery, witchcraft, and magic became popular; and "the power of the evil one was wrought upon all the face of the land." (Verse 19.) These evils, Mormon declared, fulfilled the words of Abinadi and Samuel the Lamanite. Mormon must have been a good student and comprehended the scriptures well. He knew the words of the prophets. Although we cannot discern directly from the Book of Mormon record, it is not out of line to suppose that much of this understanding and mature judgment resulted from his relationship with the beloved disciples and other teachers.

Mormon was large in stature as well as spirit. When he was but fifteen (in his sixteenth year), he was "head of an army of the Nephites." (Mormon 2:2.) The Lamanites came upon Mormon and his army with exceedingly great power. Though Mormon was not afraid, his army was. Possibly had Mormon been more experienced he could have rallied his army to stand and battle rather than retreat. Later on we see that his experience gave him victories over larger opposing armies.

Young Mormon described the blood and carnage that had spread throughout the robber-infested land both on the part of the Nephites and the Lamanites.

The Nephites found they could not keep what they owned because of the thieves, robbers, murderers, and the magic art and witchcraft. There was great mourning and lamentation. Mormon rejoiced as the people of Nephi seemed to begin repenting and mourning. His only desire was that the Nephites become a righteous people. However, his joy was shortlived, "for their sorrowing was not unto repentance . . . ; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin." (Mormon 2:13.)

Mormon was approximately thirty-three when this took place. He had the spiritual maturity to judge the people's motivation. He wrote of "broken hearts and contrite spirits" as absent signs of devotion and repentance; rather, the Nephites cursed God and wished to die. (Verse 14.)

Mormon described sorrowfully how they struggled with the sword for their lives: "I saw that the day of grace was passed with them, both temporally and spiritually; for I saw thousands of them hewn down in open rebellion against their God, and heaped up as dung upon the face of the land." (Verse 15.)

To a prophet, spiritual death and suffering are far more grievous to the soul than temporal suffering and death. Mormon was faithful, sensitive, and committed to the Lord. Imagine how painful it must have been to have under his command generals, captains, and leaders who cursed and defiled all that Mormon held dear.

Keeping his promise to Ammaron, Mormon continued the record-keeping with which he had been charged, explaining that "a continual scene of wickedness and abominations has been before mine eyes ever since I have been sufficient to behold the ways of man." (Verse 18.) How old would he have been when he was "sufficient" to behold the ways of man? Possibly eight, nine, or ten?

Mormon could no longer appeal to his people to fight in the name of their God, but he did appeal to them to "stand boldly before the Lamanites and fight for their wives, and their children, and their houses, and their homes." It took this to "arouse them somewhat to vigor." The Nephites then took their army of 30,000 against an army of 50,000 with such firmness that the enemy fled before them. (Mormon 2:23-26.)

Mormon describes the greater calamity "of my people because of their wickedness and their abominations." (Verse 27.) These are the things that cause great souls to grieve.

A treaty then enters the story, bringing peace for ten years. During that period the Lord said to Mormon, "Cry unto this people—Repent ye, and come unto me, and be ye baptized, and build up again my church, and ye shall be spared." (Mormon 3:2.) Mormon did what the Lord commanded him, but it was all in vain.

Bringing an end to this decade-long peace, the king of the Lamanites sent an epistle to Mormon. The Lamanites were preparing to do battle against the Nephites. However, when they came, Mormon's military preparations and cunning brought victory to his army, and the Lamanites were turned back. A year later they came again, and again they were turned back. But rather than thank their God for their success, the Nephites boasted of their own strength and swore before heaven, and also by the throne of God, that they would go up and cut the Lamanites off from the face of the earth.

Mormon could stand such mockery no longer and refused to be the military commander for the Nephites. They had dishonored what he held precious and dear. Mormon described how he felt about his people: "I had led them many times to battle, and had loved them, according to the love of God which was in me, with all my heart; and my soul had been poured out in prayer unto my God all the day long for them. . . . And thrice have I delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, and they have repented not." (Mormon 3:12-13.) This gives us some indication of his depth of commitment and feeling towards his people, but it was to no avail.

"And when they had sworn by all that had been forbidden them by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that they would go up unto their enemies to battle, and avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren, behold the voice of the Lord came unto me saying: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; and because this people repented not after I had delivered them, behold, they shall be cut off from the face of the earth." (Verses 14-15.) Mormon could no longer lead such an army. He stood as a witness of the things which he saw and heard. Mormon would have been about fifty-one at this time. You can imagine what a mighty man he was. He had been the commander of all the Nephite armies since he was fifteen. He was large and had fought powerfully for his people. He had had many victories and always gave credit to the Lord.

A year later, the Nephites went forth to battle against the Lamanites but were driven back to the land of Desolation. (Mormon 4:1.) While they were weary, a fresh army of Lamanites came upon them, and a "sore battle" commenced. Many prisoners were taken by the Lamanites, and the remainder fled. Mormon must have watched this horrible scene in a state of hopelessness. He knew that the Nephites had lost the support of God. Then Mormon gives marvelous insight from years of experience: "It is by the wicked that the wicked are punished." (Mormon 4:5.) This applies to our day—abortion, homosexuality, AIDS, dishonesty, violence. "It is by the wicked that the wicked are punished." In our day, the wicked transmit diseases to one another, perform nonjustifiable abortions, and kill or maim each other in barroom brawls.

When Mormon was fifty-five, he wrote, "It is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which was among the people, both of the Nephites and of the Lamanites." (Verse 11.) Every heart had been hardened, and Nephite and Lamanite alike delighted in the shedding of blood. "There never had been so great wickedness among all the children of Lehi, nor even among all the house of Israel." This was not Mormon's appraisal but was "according to the words of the Lord." (Verse 12.)

Mormon then watched while Nephite women and children were offered up as sacrifices to idol gods by the Lamanites. (Verse 14.)

So great was the anger of the Nephites that they went to battle against the Lamanites and did beat them and drive them out of the land. Mormon would have viewed this great scene with pain, sorrow, and disgust. The people he had loved and led for more than forty years were now totally godless. There were brief victories on either side, and then the Lamanites "slaughtered them with an exceedingly great slaughter and their women and children were again sacrificed unto idols." (Verse 21.)

As the Nephites fled from before the Lamanites, Mormon went "to the hill Shim, and did take up all the records which Ammaron had hid." (Verse 23.)

Finally Mormon repented of his decision to no longer help his people, and they gave him command of their armies. They looked to him as if he could deliver them from their afflictions. "But behold, I was without hope," said this great prophet-leader. (Mormon 5:2.) They repented not, nor did they turn to God. Mormon was sixty-eight or sixty-nine years old, but still a mighty warrior, commander of all the armies. Under Mormon's leadership, his army fought valiantly, but it was all in vain: the Lamanites were so numerous that they did "tread the people of the Nephites under their feet." (Verse 6.) Mormon beheld scenes of horror and violence so great that he would not write about them, so that "ye might not have too great sorrow because of the wickedness of the people." (Verse 9.)

Mormon lamented his people, who had become dark, loathsome, and filthy, yet "they were once a delightsome people, and they had Christ for their shepherd; yea, they were led even by God the Father." (Mormon 5:17.) Then the prophet looked down the channels of time and called the Gentiles, who would one day scatter the Lamanites, "to repent and turn from their evil ways." (Verse 22.)

When Mormon was seventy-four, he finished his record. He wrote to the king of the Lamanites and asked that he allow the Nephites to gather together in the land of Cumorah to give battle. The Lamanite king granted the request. Mormon hid the records that he had kept "in the hill Cumorah." (Mormon 6:6.) He gave a few plates to Moroni, his son; then the armies of the Lamanites came marching forth. Every soul was filled with "that awful fear of death which fills the breasts of all the wicked" because of the greatness of the Lamanite numbers. (Verse 7.) They came with sword, bow, arrow, ax, and all manner of weapons of war. Mormon, with his 10,000 men, was hewn down. He lay wounded in the midst, and they did not put an end to his life. They had hewn down all but twenty-four, among whom was Moroni; 10,000 each led by Moroni, Gidgiddonah, Lamah, Gilgal, Limhah, Jeneum, Cumenihah, Moronihah, Antionum, Shiblom, Shem, Josh, and ten more with their 10,000 did fall by the sword. More than 230,000 were slain of the Nephites. (Verses 11-15.)

Beholding nearly a quarter of a million of his people slain, Mormon cried out:

O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you!

Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss.

O ye fair sons and daughters, ye fathers and mothers, ye husbands and wives, ye fair ones, how is it that ye could have fallen!

But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows cannot bring your return.

And the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on immortality, and these bodies which are now moldering in corruption must soon become incorruptible bodies; and then ye must stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, to be judged according to your works; and if it so be that ye are righteous, then are ye blessed with your fathers who have gone before you.

O that ye had repented before this great destruction had come upon you. But behold, ye are gone, and the Father, yea, the Eternal Father of heaven, knoweth your state; and he doeth with you according to his justice and mercy. (Mormon 6:17-22.)

What a heartrending plea from a great general, prophet, father, and husband! Then again looking down through the channels of time, Mormon spoke to the latter-day Lamanites and appealed to them to believe that Christ is the Son of God, concluding: "Ye will also know that ye are a remnant of the seed of Jacob; therefore ye are numbered among the people of the first covenant; and if it so be that ye believe in Christ, and are baptized, first with water, then with fire and with the Holy Ghost, following the example of our Savior, according to that which he hath commanded us, it shall be well with you in the day of judgment. Amen." (Mormon 7:10.)

The records are left to Moroni, who stated that his father was slain in battle and then filled his own charge regarding the records:

Therefore I will write and hide up the records in the earth; and whither I go it mattereth not.

Behold, my father hath made this record, and he hath written the intent thereof. And behold, I would write it also if I had room upon the plates, but I have not; and ore I have none, for I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not. (Mormon 8:4-5.)

Moroni shared his testimony of the three Nephites. He and his father had both seen them, and, he wrote, "they have ministered unto us." (Verse 11.) Then with wonderful, justifiable pride, Moroni said, "I am the son of Mormon." (Verse 13.) What a blessing to be the son of such a great man! No wonder the Book of Mormon carries his name, a book that was promised to come forth in the last days:

And it shall come in a day when the blood of saints shall cry unto the Lord, because of secret combinations and the works of darkness.

Yea, it shall come in a day when the power of God shall be denied, and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts; yea, even in a day when leaders of churches and teachers shall rise in the pride of their hearts, even to the envying of them who belong to their churches.

Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be heard of fires, and tempests, and vapors of smoke in foreign lands;

And there shall also be heard of wars, rumors of wars, and earthquakes in divers places.

Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth; there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and whoredoms, and all manner of abominations; when there shall be many who will say, Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not, for the Lord will uphold such at the last day. But wo unto such, for they are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity.

Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins. (Mormon 8:27-32.)

The eighth chapter of Moroni gives us great insight concerning the prophet Mormon. In this chapter is recorded a letter that Mormon wrote to his son Moroni. The tender role of father comes out as Mormon says, "I am mindful of you always in my prayers, continually praying unto God the Father in the name of his Holy Child, Jesus, that he, through his infinite goodness and grace, will keep you through the endurance of faith on his name to the end." (Moroni 8:3.)

Later Mormon paid the supreme compliment to his son Moroni: "Behold, my son, I cannot recommend them [the Nephites] unto God lest he should smite me. But behold, my son, I recommend thee unto God, and I will trust in Christ that thou wilt be saved; and I pray unto God that he will spare thy life, to witness the return of his people unto him, or their utter destruction." (Moroni 9:21-22.)

Then Mormon counseled: "And whosoever shall believe in my name, doubting nothing, unto him will I confirm all my words, even unto the ends of the earth. And now, behold, who can stand against the works of the Lord? Who can deny his sayings? Who will rise up against the almighty power of the Lord? Who will despise the works of the Lord? Who will despise the children of Christ? Behold, all ye who are despisers of the works of the Lord, for ye shall wonder and perish." (Mormon 9:25-26.)

Mormon taught doctrine with the same forcefulness he used when leading the armies of the Nephites. For example:

Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me.

And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children.

Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach—repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children.

And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins.

Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell.

For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism. (Moroni 8:8-11, 4-15.)

And later he wrote: "And now, my beloved son, notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God." (Moroni 9:6.)

Mormon died in battle. He died for a people who had no hope. The Savior said, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." (John 15:13.) Mormon was filled with charity and love for his people. His life represented the greatness that few achieve.

Rudyard Kipling said:

But there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth, When two strong men stand face to face, Though they come from the ends of the earth!

This is a fitting tribute to the great prophet whose name is emblazoned on every copy of the Book of Mormon. His name will stand by the side of Joseph the Prophet as a witness that the book is true.

The Savior Himself, the very Son of God, bore testimony, powerfully stating, "As your Lord and your God liveth it is true." (D&C 17:6.) The names of Joseph Smith and Mormon will be had for good and evil in the future as they have in the past. I declare with absolute truth that Joseph the Prophet and Mormon the commander-prophet have performed a work so great that it will never come to an end—no, not in all of the eternities.
