Vaughn J. Featherstone, Incomparable Christ: Our Master and Model ( 1995)

Chapter Eighteen

"The Last Drop in the Chalice"

Some years ago I spoke at Brigham Young University. I borrowed from Victor Hugo a title for my talk. In the book Les Miserables, Jean Valjean is the central figure. Near the end of the book, Victor Hugo describes the final hours of Jean Valjean's saintly life by titling the chapter "The Last Drop in the Chalice." Les Miserables has had a more profound influence on my life than anything else I have ever read other than the scriptures. I have read the 1,220-page translated copy five times. I will read it one or two more times, at least, before I die.

The Savior's influence is felt most directly through the lives of those who live His teachings. Many may never have known of Him or even knew they were abiding by His teachings. Nevertheless, they lived and honored the eternal truths He authored. Most who will read this book live His teachings and know Him. It is not always easy to do what He would have us do. Nor was it easy for Him to do what His Father wanted of Him. Recall that even He "would that [He] might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—neverthe-less, glory be to the Father, and [He] partook and finished [His] preparations unto the children of men." (D&C 19:18-19.) This final testing was "to finish His preparations" for us.

Many times some partake of the last drop in the chalice without any other living soul knowing or seemingly caring. When none but God can see, these faithful few still abide the most difficult trials without a thought of murmuring or self-pity. There are many heroic examples of Christ's teachings when none but God can see. Such is the story of Sandie, a little boy in Scotland, who sold matches to feed himself and his smaller brother.

"Please, sir, buy some matches!" said a little boy, with a poor thin blue face, his feet bare and red, and his clothes only a bundle of rags, although it was very cold in Edinburgh that day. "No, I don't want any," said the gentleman. "But they're only a penny a box," the little fellow pleaded. "Yes, but you see I don't want a box." "Then I'll gie ye two boxes for a penny," the boy said at last.

"And so, to get rid of him," says the gentleman, who tells the story in an English paper, "I bought a box, but then I found I had no change, so I said, 'I'll buy a box tomorrow.'

"'Oh, do buy them to-nicht,' the boy pleaded again; 'I'll rin and get ye the change; for I'm very hungry.' So I gave him the shilling, and he started away. I waited for the boy, but no boy came. Then I thought I had lost my shilling; but still there was that in the boy's face I trusted, and I did not like to think badly of him.

"Late in the evening a servant came and said a little boy wanted to see me. When the child was brought in, I found it was a smaller brother of the boy who got the shilling, but, if possible, still more ragged and thin and poor. He stood a moment diving into his rags, as if he were seeking something, and then said, 'Are you the gentleman that bought matches frae Sandie?' 'Yes.' 'Weel, then, here's fourpence oot o' yer shillin'. Sandie canna coom. He's no weel. A cart ran over him and knocked him doon; and he lost his bonnet, and his matches, and your elevenpence; and both his legs are broken, and he's no weel at a', and the doctor says he'll dee. And that's a' he can gie ye the noo,'" putting fourpence down on the table; and then the child broke down into great sobs. So I fed the little man; and then I went with him to see Sandie.

"I found that the two little things lived with a wretched drunken stepmother; their own father and mother were both dead. I found poor Sandie lying on a bundle of shavings; he knew me as soon as I came in, and said, 'I got the change, sir, and was coming back; and then the horse knocked me down, and both my legs are broken. And Reuby, little Reuby! I am sure I am deein'! And who will take care o' ye, Reuby, when I am gane? What will ye do, Reuby?'

"Then I took the poor little sufferer's hand and told him I would always take care of Reuby. He understood me, and had just strength to look at me as if he would thank me; then the expression went out of his blue eyes; and in a moment—

"'He lay within the light of God, Like a babe upon the breast, Where the wicked cease from troubling, And the weary are at rest.'"

Heaven meant principle to that little matchboy, bruised and dying. He knew little where he was to go, but he knew better than most of those who would have spurned him from their carriages, the value of honesty, truth, nobility, sincerity, genuineness,—the qualities that go to make heaven. (Pushing to the Front, pp. 239-41.)

Somehow, when we hear or read an account of suffering in its purest form without complaint, without self-pity or blame, we lift to a level more near that of the incomparable Christ, He who suffered exquisitely more than man could bear and did it without a thought of self—only to do the Father's will, whatever pain or grief or suffering that might have cost. This little boy with broken legs, dying, had only two things on his heart: that a smaller brother would be taken care of and that the buyer of the matches have his change returned to him.

Marian Wright Edelman also gives us a clear picture of a teacher, Jean Thompson, who made a wonderful breakthrough as she drank from her own personal chalice and tasted the bitterness of her own conduct. Her sudden awareness dropped her to her knees, where she submitted herself to His loving kindness for all of her students:

On the first day of school, Jean Thompson told her students, "Boys and girls, I love you all the same." Teachers lie. Little Teddy Stollard was a boy Jean Thompson did not like. He slouched in his chair, didn't pay attention, his mouth hung open in a stupor, his eyes were always unfocused, his clothes were mussed, his hair unkempt, and he smelled. He was an unattractive boy and Jean Thompson didn't like him.

Teachers have records. And Jean Thompson had Teddy's. First grade: "Teddy's a good boy. He shows promise in his work and attitude. But he has a poor home situation." Second grade: "Teddy is a good boy. He does what he is told. But he is too serious. His mother is terminally ill." Third grade: "Teddy is falling behind in his work; he needs help. His mother died this year. His father shows no interest." Fourth grade: "Teddy is in deep waters; he is in need of psychiatric help. He is totally withdrawn."

Christmas came, and the boys and girls brought their presents and piled them on her desk. They were all in brightly colored paper except for Teddy's. His was wrapped in brown paper and held together with scotch tape. And on it, scribbled in crayon, were the words, "For Miss Thompson from Teddy." She tore open the brown paper and out fell a rhinestone bracelet with most of the stones missing and a bottle of cheap perfume that was almost empty. When the other boys and girls began to giggle, she had enough sense to put some of the perfume on her wrist, put on the bracelet, hold her wrist up to the children and say, "Doesn't it smell lovely? Isn't the bracelet pretty?" And taking their cue from the teacher, they all agreed.

At the end of the day, when all the children had left, Teddy lingered, came over to her desk, and said, "Miss Thompson, all day long, you smelled just like my mother. And her bracelet, that's her bracelet, it looks real nice on you, too. I'm really glad you like my presents." And when he left, she got down on her knees and buried her head in her chair and she begged God to forgive her.

The next day when the children came, she was a different teacher. She was a teacher with a heart. And she cared for all the children, but especially those who needed help. Especially Teddy. She tutored him and put herself out for him.

By the end of the year, Teddy had caught up with a lot of the children and was even ahead of some. Several years later, Jean Thompson got this note:

Dear Miss Thompson:

I'm graduating and I'm second in my high school class. I wanted you to be the first to know. Love, Teddy.

Four years later she got another note:

Dear Miss Thompson:

I wanted you to be the first to know. The university has not been easy, but I like it. Love, Teddy Stollard.

Four years later, there was another note:

Dear Miss Thompson:

As of today, I am Theodore J. Stollard, M.D. How about that? I wanted you to be the first to know. I'm going to be married in July. I want you to come and sit where my mother would have sat, because you're the only family I have. Dad died last year.

And she went and she sat where his mother should have sat because she deserved to be there. (Deval L. Patrick in Vital Speeches, 1994, p. 93.)

One wonders at the profound impact some seemingly insignificant acts we perform have. A good deed is never lost, however insignificant or obscure it might be. The wonderful contribution of a mite to the church's treasury does not go unnoticed. There are many acts of mercy and tenderness, many words of compassion and consolation, many gifts of heart and soul that none but God can see. Nevertheless, He does see; He does know; and He, I am certain, is tenderly, sincerely, sweetly grateful to those who give them. This whole life is about service—service in its purest form; service performed to bless and lift our fellow beings; service that seeks no reward except making someone's burden lighter or bringing a moment of relief. And so many marvelous, wonderful, Christ-like deeds are done where no eye can see, no ear can hear, and no one will ever know.

Many Saints live honorable lives of great integrity. They work hard every day of their lives, they serve faithfully in whatever way they can, and they raise sweet and wonderful families. Theirs may be an inconspicuous contribution, but nonetheless they will merit eternal life and exaltation as they comply with the Savior's holy commands.

In chapter 2 we dealt with the part of the Atonement that covers the "suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; . . . he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy . . . , that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12; emphasis added.) There is a principle in these verses that few understand. We take upon ourselves the infirmities of others that our bowels may be filled with mercy. "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." (Matthew 5:7.) What a glorious promise! We also learn how to succor His people. We learn much through empathy and love: we learn how to succor and to have our bowels filled with mercy.

As we walk through life, we influence many people. We model what they see every day. A slightly dishonest act, an unkind word, a loss of temper, a profane outburst, a white lie, a thoughtless act—all provide an image of what we really are. The reverse is also true. Every sweet and tender act we perform—our happy, buoyant spirit; the way we treat our children and our spouse; and the daily code of Christian conduct we perform—all provide the beholder with an image of us.

It is a wonderful goal in life to improve our personal life, to strengthen our virtues, to overcome our weaknesses, and to be ever growing upward to Christ's standards. There is a consequence for good or ill of everything we do. "The last drop in the chalice" suggests there may be at least one more trial in life, one more opportunity left to prove who we really are and what kind of an impact we have had on others.

I subscribe to a publication called Vital Speeches. Over the years I occasionally have come across speeches by E. Grady Bogue. In my humble opinion, he is a teacher with a capital T. In a speech he gave in 1988 he said:

Rightly done, teaching is a precious work. It is, however, the one human endeavor most damaging in consequence when done without care or competence. To carry a student in harm's way because of either ignorance or arrogance—because we do not know or do not care—is an act far worse than a bungled surgery. Our mistakes will not bleed. Instead, they carry hidden scars whose mean and tragic consequences may not be seen until years have passed and remedy is painful and impossible. (Vital Speeches, 1988, p. 615.)

One thing "the last drop in the chalice" suggests is that we will be held accountable for our conduct and the influence we have had on the lives of others. The earlier in life we commit to follow the Master's divine direction, the fewer drops of sourness there will be in our chalice.

A young couple came to my office. The husband was a sweet, committed Latter-day Saint. He was a returned missionary and a very bright young father. He had extremely impressive credentials. I interviewed him for worthiness as a potential employee in the Church educational system. I asked the wife if he was a good husband, if they got along, and how he treated her. She responded in a passive way. I then asked if she could support him in his calling, his schooling, and his employment. Hesitatingly, she said she thought she could support him, although he wasn't home very much. He was a stake executive secretary, he was writing his dissertation, and he was earning a living. I could read her thoughts: being home with the three little children and a busy husband. I said, "You didn't marry a normal man, a man who goes to work and is off at five and is home every evening. You married a very special man who has wonderful and great things to do and become. He will make you terribly proud of him. The Lord has special things for him to do, and you will be equal to him in all he does. You will need to come to understand that it really is better to have a reduced quantity of time with a very high-quality man than a great quantity of time from a lesser-quality individual." Great men and great women have learned how to put quality into whatever they do, including relationships with family members. This may be a test for this wonderful woman, but by and by she will see the blessing in it.

The last drop in the chalice is not necessarily the greatest test we will face in life. President Harold B. Lee stated that we would be tested every month of our lives. As we are able to modify our perspective of "tests" when they come, we meet them knowing that we will be the beneficiaries in some way.

If you could have the power to determine what your final test in life would be, what would you choose? Consider such tests as terminal illness, lingering illness, financial disaster, wayward children, conflict with other Church members, surgery, a loss of one or more of the five senses, or an unfaithful companion. I think we would not choose to involve others; rather we would make our test one that spared our loved ones. However, we ought to be prepared for whatever testing may come. I believe that part of being properly prepared is remembering that Christ took upon himself our pains, sicknesses, infirmities, afflictions, and trials. He offers us solace and assistance if we will but ask and then accept it.

Certain scriptures can bring us comfort and understanding. In Leviticus we read, "The life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul." (Leviticus 17:11.) We do not understand the fulness of the Atonement, the most glorious and pivotal act ever performed by the Lord, but somehow we know that "the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all." (Isaiah 53:6.)

The Master has promised great blessings to those who minister to His children in whatever way they can:

And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:

For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. (Matthew 25:33-40.)

It is my belief that those who serve others do increase their ability to empathize. Their bowels are filled with mercy and love. Their spirits soften and modify because they model the teachings of the Master, and truly He will gather them on His right hand.

Let me share several quotations with you about adversity. They are taken from the book A New Dictionary of Quotations, compiled by H. L. Mencken. You will find a common thread running through them.

Â "Prosperity getteth friends, but adversity trieth them." (Nicholas Ling Politeuphia, 1597.)

Â "A man hath many enemies when his back is to the wall." (John Clarke, Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina, 1639.)

Â "In time of prosperity friends will be plenty; In time of adversity not one in twenty." (James Howell; Proverbs 1659.)

Â "Adversity introduces a man to himself." (Author unidentified.)

Oftentimes we feel alone when adversity comes. We might even see those whom we supposed were dear friends avoid or abandon us. We may suffer in silence and endure alone.

Oliver Goldsmith said: "The greatest object in the universe, is a good person struggling with adversity; yet there is a still greater, which is the good person that comes to relieve it." (The Vicar of Wakefield.)

The wonderful thing about the Atonement is that we need not feel that we suffer alone or that we are ever abandoned if we live right. The Atonement provides an Advocate who has suffered for our afflictions, illnesses, and pains. We cannot face any trial or testing in this life that He has not vicariously suffered more than all of us collectively. He will never leave us. He was the best man ever to walk on the face of this earth. He did more good than any other. He exemplified greater humility, more tenderness, and deeper charity than anyone else who ever lived. He alone understands the fulness of the trials we face as we drink the last drop in the chalice, and He alone will stand supreme to comfort, bless, and abide with us during our darkest hours. He is the light of the world. He is not only the Son of God, He is God; and I so testify.
