If you needed to ask someone to give an important message to people you love, what kind of person would you ask? You would probably choose someone who is honest, responsible, and trustworthy.

Heavenly Father gives His message to His children on the earth through prophets. He knows His prophets are honest, responsible, trustworthy, and righteous.

In the scriptures we read the writings of many prophets who wrote the inspired messages given by Heavenly Father to His children. Let’s learn about some of the prophets’ writings in the scriptures.

Malachi delivered to the people the Lord’s message of paying tithes and offerings (see Malachi 3:8–10).

Alma the Younger left his position as chief judge to be a missionary throughout the land (see Alma 4:15–20). He shared God’s message with many people.

Moroni gave Heavenly Father’s message to all of us when he gave us this promise about reading the Book of Mormon: “When ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost” (Moroni 10:4).

Joseph Smith was given a special message from Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ (see Joseph Smith—History 1:11–20). Joseph Smith spent his life declaring that message to all people.

We are blessed to have a prophet today. We can hear messages from Heavenly Father as we listen to the prophet.

Cut out the strips of paper with the pictures of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Glue the ends of the strips to the beginning of the next one. Fold the paper back and forth on the lines to make a booklet.

Using the list below, write the name of each General Authority under his picture. Listen to their talks at general conference and use the booklet to take notes. Share your thoughts about general conference during a family meal or family home evening.
