For the information of the members of the Church, the First Presidency has issued the following statistical report concerning the membership of the Church as of December 31, 1976:

Number of stakes of Zion at the close of 1976

Number of independent branches in stakes

Total wards and independent branches in stakes at the close of the year

Number of mission branches at the close of the year

Number of full-time missions at the end of the year

Children blessed in stakes and missions

Children of record baptized in stakes and missions

Converts baptized in stakes and missions

Birthrate per thousand

Number of persons married per thousand

Death rate per thousand

Members holding the Aaronic Priesthood, as of December 31, 1976

Total number holding Aaronic Priesthood

Members holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, December 31, 1976

Total number holding Melchizedek Priesthood

Grand total, members holding Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood

(An increase of 32,387 during the year.)

Aaronic Priesthood-age young men

Number of persons assisted during the year

Number placed in remunerative employment

Man-days of work donated to the welfare plan (estimated)

Unit-days of equipment use donated

In addition to the above, 125,000 man-days were donated in connection with the Teton flood disaster in Idaho.

Names cleared in 1976 for temple ordinances

The Genealogical Department is acquiring records in 35 countries, using 80 microfilm cameras and five oral interviewers. During 1976 microfilm holdings increased by 4.5 percent to a total of 910,661 100-foot rolls equivalent to 4,334,559 volumes of 300 pages each.

Number of endowments performed during 1976 in the 16 operating temples

Total number of endowments

Total enrollment in Church schools for the 1975–76 school year, including institutes and seminaries

Elder Alvin R. Dyer of the First Quorum of the Seventy; Sister Lewella Rees Christiansen, widow of Elder ElRay L. Christiansen, former Assistant to the Twelve; Sister Ida Josephine Murdock Kirkham, widow of Elder Oscar A. Kirkham, a former member of the First Council of Seventy; President Aley K. Auna of the Hilo Hawaii Stake; President Daniel O. Trevino of the Mexico Torreon Mission; President Millen Dan Atwood of the Ogden Utah Riverdale Stake; Dr. Leland R. Cowan, a pioneer in cancer research and treatment; and Sister Kate B. Carter, president, Daughters of the Utah Pioneers.
