My dear young friends,

Our Heavenly Father is perfect and we can also become perfect. One of the most Christ-like qualities we ought to develop is reverence, an attitude that shows how we feel about Heavenly Father and the things He has asked us to do. The person who is reverent has a quiet dignity. It requires a pure heart to be reverent. Reverence is more than just being quiet. It is a spiritual communication between us and our Father in heaven. When we are reverent, we don’t do anything that reflects negatively upon the Lord or His Church. This does not mean just during meetings, but it includes our conduct wherever we may be or in whatever we do.

When there is quarreling and arguing in the home, reverence is not possible. Children who are obedient to their parents help to bring a reverent atmosphere into the home that is pleasing to the Lord. Children who swear or take the Lord’s name in vain or tell questionable or dirty stories are not reverent. When we must make a decision we ought to ask ourselves, “What would Jesus want me to do or say?”

Reverence during meetings is a very important part of the responsibility we have as members of His true church. We are all impressed with the reverence shown by children in Primary who enter the chapel quietly with arms folded. Their reverence is an example that all members of the Church should appreciate and remember when attending any meetings in the chapel.

However, reverence is not shown only in the chapel. Boys and girls who have learned how to be reverent do not run up and down the halls or yell and talk loudly inside the church. Reverent people also do not offend or hurt people’s feelings or make fun of others’ clothing or appearance. They try to be kind to everyone they meet.

At Sunday School and sacrament meeting we have an opportunity to show our Savior how much we love Him by being reverent. It is not reverent to walk in and out of a sacrament meeting while it is in progress. We should get a drink of water and go to the rest room before the meeting begins. It is very disturbing to a speaker when someone leaves. The attention of other members in the congregation is also distracted. Those who speak and provide music have prayed and often fasted for help with their assignment. The reverent person listens carefully and receives the message from the speaker.

Determine to be reverent in sacrament meeting by never speaking out loud. Speak in a whisper and then only when it is absolutely necessary. Sing the hymns with your parents. Children have beautiful voices and it adds much to the meeting when they sing. It is appropriate to take the sacrament with your right hand. And during the administration and passing of the sacrament, we should try to think of the Savior.

Boys and girls who have smaller brothers and sisters should not tease them. They should not keep asking their mothers or fathers to let them take these little ones out. Your brothers and sisters and often older people can learn how to be reverent by watching your behavior.

Now in conclusion, as we become reverent we prepare ourselves to go to the temple, a beautiful and holy place. The words “Holiness to the Lord” inscribed on the wall of the temple indicate the reverent feelings of those worthy to go inside that sacred building. Someday if we are truly reverent and if we live worthily, each one of us can have the privilege of going inside one of the Lord’s temples. Such a sacred and holy experience helps us to feel closer to our Savior.

I pray that each of you boys and girls will always try to be reverent and that you will, in time, be able to go to the temple, that holiest of all the Lord’s church buildings on the earth. With love and affection,

Vaughn J. Featherstone,

of the Quorum of the Seventy
