Hauling oil in the backcountry of North Dakota, USA, I see little kindness. Christmastime is no exception.

A few years ago, I wondered, “How can I help change that?” While pondering this question, I began ordering a case of boxes of chocolates every December and handing them out to other truckers and people in the oil fields.

Every morning before going to haul oil, I would ask Heavenly Father to help me do my job correctly, efficiently, and safely. Then I would ask Him to help me to find people who could use some Christmas cheer. As I followed promptings, I could tell that people’s burdens were lightened just by having someone talk to them and give them some chocolates.

One morning I felt prompted to take two boxes. As I pulled into an oil well site that day, the Spirit prompted me to give a box to a man there. After he thanked me, I began to back my rig into the spot behind me. A man in a water hauler farther behind me began yelling at me for backing into what he considered his spot.

Unfortunately, I yelled back at him. I took the spot and waited while my tanker filled with oil. When my tanker was full and I began to pull out of the well site, I saw the man again.

A strong prompting from the Holy Ghost came over me: “That man needs a box of chocolates.”

I protested, “Oh, not that guy.”

I knew, however, that I wasn’t giving out chocolates to make myself feel better. I was doing it because I wanted to follow promptings from the Lord and do what He wanted me to do for others—no matter how hard the promptings were to follow.

I walked up to the man, who glared at me as he saw me approaching.

“We got off on the wrong foot,” I said. “I’m Vaun Kearsley. I’d like to wish you a Merry Christmas.”

I handed him the box of chocolates and shook his hand. Before he let go of my hand, he broke down in tears.

“Vaun, I’ve been in the oil fields for six years,” he said. “The lack of kindness up here is heartbreaking. It feels like everyone is mean to each other. They all do their own thing and don’t care about anyone else out here.”

Then he added: “Today I said if not one person is kind to me, on my last load of the day, I will fill my semi with as much weight as possible and drive it into a wall.”

I grabbed him by the arm and said, “Please don’t do that. Don’t throw away your life.”

I told him about the Savior Jesus Christ and His gospel. I told him of the love, light, and understanding He has for everyone. As we talked, I learned he had a young son in Idaho whom he missed. I pleaded with him not to destroy his life or hurt the lives of those he loved because of the pain he felt. As we embraced, I told him that I hoped to see him again and that he would change his mind.

For the next several weeks, I saw and greeted him every day. During a stop on December 23, he walked up to me and said, “Today’s my last day, Vaun. I’m going to move back home and be closer to my son.”

Of letting God prevail in our lives, President Russell M. Nelson said: “Will you allow His words, His commandments, and His covenants to influence what you do each day? Will you allow His voice to take priority over any other? Are you willing to let whatever He needs you to do take precedence over every other ambition? Are you willing to have your will swallowed up in His?”

Handing out boxes of chocolates was a simple exercise of faith, but the Lord made it something much more (see Doctrine and Covenants 64:33). I don’t know what would have happened that day had I driven off and ignored the Holy Ghost. All I know is I followed a prompting, and great good followed.

There’s power in obeying the commandments, listening to the Spirit, and showing kindness. We should strive to remember that every person we see is a son or daughter of our Father in Heaven. When we carry the Light of Christ and share it, His children notice (see Doctrine and Covenants 84:45–46).
