My grandmother was the best giver. Her gifts were thoughtful and personal, each one wrapped in beautiful paper and tied with a perfect bow. Her Christmas gift was the one you couldn’t wait to receive.

Late in 2016, Grandma was diagnosed with cancer. This woman who shared so much joy at Christmas would be in the hospital for her favorite holiday. As I thought of her, I wondered how I could help make the Christmas season a happy one. Knowing Grandma, she would have made her plans for gifts ages ago and would be disappointed not to carry them out.

Grandpa said this was indeed the case. Upon offering help, I was given the task of preparing gifts for each of the 13 grandkids, their spouses, and more than 27 great-grandkids. I tried to wrap just as Grandma did. I carefully chose the gift bags, tissue paper, and envelopes.

By scanning a card from a previous year, I included her annual handwritten message: “Love eternally, Grandma and Grandpa.”

I wanted everything to be perfect—to do things as she would have. When I was about halfway through the bags, glitter, and cards, the Spirit whispered to me, “This is what it’s like to take someone’s name upon you. This is what it’s like to act in someone else’s name.”

In that deeply personal moment, I was taught more about what it means to take Jesus Christ’s name upon me.

Each week as we partake of the sacrament, we witness that we are willing to take upon ourselves the name of Jesus Christ and always remember Him (see Moroni 4:3; Doctrine and Covenants 20:77). I take that invitation more personally now. I understand better how taking Christ’s name upon me involves living as He would.

I knew how Grandma gave because I had been the recipient of her love and thoughtfulness many times. I know how Heavenly Father and Jesus love and give because I witness Their hand in my life. I am a recipient of Christ’s grace. I want to do what He would do. I want the life I live, the service I give, and the love I share to resemble His life, service, and love—to feel as though they came from Him.
