During the Christmas season, we often feel an extra desire—maybe even an obligation—to serve others and to do it as the Savior would. Which can be overwhelming! The Lord performed some incredible miracles during His mortal ministry! How can our humble acts of service even compare to what He did?

This doesn’t need to be daunting. Besides the obvious miracles like turning water into wine, our Exemplar also performed less-visible miracles like touching people’s hearts and improving their lives.

Much of what He did is well within our power to emulate as we follow Him. Here are some basic principles to keep in mind as you look for ways to minister this holiday season.

Jesus knew the Samaritan woman at the well had not obeyed the law of chastity (see John 4:6–29). He knew the woman accused of adultery was guilty of it (see John 8:3–11).

But the Savior didn’t dwell on those things. With compassion, He helped them understand they could change their lives. He gave them hope for a brighter future. The result? Both women gained testimonies of the Savior (see John 4:29; Joseph Smith Translation, John 8:11 [in John 8:11, footnote c]).

Like the Savior, we can listen without condemning others. We can offer hope and encourage others to discover the joy of following Him.

When Jesus saw Lazarus’s friends and family weeping over his death, He knew He was about to raise the man from the dead. He could have told the people, “There’s no need to cry. Everything is going to be fine!”

But He didn’t. What did He do? He wept with them (see John 11:35).

Our loved ones may have problems that don’t affect us personally. They may have fears we don’t share or concerns we’ve already resolved. They might struggle with gospel principles that come easily to us. We show compassion (the Latin root of which means “suffer with”) by joining others in their feelings—not wallowing in negative thoughts with them but taking their challenges seriously and helping them work through them.

Jesus was often criticized for being too inclusive, for socializing with people He wasn’t “supposed” to (see Matthew 9:10–12). But excluding people? That’s not something He did. He was concerned for all, including those on the margins of society.

Like the Savior, you can seek to be aware of who needs to feel more of God’s love.

Remember that when you’re planning your holiday parties and activities. WWJI: Who Would Jesus Invite?

When five thousand people were hungry and no food was nearby, the Lord didn’t say, “I’m sorry, I don’t have any food, either. There’s nothing I can do to help you.” Instead, He asked His followers to gather what was available, He prayed, and He provided a miracle.

The miracles that result from your prayers might not be as, well, miraculous as that. But you might be surprised at the ideas the Spirit whispers to you when you tell Heavenly Father: “I want to help with this situation, but I don’t think I have the resources. Am I wrong about that? What can I do?”

How often did Jesus say things like “Be not afraid” (Matthew 17:7; Mark 5:36), “Fear not” (Matthew 10:28; Luke 8:50; 12:7), and “Be of good cheer” (Matthew 14:27; John 16:33)?

Have you noticed that our latter-day prophets are the same way? (Quick, think of President Nelson. You picture him smiling, don’t you?) Negativity is readily available to anyone who wants it. You don’t need to be a source of it.

It seems like a paradox, but a great way to cope when you’re feeling down is to serve others. Don’t let your own problems be an excuse for self-centeredness. The Savior’s entire life and mission were an example of this. Despite being “despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief” (Isaiah 53:3), Jesus nonetheless “went about doing good” (Acts 10:38).

While He was dying on the cross—a time when selfish thinking would be understandable—He asked His Father to forgive the men responsible (see Luke 23:34) and made sure His mother was taken care of (see John 19:26-27).

There’s one more thing the Savior did. He prayed a lot. If you sincerely ask Heavenly Father for direction in ministering to others—what to say, what to do, how to help—the Holy Ghost will guide you. That’s essentially all that “serving like the Savior” really means: having the Spirit. Let’s spread some joy this Christmas!

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="168402034" id="p_tjZkP">You can send your own article, ideas, or feedback to YAWeekly@ChurchofJesusChrist.org. We can’t wait to hear from you!</p> <p data-aid="168402037" id="p_iLnHR">Follow us on Instagram at @ya.weekly for more uplifting content!</p> [/SIDEBAR]
