Over the past 40 years the Liahona local pages have reported a huge number of faith stories, testimonies, experiences, service projects, inspiration and uplifting messages, all featuring members of the Church in the United Kingdom and Ireland. We estimate that over 2,500 articles have been published and distributed throughout the British Isles during that time.

A lot has happened within the Church and the lives of its members since 1985. Some have been big events that we’ve recorded and shared, others have been quiet miracles and experiences that have been written in our hearts or shared in whispers.

In 1985 the first Missionary Training Centre was dedicated in the grounds of the London England Temple, the only temple in the UK at the time. We now have two operating temples, with the Preston England Temple being dedicated on 7 June 1998 and the Missionary Training Centre moving from the London to the Preston temple site.

In April 2022 the Birmingham England Temple was announced, the groundbreaking for which happened earlier this year in March. In April 2024 we heard the announcement about a temple in Edinburgh, with the Dublin Ireland Temple being announced just six months later in October 2024.

There have been changes within the Europe Areas and to mission boundaries; stakes, wards and branches have been created and some closed. On 12 March 1995 the Dublin Ireland Stake, the first stake in the Republic of Ireland, was organised; and in June 2022 the England Bristol Mission was reinstated, twenty years after it was discontinued.

The youth and young adults enjoyed another summer of wonderful, uplifting FSY experiences this year where they learned new things, had fun and developed their relationship with Christ and with each other. We look forward to our own FSY campus in Chorley in due course. And this is our second year of hosting Light the World machines and working closely with wonderful charities in the process.

In his talk, when he announced a temple in Dublin, President Russell M. Nelson said: ‘The best is yet to come, my dear brothers and sisters, because the Saviour is coming again! The best is yet to come because the Lord is hastening His work. The best is yet to come as we fully turn our hearts and our lives to Jesus Christ.’

As we close this chapter on the Liahona’s monthly 16 local pages we are grateful to all those who have submitted articles and shared their stories of faith and discipleship. Next year will bring change and new chapters, unlimited in pages. We hope that you will continue to share your stories, testimonies, experiences and voices so that we can all be uplifted, ‘edified and rejoice together.’ Helping us to feel more united in our efforts as members across the UK and Ireland to invite people to Christ. You can submit your content by going to: https://uk.churchofjesuschrist.org/uk-voices">https://uk.churchofjesuschrist.org/uk-voices
