The Christmas season is always buzzing with bold declarations of Jesus Christ’s impact on the world:

“Peace, good will toward men” (Luke 2:14).

“Joy to the world.”

“Good tidings of great joy” (Luke 2:10).

Passed down from generation to generation, these phrases communicate the immeasurable peace, joy, and light extended by the Savior.

Throughout His mortal life, Christ showed us how to share His love with others. We are taught that Christ “doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world” (2 Nephi 26:24).

As we commemorate Christ’s birth, we can seek to understand His love for each of God’s children and extend that same love.

Church leaders have spoken about His teachings on social media. The following messages guide us to share the love of Christ with others this Christmas and beyond:

“Though 99 of his flock were safely by his side, the shepherd went in search of the 1 who was lost. …

“… I invite you to consider prayerfully: who do you know who may be discouraged? Who might you need to reconcile with or ask for forgiveness? Has one name been on your mind lately, though you haven’t quite known why? As you bring these questions to the Lord, He will inspire you to know how you can reach out and lift one who needs help.

“… Through each of us ministering to just one within our reach, we can spread the love of Jesus Christ throughout the world.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, June 1, 2024, facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“The heavenly hosts proclaimed good will to all men—to casual friends and to strangers.

“The Savior taught, ‘Love thy neighbor as thyself’ (Matthew 22:39). He even taught that we should love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them who despitefully use us and persecute us.

“As we work toward the goal expressed in those teachings, Christmas should be a time for forgiving, a time to heal old wounds and restore relationships that have gone awry.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, First Counselor in the First Presidency, Facebook, Dec. 8, 2024, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“The Savior’s teachings about our relationship with our Heavenly Father and with one another are straightforward: Love God and serve Him, then love our neighbors and serve them.

“Don’t make it too complicated. We have received a responsibility to love all of God’s children and invite all to come and see—to learn more about the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. … Keep it simple. We love, share, and invite.

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Jan. 31, 2025, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“I am reminded of a wonderful Christmas tradition that blended an ancient African custom with Christian teachings. This tradition developed in some villages in West and Central Africa. …

“A man from one of these villages told me that in his small village there was a Christmas tradition wherein everyone with a dispute with another villager met on the morning of Christmas Eve with the village chief. The chief would listen and seek to resolve the dispute to the satisfaction of both parties.

“This process of dispute resolution would go on all day but at the end of the day, no villager had an unresolved dispute with another villager. The purpose of the tradition was to enable the villagers to be ready the next day to celebrate the birth of the Prince of Peace. …

“Perhaps one way we can honor the Savior this Christmas is by letting go of grudges, seeking forgiveness, and granting forgiveness. We can let the pure love of Christ be the antidote to contention.”

Elder Dale G. Renlund, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Dec. 24, 2024, facebook.com/DaleGRenlund.

“In 2 Nephi 32:3 we learn that angels declare the words of Christ: ‘Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do.’

“An angel is anyone who speaks the words of Christ and ministers the way Christ ministers.

“We can be angels in the lives of one another!

Sister Amy A. Wright, First Counselor in the Primary General Presidency, Facebook, Dec. 9, 2024, facebook.com/Primary1stCounselor.
