Beginnings, Origin of Life

Many science textbooks teach that the universe began with an

explosion 14 billion years ago. Darwin’s theory suggests that complex

creatures such as human beings developed from single-celled animals Quotes from Scientists over 5 billion years. Mathematicians say that life could not become

that complex that quickly—even in 100 billion years.

“…I am quite conscious that my speculations run beyond the

bounds of true science. …it is a mere rag of an hypothesis

with as many flaw[s] & holes as sound parts.”

Q3 What is the Big Bang Theory? The Big Bang theory says that the

—Charles Darwin to asa Gray, CiteD by aDrian DesmonD anD James moore

in Darwin (new york: w.w. norton anD Co, 1991), pp. 456, 475

entire universe began as a super-hot,

super massive “explosive point,” and

“To improve a living organism by random mutation is like

that the universe continues to expand.

saying you could improve a Swiss watch by dropping it and

The first chapter of Genesis says that

bending one of its wheels or axis. Improving life by random

God created the universe out of

mutations has the probability of zero.”

nothing. The Big Bang theory also

—albert szent-GyorGi, nobel laureate (meDiCine, 1937)

says the universe was created out of

nothing.

“If pressed about man's ancestry, I would have to

If the universe was created the way the Big Bang theory says it was, we should see

unequivocally say that all we have is a huge question mark. To

stars and galaxies moving away from each other (and away from us). We should

date, there has been nothing found to truthfully purport as a

also be able to detect cosmic background radiation from the Big Bang’s fiery

transitional species to man…If further pressed, I would have

explosion. Both of these phenomena have, in fact, been observed as the theory

predicts.

to state that there is more evidence to suggest an abrupt

arrival of man rather than a gradual process of evolving.”

Q4 Is the Big Bang Theory good news or bad news for

—riCharD leakey, worlD's foremost paleoanthropoloGist,

the theory of evolution?

in a pbs DoCumentary,1990

The Big Bang theory is bad news for the theory

“All of us who study the origin of life find that the more we

of evolution. Why? Darwin’s theory requires

extremely large amounts of time to produce the

look into it, the more we feel that it is too complex to have

necessary changes in living forms. However, the

evolved anywhere. We believe as an article of faith that life

Big Bang theory says that there was a beginning,

evolved from dead matter on this planet. It is just that its

a point in time when the universe was created,

complexity is so great, it is hard for us to imagine that it did.”

and that point was not long ago—not long

enough for any organism to evolve. According to

—Dr. harolD urey, nobel prize winner (Chemistry, 1934)

most mathematical calculations, a universe even

100 billion years old is not old enough for

“To suppose that the eye with all its inimitable contrivances

the development of a single cell.

for adjusting the focus to different distances, for admitting

ALBERT EINSTEIN The Big Bang theory appears to be consistent

different amounts of light, and for the correction of spherical

with the biblical account of creation in Genesis, which says that God created the

and chromatic aberration, could have been formed by natural

world out of nothing.

selection, seems, I confess, absurd in the highest degree.”

Some scientists dislike the Big Bang idea precisely because it sounds too much

—Charles Darwin, The Origin Of SpecieS (lonDon: John murray, 1859)

like biblical Creation.

In the 1920s, Albert Einstein1 said that the universe was infinitely large and

infinitely old—with no beginning. Later, Einstein said this was “the greatest 3

mistake of my life.”2 He finally accepted the necessity of a beginning.

These pages are from Answers to Evolution, a 12-page pamphlet that looks at 16 Reasons to Doubt Darwinism, reviewing topics ranging © 2011 Rose Publishing You may print 10 copies, but do not post on the from Darwin’s Observations, the Origins of Life, the Fossil Record and Body Development and DNA. The pamphlet also includes Quotes internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for these Free Rose from Scientists, answers to questions and has additional references for more information. ISBN: 9781890947897

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Pamphlet Answers to Evolution pamphlet

Pamphlet Creation and Evolution pamphlet

Middle school and high school students hear about

The bestselling Creation & Evolution pamphlet -

the theory of evolution numerous times throughout

shows how scientific findings in the areas paleon

their public educations. Science textbooks teach

tology, genetics, biochemistry, astrophysics and

Darwinism virtually without question despite the

mathematics cannot be explained by Darwinian

growing lack of evidence. The full-color glossy

Evolution. The full-color glossy pamphlet reveals

Answers to Evolution pamphlet gives students

the basic lack of proof surrounding Darwinism and

dozens of quotes from respected scientists to

delves into the exciting recent findings.

help refute the evolutionary theory, and showing

that even Darwin believed could be flawed and

Click Here wouldn’t hold up against a preponderance of Click Here most Bible covers. Size: 8.5”x 5.5” unfolds to 33” long. Fits inside

Pamphlet 9781890947019

scientific evidence.

most Bible covers. Size: 8.5”x 5.5” unfolds to 33” long. Fits inside

Pamphlet 9781890947897

10 Q & A on Atheism and

Pamphlet Intelligent Design pamphlet

This pamphlet is full of information on the

Pamphlet Agnosticism pamphlet

fascinating topic of Intelligent Design (ID) and

This pamphlet answers questions about prayer and

why many scientists and analytic philosophers

Leading apologists Dr. Norman Geisler and Alex

today are embracing it and distancing themselves

McFarland (President of Southern Evangelical Sem-

from Darwin’s theory of the origin of life.

inary) look at the important questions of life. The

Co-authored by William Dembski, PhD, a

chart provides a comprehensive yet understandable

mathematician, philosopher and leader in the

examination of what atheists and agnostics believe

I.D. debate, and Sean McDowell, MA, a popular

and also explains the evidence for the biblical God.

nationwide speaker, Intelligent Design is an easy-

Pamphlet is 5.5 inches x 8.5 inches and unfold to 33

Click Here to-follow guide into this engaging topic about God Click Here inches long. Fits inside a Bible cover. 9781596361232 and science.

Pamphlet

Pamphlet 9781596363397

Rose Publishing, Inc. publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including Bible charts, Bible maps, Bible timelines

izes in graphics-rich Bible teaching aids. Its mission is to make Bible and Christian topics easy to understand and more interesting.

© 2011 Rose Publishing, Inc. This free e-chart is taken from the pamphlet

www.rose-publishing.com and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes, and small groups. Rose Publishing special- Share Rose Bible e-Charts with a friend. Answers to Evolution, ISBN 9781890947897

info@rose-publishing.com Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts via email: Click Here Click Here or call (310) 353-2100
