Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Preface

For many years I have wanted to prepare a book containing insights from my father, Elder Neal A. Maxwell. I am blessed to know him both as a wise father who loves his family (and loves to spend time with them) and as one of the Lord's anointed who has an abiding love of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, a keen intellect, and a marvelous facility with language. His ability to coin a phrase that teaches or reaffirms a gospel principle in a succinct and memorable way is widely known. The scope of his understanding and the

Elder Bruce C. Hafen recalls sitting in the Tabernacle when Elder Maxwell gave one of his first general conference talks. "His speaking style was so provocative that it left the brethren among whom I sat visibly breathless. They were not accustomed to such phrases as 'The living of one protective principle of the gospel is better than a thousand compensatory governmental programs-which are, so often, like "straightening deck chairs on the Titanic.'" Or, 'Hearts "set so much upon the things of this world" are hearts so set they must first be broken.'" Elder Hafen goes on to note that Elder Maxwell's books and addresses "are nearly all laced with verbal imagery, metaphors, and alliteration. These poetic devices and his sense of the well-turned phrase often make his language closer to poetry than to prose. For instance, 'Let us have integrity and not write checks with our tongues which our conduct cannot cash.' Consider also: 'The home lies at the headwaters of the stream of civilization and we must keep it happy and pure' rather than putting all our efforts into reducing the 'downstream pollution.' The LDS educators who heard him will always remember his thoughtful response to the issue of balancing one's Church and professional interests: 'The LDS scholar has his citizenship in the Kingdom, but carries his passport into the professional world-not the other way around.'" ("Elder Neal A. Maxwell: An Understanding Heart," Ensign, February 1982, pp. 9-10.)

I have spoken with Elder Maxwell a number of times over the years about a quote book, and five or six years ago began reviewing his talks and books. I have worked in earnest over the last two years preparing this manuscript. The task has been both challenging and rewarding. Because I have heard Elder Maxwell speak to numerous gatherings and have read his books and articles, I knew from the outset that this would be a daunting task. Once I really became immersed in the project, I realized that it was even more intimidating than I had expected.

The body of work from which I had to draw (just in terms of books, articles for magazines, and talks for which complete transcripts exist) would comprise, estimating conservatively, some 5,000 pages. I have read the twenty-five books written by Elder Maxwell (as well as chapters he has contributed to several other books) and over a hundred of his articles and talks. Transcripts of some of these talks are not widely available because they were given in private or informal settings. In this undertaking I have been aided by work performed by Hoyt W. Brewster, Jr. Prior to his call to preside over the Netherlands Amsterdam Mission, he was the managing director of the Priesthood Department for the Church and had occasion to work with Elder Maxwell. Brother Brewster has long had a keen interest in Elder Maxwell's books and sermons, and assembled numerous quotes, organizing them topically, out of a desire to be helpful to Elder Maxwell and his family. Brother Brewster's efforts have made it possible to release this book much earlier than otherwise would have been possible.

Deciding which quotes to include in a work such as this is naturally a subjective process. While I have attempted to include those quotes that I felt were the most important, incisive, and memorable expressions of gospel principles, another compiler would undoubtedly have included some quotes that I have not. Some readers will likely be disappointed to learn that a favorite quote of theirs is not found here. I hope I have been successful in finding "most of the best" and in conveying a sense of the keenness of Elder Maxwell's insights and his boundless love for the fulness of the gospel. Though some duplication is almost unavoidable-and perhaps is even advisable to round out a particular topic-I have tried to keep such repetitions to a minimum.

The excerpts included do not reflect the frequency with which Elder Maxwell has quoted from the scriptures, nor do they show the great frequency with which he has shared ideas derived from his reading of the writings of prophets and of other leaders and thinkers. It seemed advisable, given the limitations of space, to give preference to Elder Maxwell's insights and his contribution to our understanding of the gospel. Obviously, short excerpts also do not give a sense of continuity or illustrate Elder Maxwell's development of a theme.

As to source citations, most references are given in shortened form in the text, and full bibliographic details for all sources are provided at the back of the book. A list of abbreviations used for book titles appears in the preliminary pages. It should also be noted that page numbers have not been included in references to talks not formally published.

Many people have helped make this work a reality and have offered invaluable suggestions and counsel. I appreciate the secretaries who have worked for Elder Maxwell over the years, particularly Susan Jackson, his secretary of fourteen years, for helping to gather copies of his talks and other material written by him. I am grateful to George Bickerstaff for his wise and conscientious editorial assistance on this manuscript (and on others he has edited for Elder Maxwell in recent years), and to Jana Erickson for her thoughtful and capable oversight of the design of this book. I am indebted to Jan Jensen for assisting in numerous ways to ensure that work on the manuscript proceeded as quickly and efficiently as possible and for helping to tie up loose ends. I appreciate the careful attention to detail given by Garry Garff and Janna Nielsen as final preparations were made to send the book to press.

My wife, Karen, has not only encouraged me to complete this project but also reviewed drafts of the manuscript and offered many helpful suggestions. I could not have done it without her support. I'm also grateful to my children, who have been willing to put up with my tendency, while working on this project, to be preoccupied or inaccessible.

Finally, I am grateful to Elder Maxwell for allowing this work to be published and for "paying the price" to become an effective teacher of and powerful advocate for the gospel of Jesus Christ. ForElder Maxwell, speaking or writing about the gospel is not merely an intellectual pursuit. His teachings are borne of the perspective that understanding and applying the principles of the gospel is the very purpose of our experience on earth-that bringing our behavior in line with gospel standards is serious business. Elder Henry B. Eyring has observed: "Many of us have felt the special calling and power of Elder Neal A. Maxwell. There is no doubt that in focusing the light of the gospel on others, to illuminate their lives and help them contribute more, Elder Maxwell has been illuminated and changed by that light himself." ("Elder Neal A. Maxwell: Pursuing 'A More Excellent Way,'" Ensign, January 1987, p. 11.) I hope readers will find this representative sample of his work as thought-provoking and inspiring as I have.

Cory H. Maxwell

Salt Lake City, Utah

May 1997
