Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Gospel Living

The men and women of Christ are constant, being the same in private as in public. We cannot keep two sets of books while Heaven has but one. (Ensign, November 1990, p. 16.)

There is an inseparable connection between the keeping of the commandments and the well-being of society. (Ensign, November 1974, p. 12.)

God asks us now to give up only those things which, if clung to, will destroy us! (Ensign, November 1974, p. 13.)

Do not look too deeply into the eyes of the pleasure-seekers about you, for if you do, you will see a certain sadness in sensuality, and you will hear artificiality in the laughter of licentiousness. (Ensign, November 1974, p. 12.)

Reflect on the practicality of gospel standards such as abstaining from alcohol; for if you do, a surf of statistics will wash over you, confirming that abstinence is ultimately the only cure for alcoholism that is both preventive and redemptive. (Ensign, November 1974, p. 12.)

Young people, too, must come to see that the Gospel is something we do, not simply something we talk about. (A Time to Choose, p. 8.)

And when we tear ourselves free from the entanglements of the world, are we promised a religion of repose or an Eden of ease? No! We are promised tears and trials and toil! But we are also promised final triumph, the mere contemplation of which tingles one's soul. (Ensign, November 1974, p. 13.)

May we be different in order to make a difference in the world. (Ensign, November 1974, p. 13.)

The "man of Christ" does not divorce the Sermon on the Mount from the sermon at Capernaum with its hard teachings which caused many to walk "no more with" Jesus. (John 6:66.) (Ensign, May 1975, p. 101.)

We cannot reenter His [God's] house until our behavior would let us feel at home. (Ensign, November 1986, p. 54.)

There are so many little, focusing moments in which the reflexes of faith are either in place or they are not. Defining moments are preceded by preparatory moments. If previously we have behaved properly, though tempted, or if we have been gentle, though irritated, and if we have reached out to help others, though beset with personal problems, as we meet the defining moments these reflexes will steady us. Reflexes do not introduce new and sudden surges. Rather, they represent the harvest of what has passed. How good, for instance, are we at receiving bad news? If we have buckled in the past, that is one thing; but if we have absorbed bad news and moved on, we are likely to be able to gird up our loins again. If we have hedged instead of trusted in the Lord, then we are likely to hedge again. Equivocation followed by equivocation can become its own destination. (Lord, Increase Our Faith, pp. 108-9.)
