Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Apostasy

Is not apostasy a denial of that which was once genuinely known but which now comes to be doubted, discounted, and discarded? Neglected and unnourished, the tree of testimony is, alas, plucked up and cast out. But the tree was there, a fact to which its dried branches and roots are stark witness. (Even As I Am, p. 76.)

The Savior was also quite specific in indicating the major and usual causes behind the falling away of Church members: The cares of the world, temptations, tribulations, persecution and fear of persecution (Matt. 13:20-22; Mark 4:17; Luke 8:13; D&C 40:2). ("Thanksgiving for the Fulness of the Gospel Granary.")

Those who believe for a while make only a brief tour in the kingdom, though thereafter they often feel qualified to inform those who know even less about the Church; but the fact is they were really only tourists-not natives who really knew the kingdom's countryside. ("'True Believers in Christ,'" p. 135.)

A few will be deceived by defectors. Likewise, others will be offended, for sufficient unto each dispensation are the stumbling blocks thereof! A few will stumble because, in their preoccupation with the cares of the world, they do not have oil in their lamps. And again and again, those who refuse to eat their spiritual spinach will come off second when they wrestle with the world. (Ensign, November 1982, p. 68.)

While we usually think of apostasy solely in terms of theological deviation, we often fail to see its connections to the everyday, human condition in which the consequences of that deviation are enormous. (Sermons Not Spoken, p. 70.)

Apostasy is more than doubt; it is sometimes actual "mutiny," just as the Apostle John experienced it from Diotrephes (see 3 Jn. 1:9-10). The defections and betrayals in the Kirtland and Nauvoo periods represented mutiny. So many people "piled on" by being disloyal to the Prophet. Not everyone was a Hyrum [Smith] or a Brigham [Young] or a Wilford [Woodruff]. (Lord, Increase Our Faith, p. 92.)
