Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Apostates

Those who turn against the Church do so to play to their own private gallery, but when, one day, the applause has died down and the cheering has stopped, they will face a smaller audience, the judgment bar of God. (Things As They Really Are, p. 90.)

Occasionally a member of the Church who is weak in the faith struggles with his other questions and circumstances and loses the battle. Those few members who desert the cause are abandoning an oasis to search for water in the desert. Some of them will not just wander off but will become obsessed critics occupying offices in the "great and spacious building" (1 Ne. 8:26-27; 11:35), that large but third-class hotel. ("Not My Will, But Thine", p. 28.)

Unlike those who wander off the straight and narrow path because of indifference, a few will actually defect. Like Lucifer, the first defector, who did not accept the rejection of his bid for ascendancy with parliamentary politeness, these, his minions, will also depart in anger. Like Lucifer, they will take all they can with them. (Things As They Really Are, p. xiii.)

The enemies and the critics of the Lord's work will not relent; they only regroup. Even among the flock, here and there and from timeto time, are a few wolves, wearing various styles of sheep's clothing-ironically, just before the shearing season! A few defectors and "highminded" traitors (2 Tim. 3:4) even go directly to the "great and spacious building" to hire on (1 Ne. 8:26). There recruits are celebrated and feted until-like their predecessors-they have faded into the dark swamps of history. (Ensign, May 1988, p. 9.)

Let these few departees take their brief bows in the secular spotlight; someday they will bow deeply before the throne of the Almighty, confessing that Jesus is the Christ and that this is his work. (Ensign, November 1980, p. 14.)

Defectors often cause more difficulty than disinterested disbelievers. ("'All Hell Is Moved,'" p. 177.)

In racing marathons, one does not see the dropouts make fun of those who continue; failed runners actually cheer on those who continue the race, wishing they were still in it. Not so with the marathon of discipleship in which some dropouts then make fun of the spiritual enterprise of which they were so recently a part! ("'True Believers in Christ,'" p. 135.)

No attacks on the Church will be more bitter or more persistent than those made in the Salt Lake Valley. No taunts will be more shrill than those of apostates and excommunicants. In that valley and in the state of Utah, Church members will be accused of the "crime" of being a majority! Some clever defectors will imitate their model, Satan, and will try to take others over the side with them. Elsewhere, you will encounter the same sort of snobbery that gave rise to "can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" (Wherefore, Ye Must Press Forward, p. 80.)

The quiet and steady decrease of faith leads to a surrendering to the world. When that happens there are no white flags or formal,public ceremonies marking such subjugation. The adversary cleverly does not insist on these ceremonies so long as the results are what he desires. A few "sell out" directly, like Judas. Thirty pieces of silver are not necessary if a little notoriety will suffice. (Lord, Increase Our Faith, p. 6.)

A few in the Church today choose to meet their defining moments by separating themselves from the Church and its leaders. A few set themselves up in open rebellion as a substitute light (see 2 Ne. 26:29). (Lord, Increase Our Faith, p. 92.)
