Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Love

The relevancy of "love thy neighbor," if practiced successfully "here and now," one day will demonstrate how it will be applied in the coming "there and then"-in a neighborhood as wide as the universe! (If Thou Endure It Well, p. 98.)

The lubricant of love must be used in generous proportions. (A Time to Choose, p. 4.)

Celestial customs will invariably refuse admission to a disciple devoid of love. (A Time to Choose, p. 16.)

Charity initiates and sustains all the other spiritual qualities in much the same way that courage sustains these qualities at the testing point. ("'Brim with Joy,'" p. 147.)

Has not the Lord with equal truth and relevance told us concerning the resources of this planet, "For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare"? [D&C 104:17. Should not this reality sober us in terms of what might be achieved as regards poverty? Clearly, it is the attribute of love, not other resources, that is in short supply-a scarcity that inevitably means misery. (Even As I Am, p. 25.)

Too often we behave as if we were in massive competition with others for God's love. But we have His love; it is our love of Him that remains to be proven, such as through service to others. (Even As I Am, p. 63.)

The adversary, who displays no true love, has sought (with renewed efforts in recent times) to cripple the family, the naturallocus of so much love. The adversary, interestingly enough, has even tried to ruin the word love itself, making it seem to be a one-dimensional thing, a base act instead of a grand thing. If the adversary could have his way, loving would mean only copulating-and even that in violation of the seventh commandment. Such a narrowing is nonsense, for it is like saying that freedom is merely voting or that literature is simply words in print. (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, p. 53.)

Love is never wasted, for its value does not rest upon reciprocity. (Wherefore, Ye Must Press Forward, p. 37.)
