Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Atonement

The Atonement, then, was infinite in the divineness of the one sacrificed, in the comprehensiveness of its coverage, and in the intensivenessincomprehensible to usof the Savior's suffering. (Not My Will, p. 51.)

The cumulative weight of all mortal sinspast, present, and futurepressed upon that perfect, sinless, and sensitive Soul! All our infirmities and sicknesses were somehow, too, a part of the awful arithmetic of the Atonement. (See Alma 7:11-12; Isa. 53:3-5; Matt. 8:17.) (Ensign, May 1985, p. 73.)

Mortal experience points evermore to the Atonement of Jesus Christ as the central act of all human history. The more I learn and experience, the more unselfish, stunning, and encompassing His Atonement becomes! (Ensign, May 1997, p. 12.)

Having bled at every pore, how red His raiment must have been in Gethsemane, how crimson that cloak! No wonder, when Christ comes in power and glory, that He will come in reminding red attire (see D&C 133:48), not only signifying the winepress of wrath but also to bring to our remembrance how He suffered for each of us in Gethsemane and on Calvary! (Ensign, May 1987, p. 72.)

Only He could have carried it all. I thank the Savior personally for bearing all which I added to His hemorrhaging at every pore for all of humanity in Gethsemane. I thank Him for bearing what I added to the decibels of His piercing soul-cry atop Calvary. (Ensign, May 1988, p. 9.)

Ironically, during the moments when in agony He was benefitting billions upon billions of mortals, He was attended by only a faithful few. (Ensign, November 1988, p. 33.)

His infinite atonement affected every age, every dispensation, and every person. (See 2 Ne. 9:7; 25:16.) Hence the appropriate symbolism of His bleeding at each and every porenot just somein order that "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) (Ensign, November 1988, p. 33.)

There will be no end to the ripples of the Resurrection resulting from the infinite Atonement. (Ensign, November 1988, p. 33.)

Jesus' marvelous meekness prevented any "root of bitterness" from "springing up" in Him (Heb. 12:15). Ponder the Savior's precious words about the Atonement after He passed through it. There is no mention of the vinegar. No mention of the scourging. No mention of having been struck. No mention of having been spat upon. He does declare that He "suffer[ed] both body and spirit" in an exquisiteness which we simply cannot comprehend. (D&C 19:18; see also v. 15.) (Ensign, May 1989, p. 64.)

Diluted Christianity is not Christianity, it is a feeble attempt to have Christianity without Christ, for it denies the central service of Jesus' lifethe Atonement. Those who call themselves Christians but deny the divinity of Jesus cannot seem to tolerate those of us who accept and proclaim the divinity of Christ. No one, brothers and sisters, would pay us much heed if we were merely nonsmoking, nondrinking humanists. Without acknowledging the reality of the Resurrection and the Atonement, believing in the ministry of Jesus would mean slumping into the very Sadduceeism which Jesus himself denounced. ("‘All Hell Is Moved,’" p. 177.)

Can we, even in the depths of disease, tell Him anything at all about suffering? In ways we cannot comprehend, our sicknesses and infirmities were borne by Him even before they were borne by us. The very weight of our combined sins caused Him to descend below all. We have never been, nor will we be, in depths such as He has known. Thus His atonement made perfect His empathy and His mercy and His capacity to succor us, for which we can be everlastingly grateful as He tutors us in our trials. There was no ram in the thicket at Calvary to spare Him, this Friend of Abraham and Isaac. (Even As I Am, pp. 116-17.)

When Jesus comes again in reminding red attire, there will be a spectacular solar display and stars will fall from their places in the heavens. What will then be evoked will not be an exclamation over the solar display. Rather, from human lips praise will flow for Jesus' loving-kindness, for His perfect goodness. Then the scriptures assure us and tell us how long we will go on praising Jesus for that atonement: "forever and ever." (Mosiah 2:24; D&C 128:23.) The one thing He will mention when He comes again in majesty and power will have nothing to do with how He suffered in the scourging, nothing to do with the vinegar and gall or any of those things. Instead, His voice will be heard to say, "I have trodden the winepress alone, and none was with me" (Isa. 63:3). Incredible aloneness lay at the heart of the Great Atonement, and Jesus endured it, because He let His will be swallowed up in the will of the Father. ("‘Build Up My Church,’ ‘Establish the [Lord's] Righteousness.’")

Being sinless Himself, Jesus could not have suffered for personal sin nor known what such agony isunless He took upon Him our sins, not only to redeem us and to save us, but also in order that He might know how "according to the flesh . . . to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:12.) (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, p. 35.)

Jesus' daily mortal experiences and His ministry, to be sure, acquainted Him by observation with a sample of human sicknesses, grief, pains, sorrows, and infirmities which are "common to man" (1 Cor. 10:13). But the agonies of the Atonement were infinite and first-hand! Since not all human sorrow and pain is connected to sin, the full intensiveness of the Atonement involved bearing our pains, infirmities, and sicknesses, as well as our sins. Whatever our sufferings, we can safely cast our "care upon him; for he careth for [us]" (1 Pet. 5:7). (Not My Will, p. 51.)
