Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Perspective

One day all our temporary designations, locations, and vocations will shrink in their significance when bathed in the candlepower of Kolob's brighter and perfect day. Meanwhile, however, spiritual perspective is precious. ("Out of the Best Faculty," p. 33.)

An economic depression would be grim, but it would not change the reality of immortality. The inevitability of the Second Coming is not affected by the unpredictability of the stock market. Political despots make this world very ugly, but they cannot touch that better world to come. A case of cancer does not cancel the promises of the temple endowment. Thus the things of which we can be most certain are also those things which matter most. (Notwithstanding My Weakness, p. 57.)

Looking through the lens of gospel perspective, we see more clearly what life is really all about. In considering, for instance, the great reconciliation of Jacob and Esau with their caravans in the desert, none of us would be much interested in reviewing the invoices of the gifts offered or exchanged. It was their reconciliation that mattered! ("Out of the Best Faculty," p. 48.)

Even something as small as a man's thumb, when held very near the eye, can blind him to the very large sun. Yet the sun is still there. Blindness is brought upon the man by himself. When we draw other things too close, placing them first, we obscure our vision of heaven. (Of One Heart, p. 19.)

What is most to be focused on-the fact that Peter walked briefly on the water or that he did not continue? Has any other mortal so walked, even that briefly? (Ensign, May 1982, p. 38.)

In those moments when we feel the pain which is a necessary part of the plan of happiness, we can remember that there was an ancient time when that plan was first unveiled. Then the perceptive among us voted not secretly, but audibly-by shouting for joy! (See Job 38:7.) Let us not go back on those feelings now-for we saw more clearly then what we are experiencing now! (Ensign, November 1982, p. 68.)

As to scale, what occurred in the gardens of Eden and Gethsemane is of enormous significance to all mankind, but it was inversely proportioned to the tiny plots of earth on which those eternity-shaping dramas were played out! (Ensign, November 1984, p. 8.)

One-dimensional man with only a one-dimensional view of the world will surely focus upon the cares of the world, yielding to the things of the moment. (Ensign, November 1985, p. 17.)

Messes of pottage (Gen. 25:29-34) respond to the "now" in us, whereas only the submissive heart and mind sees eternity's considerations. ("Not My Will, But Thine", p. 60.)

The worldly appetites are, in a sense, like secularism's manna, a day-to-day thing, seldom preserved overnight. Instead, prophets urge the long view of the individual's eternal self-interest. ("Not My Will, But Thine", p. 61.)

If we have a sense of proportion here and now, our portion hereafter will be significantly larger. (Even As I Am, p. 102.)

This life's temporal lens distorts. The things of the moment are grossly magnified, and the things of eternity are blurred or diminished. (If Thou Endure It Well, p. 26.)

Never let the needs of now crowd out the considerations of eternity. (Ensign, May 1976, p. 26.)

How can we expect to enjoy eternally that which we neglect in mortality? (If Thou Endure It Well, p. 39)

The remedies for people who stumble because they feel unvalued, unloved, unused, unheeded, and unappreciated include coming to know about God's love and coming to see the disappointments of the day in the context of the blessings of eternity and God's plan of happiness. It is vital for one to know that life's real difficulties are "but for a small moment" and thereby to trust in God's timing (see D&C 122:4; 2 Cor. 4:17). (A Wonderful Flood of Light, p. 87.)

We misread and misuse life-except with this plain and precious perspective of the gospel, which puts the things of the world in their lesser places. Then, on that essentially unchanging mortal stage, we can see things for what they really are, such as the demanding cadence called for by the cares of the world. Like birds and animals performing some inborn ritual, amusing to everyone but the participants, these maneuverings of materialism would be comedy if they were not tragedy. So would the posturings as to power and the thirsty seeking of the praise of the world. The ploys are so transparent when seen in the gospel's light. (Ensign, November 1986, p. 54.)

Without enduring the in-your-face, personal experiences in the here and now of this life, how useful will we be to Him in the there and then as He continues the "one eternal round" of His grand work and glory (see 1 Ne. 10:19; Moses 1:39)? Thus how could immortality be fully appreciated without an earnest sense of proportion and perspective. (If Thou Endure It Well, p. 7.)

A mere hundred years from now today's seeming deprivations and tribulations will not matter unless we let them matter too much now! A thousand years from now, for instance, today's serious physical ailment will be but a fleeting memory. A million years from now, those who today worry and are anguished because they are unmarried will, if they are faithful, have smiles of satisfaction on their faces in the midst of a vast convocation of their posterity. (We Will Prove Them Herewith, p. 28.)

Unfortunately, the morning after does not occur the day before. (Notwithstanding My Weakness, p. 77.)

Knowing the truth about those things that really matter frees us from our inhibiting and finite perspective in the same way that turning the light on in an otherwise darkened room can keep us from stubbing toes and breaking furniture. (The Smallest Part, p. 6.)

Eternal perspective does not say to us to be inattentive to things like the dollar crises, floods, poverty, law and order, and borders-for these contemporary challenges represent, in fact, some of the interpersonal moral issues and challenges to our agency and to our ability to apply the gospel by assisting others. (The Smallest Part, p. 28.)

Perspective would have helped those who worked on the tower of Babel, no doubt an exciting undertaking for a time. Because it was so fatally flawed, we can't be sure who was the more lightheaded-the hod carriers (as the tower's altitude increased) or the architects who designed it! (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 81.)

Without the perspective of a purposeful mortality and also of long-standing, even premortal, covenants, Israel's wanderings make of Sinai a senseless sojourn. However, Israel's wandering is actually a type for our mortal state and God's plans for us. (A Wonderful Flood of Light, p. 38.)

As in the case of the episode of the golden calf, the view from the desert floor is very different from that atop Mount Sinai. Perspective makes such an enormous difference. (A Wonderful Flood of Light, p. 65.)

People who look beyond the mark are clearly not without sight. They can see, but it is what they choose to look at (or for) that causes a lack of vision. It might be likened to anxiously watching a traffic light two intersections away and missing an oncoming truck in our own intersection; or a basketball player taking his eyes off the basket and missing an easy layup because he glances at a hotdog vendor in the stands; or the blindness of the British fortifying Singapore prior to World War II with mighty guns firing only seaward as the Japanese came by land; or those who were too busy staring in search of a political liberator and missed the Messiah. (Things As They Really Are, p. 54.)

The Martha-like things chosen are not always the bad part- merely lesser choices. The Savior did not say that the cares of the world were not cares. But this world will pass away, and its cares with it. The things really worth caring about will still be around to be cared about forever. The other things are like last week's firewood, useful to warm a needed meal, which, in turn, helped to sustain the body. But to what end? Only His gospel gives us ultimate reasons. Without such perspective, we would be like astronomers who have never seen the stars. (We Will Prove Them Herewith, p. 30.)
