Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Programs

Often in the confusion of means and ends, we fail to see that programs and activities are helps, not ends in themselves, so far as developing the eternal attributes and everlasting skills are concerned. The character that can be developed by Scouting will be there in the next world, long after one has any need to make fire without matches. (We Will Prove Them Herewith, p. 111.)

Let us not mistake program scaffolding for substance. (Ensign, November 1982, p. 68.)

Programs such as the Church's current recreation programs are aids and helps. These clearly provide needed fellowship, physical exercise, cultural development, opportunities for missionary work, and moments of needed recognition for individuals. However, Abraham and those about him apparently did not have an athletic program. We have it now and it is helpful. (Notwithstanding My Weakness, p. 19.)

Some programs and practices in the Church today are important aids but have not been constant necessities in every other age. Discerning disciples understand this. (Notwithstanding My Weakness, p. 20.)

The Church is not a democracy that responds to its constituents. We do not make demands of the Lord. Of course, the Church and its leaders at all levels should be sensitive to conditions in the Church-if for no other reason than the keeping of the second commandment-but, most of all, as shepherds of the flock. But, as we have so sadly learned in recent secular and political history, a preferential program is seldom the "cure" for a basic need. (Notwithstanding My Weakness, p. 53.)

The Church seeks to avoid the mistakes of some secular governments that establish a program for every need and a department for every constituency. What is needed is more good families and neighbors and fewer programs. (We Will Prove Them Herewith, p. 65.)

A few in the Church are needlessly laden with programmed hyperactivity. They unwisely and unnecessarily exceed their strength and means, running faster than they are able (see D&C 10:4; Mosiah 4:27). Their fatiguing, Martha-like anxiety should yield more often to a Mary-like sense of proportion about what matters most; then the good part will not be taken from them (see Luke 10:41-42). (Men and Women of Christ, p. 3.)
