Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Relativism

At times only a small, satanic breeze, now the winds of relativism have reached gale proportions. Over a period of several decades relativism has eroded ethics, public and personal, has worn down the will of many, has contributed to a slackening sense of duty, civic and personal. The old mountains of individual morality have been worn down. This erosion has left mankind in a sand-dune society, in a desert of disbelief, where there are no landmarks, no north, no east, no west, and no south. There is only the dust of despair! (Deposition of a Disciple, pp. 79-80.)

As the Church spreads across the earth, so does Satan's dominion. Prophesied for our day are such things as wars, commotions, and distress of nations. These are not all geophysical. Perhaps even more destructive is the ethical relativism that denies any spiritual order and rejects divine and fixed principles of right and wrong. This we see reflected in a wholesale decline in moral standards and in the rapidly escalating incidence of cruelty, crime and corruption. (If Thou Endure It Well, p. 18.)

Without utilizing fixed principles, confused mortals will find things very hard to fix. (If Thou Endure It Well, p. 15.)

Relativism may be the disbeliever's defense, but it is the devil's offense. It involves the denial of the existence of absolute truths and, therefore, of an absolute truth giver, God. (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 79.)

Reflect, for instance, on how inoperative the Ten Commandments are in many lives. Today, killing, stealing, and bearing false witness still carry some social stigma and legal sanction, but sanction is effectively gone regarding sexual immmorality, the Sabbath day, honoring fathers and mothers, and the taking of the name of the Lord in vain. Some of this decline represents the bitter harvest of ethical relativism, the philosophy of choice of many, reflecting no fixed, divine truths but merely the mores of the moment. No wonder Ortega Y. Gasset wisely warned, "If truth does not exist, relativism cannot take itself seriously." (Ensign, May 1994, p. 88.)

To assert that there is some way other than adherence to the divine standard that has come down to us through the centuries in our Judeo-Christian heritage is to introduce the inevitable rationalization that relativism always brings: If infidelity is not really wrong per se, then why cannot every individual walk "in his own way," determining that which pleases him or her and that which gives sensual pleasure-even if it be child molestation or masochism? A nonmoral ground is no ground at all! A pervert will be unimpressed by ethical relativism's norms. Besides, inner slackness finally dooms outer enforcement, for enforcement officials are not only dwarfed by the enormity of their tasks, but also become less effective as the definition of crime becomes less and less legally and behaviorally clear. One has only to pause and wonder about what the role of a vice squad would have been in Sodom and Gomorrah! (Notwithstanding My Weakness, p. 96.)
