Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Righteousness

Righteousness preserves and sharpens the tastebuds of the soul, while selfishness first scalds and then destroys them. (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, p. 65.)

Righteousness is not a matter of role, nor is goodness a matter of gender. (Ensign, May 1978, p. 10.)

Before the ultimate victory of the forces of righteousness, some skirmishes will be lost. Even these, however, must leave a record sothat the choices before the people are clear and let others do as they will in the face of prophetic counsel. There will also be times, happily, when a minor defeat seems probable, that others will step forward, having been rallied to rightness by what we do. We will know the joy, on occasion, of having awakened a slumbering majority of the decent people of all races and creeds-a majority which was, till then, unconscious of itself. ("Meeting the Challenges of Today," p. 151.)

Eight were rescued in the time of Noah, but finally only three from Sodom (in view of Lot's wife's fate). While the precise mathematical proportions of the critical mass of good people necessary to save a society is not known to us, it cannot be doubted that without that critical mass, societies decline rapidly and significant changes come, in one form or another, and sometimes suddenly! (Look Back at Sodom, p. 26.)

Any response but righteousness is risky. (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 13.)

Eternal things are always done in the process of time. Men are ripened in righteousness as the grain is ripened. Each process requires rich soil and the sunlight of heaven. Time is measured only to impatient men. Direction is initially more important than speed. Who would really want momentum anyway, if he were on a wrong course? (Of One Heart, p. 35.)

Righteousness increases the uniqueness of our presence, but sin sinks us into sameness. (Of One Heart, p. 35.)

Evil people exist. The in-betweeners merely survive. But those who have really lived will be those who have lived righteously, because they will have lived righteously and served selflessly in a time of stunning contrasts. They will have managed to keep clean in a dirty world. And being free, they will be happy in otherwise sad times, and all their experiences will be for their good. (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, p. 65.)
