Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Time

Whereas the bird is at home in the air, we are clearly not at home in time-because we belong to eternity. Time, as much as any one thing, whispers to us that we are strangers here. ("Patience," p. 220.)

How we spend our time is at least as good a measure of us as how we spend our money. An inventory of how we spend our disposable time will tell us where our treasure is. (Matthew 6:19-21.) (Notwithstanding My Weakness, pp. 116-17.)

There are no idle hours; there are only idle people. In true righteousness there is serenity but there is an array of reminders that the "sacred present" is packed with possibilities which are slipping by us, which are going away from us each moment. ("Taking Up the Cross," p. 260.)

Good management of one's time can actually make more time available for people. On a few occasions, in kindness and in love, we can help others avoid imposing on our time inefficiently or inappropriately. Except for real crises, if we have relationships of trust, we can without fear indicate that a particular moment is not best for us, offering a genuine alternative. There are examples of situations when even the Savior made others wait-for their own good. "Instant" help is not always the best help, if it creates in others the unrealistic expectation that such mortal help is always available to them. (The Smallest Part, p. 49.)

Longevity does not automatically produce humility. The mere passage of time does not mean the automatic passing of milestones in personal development. (Even As I Am, p. 47.)

To withhold some of oneself brings subtle consequences. There is always the irrevocable loss of misspent time. Time spent in indulging oneself cannot be spent simultaneously in other ways. We cannot engage in murmuring and use that same time for praising. We cannot engage in griping at the very time we are consoling others. (A Wonderful Flood of Light, p. 98.)

Time, unlike some material things, cannot be recycled. (A Time to Choose, p. 13.)

We are often actually less generous with our time than with our money. We keep forgetting where our time comes from! (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, p. 73.)
