Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Trust in God

It is only by yielding to God that we can begin to realize His will for us. And if we truly trust God, why not yield to His loving omniscience? After all, He knows us and our possibilities much better than do we. (Ensign, May 1985, p. 72.)

What we already know about God teaches us to trust him for what we do not know fully. (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 56.)

For the faithful, what finally emerges is an understanding of "things as they really are" (Jacob 4:13), such as the reassuring realization that we are in the Lord's hands! But, brothers and sisters, we were never really anywhere else! (Ensign, May 1985, p. 72.)

Mormon [declared]: "And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will." [W of M 1:7; italics added.] Such is the trust that we need in God's omniscience, causing us to be entreated, freely, into participating in His purposes-and without fretting. Such trust allows us to be concerned with making a good choice rather than brooding over whether or not we had a choice. Besides, if we cannot accept and trust in the Lord's declaration that He has left us "free to choose," in which of His other declarations can we then trust? Being now limited in our information and limited in our perception, it is a good time to trust God! (Even As I Am, p. 59.)

Thus it is that our faith and trust in our Heavenly Father, so far as this mortal experience is concerned, consists not simply of faith and gladness that He exists, but is also a faith and trust that, if we are humble, He will tutor us, aiding our acquisition of needed attributes and experiences while we are in mortality. We trust not only the Designer but also His design of life itself, including our portion thereof! (We Will Prove Them Herewith, p. 12.)

Coming to "put our trust in the living God" is not the work of a day or a season. Instead, this mortal school continues to the very end, when the final school bell rings for each of us. (That Ye May Believe, p. 33.)
