Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Truth

Salvational truths combine longevity and relevancy; they contain both span and significance! Education that is only "for a season" is narrow; it pertains only to a knowledge of things as they temporarily are, like today's weather forecast or an airline schedule. Temporary facts are useful but terminal. ("The Inexhaustible Gospel," p. 146.)

We constantly need to distinguish between the truths which are useful and those which are crucial, and between truths which are important and those which are eternal. The restored gospel gives us this special sense of proportion. (On Becoming a Disciple-Scholar, p. 6.)

In human affairs, erroneous and unchallenged assertions sometimes assume an undeserved aura of truth. While a response to this hopelessness may not create conviction in disbelievers, it can bolster believers against the silent erosion of their own convictions. (Ensign, May 1983, p. 9.)

Truth, as Mount Sinai showed, transcends the importance of the terrain on which it is given. (Ensign, November 1984, p. 9.)

In point of value, longitudinal truth, when compared to truth which reflects reality as it exists in only a portion of one of the three great time zones-past, present, and future-is like the Bible when it is compared with the single issue of a newspaper. (The Smallest Part, p. 5.)

Gospel truths about life and the human condition stand in stark contrast to the world's view; the world's solutions so often lead mankind into conceptual cul-de-sacs. Without gospel truths, man's efforts to reach his goals are like the northbound explorer whodrove his dog sled feverishly northward on an ice pack that was flowing southward-only to find himself farther from his destination at the end of a hard day's journey than he had been at dawn! (The Smallest Part, p. 36.)

The theology of truth about man, life, and the universe does not depend for its validity on acceptance by many, or even any. Only eight people were right about the weather in Noah's time when being right really mattered. (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 14.)

The gospel is continuing education at its best. However, the gospel isn't simply another building block to be fitted into the tower of truth; it is the tower of truth itself. (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 16.)

Truth cuts across all three time zones-our premortal state, our second state (mortality), and the eternal future that is fashioned for us. (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 48.)

Truth can be very threatening. We do not read, for instance, that the power structure in Jerusalem ever seriously searched the sermons of Jesus with a view to understanding; the cognoscente concerned themselves with entrapment, not enlightenment. (Deposition of a Disciple, p. 61.)

One wonders if the reaction to Jesus' first visit to Nazareth-rage-was not in some respects preferable to the deliberate disdain experienced in connection with his second visit. Satan's stratagems are apparent: If one cannot face truth, then he can merely dismiss it by stereotyping or dismissing the source. Dismiss the message because of the lowly messengers. (Even As I Am, p. 85.)

Truth does not eliminate the force of life's tragedies and frustrations, but it provides a context within which one can cope with them. (That My Family Should Partake, p. 32.)

Christ's disciples should ever realize that wandering in the underbrush of the unimportant or in the forest of facts there are many "who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it" (D&C 123:12). In our passion for equality we sometimes wrongly assume there is a democracy among truths. (That Ye May Believe, p. 140.)

Intellectual embroidery is but an unreliable frill; the hardy and homely cloth of truth is to be found in the hardy gospel of Jesus Christ. (Of One Heart, p. 29.)

Bearers of truth are often victimized by partial truths. Partial truths can sometimes have such an influence as to make full falsehoods green with envy. (Meek and Lowly, p. 108.)

Trends do not change truths. (Wherefore, Ye Must Press Forward, p. 3.)

A dying civilization can, of course, be annoyed by the living Church. People who are cut to the very center by the truth, the laser of our Lord that emanates from the living Church, will gladly "turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables" (2 Tim. 4:4) it is so much less painful. (Things As They Really Are, pp. 58-59.)

God, who does not grow weary of making all daisies alike and whose course is one eternal round, does not tire of certain truths as do we mortals. Nor does the repetition of a true phrase reduce its relevancy; it vouches for its validity. (Things As They Really Are, p. 101.)
