Neal A. Maxwell, Neal A. Maxwell Quote Book ( 1997)

Veil

Without the veil, we would lose that precious insulation which would constantly interfere with our mortal probation and maturation. Without the veil, our brief mortal walk in a darkening world would lose its meaning-for one would scarcely carry the flashlight of faith at noonday and in the presence of the Light of the World. Without the veil, we could not experience the gospel of work and the sweat of our brow. If we had the security of having already entered into God's rest, certain things would be unneeded; Adam and Eve did not clutch social security cards in the Garden of Eden. ("Patience," p. 219.)

The partition which produces [premortal forgetfulness] is something we call the veil-a partition the presence of which requires our patience. We define the veil as the border between mortality and eternity; it is also a film of forgetting which covers the memories of earlier experiences. This forgetfulness will be lifted one day, and on that day we will see forever-rather than "through a glass, darkly" (1 Cor. 13:12). ("Patience," p. 219.)

We are cocooned, as it were, in order that we might truly choose. Once, long ago, we chose to come to this very setting where we could choose. It was an irrevocable choice. And the veil is the guarantor that our ancient choice will be honored. ("Patience," p. 220.)

Fortunately, the veil keeps the first, second, and third estates separate, hence our sense of separateness. The veil insures the avoidance of having things "compound in one"-to our everlasting detriment. (2 Ne. 2:11.) (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, p. 11.)

The veil (which is both the film of forgetting and the border between mortality and eternity) will, one day, be shown to have been a succoring screen for us earthlings. Were it possible to breach it on the wrong terms, we would see and experience, before we are ready, things that would moot much of the value in this mortal experience. (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, p. 11.)

The veil of death stands, not to forever shut us out but as a reminder of God's tutoring and patient love for us. Brushing against it can produce a feeling of "Not Yet," but also faint whispers of anticipation. Then there is the still later and glorious moment when, in the words of the hymn, those who have prevailed "by the patience of hope and the labor of love" will hear in the final judgment these glad words, "Well and faithfully done; enter into my joy and sit down on my throne." (Hymns, no. 217.) ("Patience and the Law of the Harvest.")
