Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

FOUNDATIONAL EVENTS

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (referred to hereafter as Latter-day Saints, LDS, or Mormon) believe in God. They believe that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God and the Savior of humankind. They believe in observing high moral standards and in honoring and sustaining the laws of the land. They believe there is purpose in life, and that happiness is the object of our existence and the product of a well-lived life. Many of these matters of faith and practice, matters the Latter-day Saints share with men and women of goodwill throughout the earth, will be treated in more detail in subsequent chapters. For now we will start at the beginning.

THE SETTING

One simply cannot understand the Latter-day Saints without at least some understanding of their origins. The Church as we know it came into being in the early nineteenth century. The population of our young nation doubled in the first quarter of that century. It was a time of revolution, what some historians have called the "Second American Revolution," a time of upheaval, of movement—social, political, economic, and religious. There was a movement in values and ideology as well as topography. Alexis de Tocqueville characterized the age as follows: "In the United States a man builds a house in which to spend his old age, and he sells it before the roof is on; he plants a garden, and leaves it just as the trees are coming into bearing."<#>1 Orestes Brownson, a prominent thinker of the time, explained, "No tolerable observer of the signs of the time can have failed to perceive that we are, in this vicinity at least, in the midst of a very important revolution; a revolution which extends to every department of thought, and threatens to change ultimately the whole moral aspect of society. Everything is loosened from its old fastenings, and is floating no one can tell whither."<#>2

This was the age of Restorationism, an era in America's history when men and women read the Bible, believed its story and message, and sought for a return to "the ancient order of things." Many longed for the reestablishment of primitive Christianity; others desired once more to enjoy the spiritual gifts and outpourings that had once graced the ancients. A classic illustration of one imbued with such desires was Alexander Campbell. Thomas and Alexander Campbell came to America from Ireland. Educated and trained as Presbyterian ministers in Scotland, Thomas Campbell and his son began another of the many campaigns against creeds and a strict Calvinism. Thomas had arrived in America first and, after having obtained a pastorate in a Presbyterian church in southwestern Pennsylvania, had managed to incur the wrath of the synod for teaching what were perceived as heretical doctrines. Campbell rejected the notion that the church should hold the Westminster Confession of Faith as a term of communion. He denied that faith came through some mystical-emotional experience, stressing that faith resulted rather from "an intelligent response to the mind of evidence."<#>3 After dismissal by the Presbyterians, Thomas continued to teach his doctrines to the farmers in western Pennsylvania and organized the "Christian Association of Washington" in 1809. This society stressed "a pure Gospel ministry, that shall reduce to practice that whole form of doctrine, worship, discipline, and government, expressly revealed and enjoined in the word of God."<#>4

Alexander Campbell joined his father in America in 1809, learned of the beliefs and practices of the movement, and assumed leadership. He accepted the doctrine of believer's baptism by immersion, was baptized, and in 1811 accepted the pastorate at the Brush Run Baptist Church in what is now Bethany, West Virginia. Campbell's adherence to his Restorationist beliefs proved a serious concern to the Baptists, and he was rejected by many Baptist colleagues in the ministry. In 1823 the younger Campbell began editing a magazine entitled the Christian Baptist, the title of which was eventually changed to the Millennial Harbinger, the latter title evidencing a belief in the imminence of Christ's second coming. Campbell's dissatisfaction with nominal Christianity is apparent in a statement from the first volume of the Christian Baptist: "We are convinced, fully convinced, that the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint of modern fashionable Christianity."<#>5 In addition, Campbell the iconoclast "condemned all beliefs and practices that could not be validated by apostolic mandates. He proclaimed that missionary societies, tract societies, Bible societies, synods, associations, and theological seminaries were inconsistent with pure religion."<#>6

Alexander Campbell's disillusionment with nineteenth-century religion was not an isolated perception. As late as 1838 Ralph Waldo Emerson stated in his famous "Divinity School Address" at Harvard that "the need was never greater of new revelation than now." Further, "the Church seems to totter to its fall, almost all life extinct." Continuing, "I look forward for the hour when the supreme Beauty, which ravished the souls of those Eastern men, and chiefly of those Hebrews, and through their lips spoke oracles to all time, shall speak in the west also."<#>7

A number of later LDS Church leaders spoke of their own quest for truth and of the frustrations they felt before their encounter with Joseph Smith. Brigham Young stated, "My mind was opened to conviction, and I knew that the Christian world had not the religion that Jesus and the Apostles taught. I knew that there was not a Bible Christian on earth within my knowledge."<#>8 Wilford Woodruff, fourth president of the Church, said, "I did not join any church, believing that the Church of Christ in its true organization did not exist upon the earth."<#>9 Willard Richards, later a counselor to Brigham Young, became "convinced that the sects were all wrong, and that God had no church on earth, but that he would soon have a church on earth whose creed would be the truth."<#>10

JOSEPH SMITH'S FIRST VISION

Nothing of consequence emerges in a social or intellectual vacuum, and Joseph Smith and the work set in motion were no different. What began as a frontier faith through the work of an obscure farm boy and would later survive and blossom into a worldwide religious movement did not come into being in "dry ground." Indeed, the ground was prepared through a general dissatisfaction of large groups of people with mainline religious bodies. The roots of the new religion would sink deep into the soil because individuals were anxious for a "new revelation."

Into this world of nineteenth-century foment came Joseph Smith, Jr. He was born in Sharon, Vermont, on December 23, 1805, the fourth of nine children of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith. His family moved thereafter to Tunbridge, Vermont; Lebanon, New Hampshire; and Norwich, Vermont. Finally in 1814 they settled in Western New York. After two years of hard labor and financial strain, Joseph Smith, Sr., purchased 100 acres of unimproved land two miles south of Palmyra, New York, on the Palmyra-Manchester town line. In commenting on the religious activity in his own area, young Joseph mentioned that some time in the second year after the family's move to Manchester, "there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion." He continued his report by explaining that the excitement "commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:5.) Between 1816 and 1821 revivals were reported in more towns and more settlers joined churches than at any previous time in New York's history.<#>11 During this period of religious explosion, the Smith family was proselyted by the Presbyterian sect. Young Joseph (in his fifteenth year) leaned toward the Methodists and felt some desire to join them. Four members of the family became officially associated with the Presbyterians, but Joseph remained an interested investigator of truth without fully committing himself to any church.

Joseph attended many of the revivals with family members and became concerned for the salvation of his own soul. In addition, he was particularly troubled about which of all the religious denominations was correct and which he should join. Tradition has it that at one of the revivals a minister quoted from James 1:5-6 in the New Testament ("If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God") and encouraged the congregation to undertake their religious quest through prayer as well as study. The fourteen-year-old then returned to his home and read the same passage from the family Bible. He later wrote of this experience, "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:12.)

Joseph reported that soon thereafter he walked to a grove of trees not far from his father's farm and knelt to pray. He later wrote, "Information was what I most desired at this time, and with a fixed determination to obtain it I called upon the Lord for the first time."<#>12 It was the spring of 1820. In writing of that occasion almost twenty years later, Joseph Smith made the following remarkable claim:

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is my Beloved Son. Hear Him! (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:15-17.)

In an earlier account of the same phenomenon, Joseph explained that "a pillar of light above the brightness of the sun at noon day came down from above and rested upon me and I was filled with the spirit of God. The Lord opened the heavens upon me and I saw the Lord and he spake unto me, saying, Joseph, my son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Go thy way. Walk in my statutes and keep my commandments."<#>13 In 1842 Joseph Smith prepared a brief history of the Mormons. The history contains the following description of the theophany:

While fervently engaged in supplication my mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded, and I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision and saw two glorious personages who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day. They told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as his church and kingdom. And I was expressly commanded to "go not after them," at the same time receiving a promise that the fulness of the gospel should at some time be made known unto me.<#>14

This experience has come to be known by Latter-day Saints as "Joseph Smith's First Vision" and is central to their faith. They believe in God, in Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Bible. They also believe in modern and continuing revelation and modern prophets, and the First Vision is foundational to such beliefs.

The unfolding of Joseph Smith's doctrinal beliefs and the early development of the faith would entail a lengthy process over the next twenty-four years of his life. At the same time, the prophet-leader and his followers came to extract definite theological principles from the First Vision, such as (1) a belief in a literal Satanic being bent upon the overthrow of all that is good; (2) the reality of God the Father as a separate and distinct personage from the resurrected Jesus Christ; (3) the concept that a universal apostasy or falling away had taken place in the first-century Christian Church, and that no religious denomination on earth had authority to act in the name of God; (4) the need for a restoration—more than a reformation—in order that saving truths and powers might be given anew to mortals on earth; and (5) the confidence that it was possible for men and women to pray in faith, to commune with their Maker, and to know the things of God. Joseph Smith would later state his position in regard to the reality of his experience: "Though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; . . . I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:25.)

After the experience, Joseph wrote, "My soul was filled with love, and for many days I could rejoice with great joy. The Lord was with me but I could find none that would believe the heavenly vision."<#>15 In speaking more specifically of the opposition he faced, he wrote of an encounter with a Methodist minister some days after the vision: "I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:21.)

THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH

Some three years after his first vision, Joseph claimed to have been visited by an angel named Moroni, an ancient American prophet who returned to deliver a scriptural record that came to be known as the Book of Mormon. We will discuss the Book of Mormon as a part of the expanded canon of LDS scripture in the next chapter.

Early on, Joseph Smith taught that a vision or revelation from God was not sufficient to represent Deity. He sensed, like Roger Williams, the founder of the Baptist Church, that the authority to act in the name of God was not to be found on earth, that priesthood had been lost with the death of the original apostles. John Winthrop, one of William's contemporaries, noted that Williams had concluded that the Protestants were "not . . . able to derive the authority . . . from the apostles" but "conceived God would raise up some apostolic power."<#>16 After a while Roger Williams renounced the views of the Baptists and "turned seeker, i.e., to wait for new apostles to restore Christianity. He believed the Christian religion to have been . . . corrupted and disfigured in what he called the `apostasy,' . . . and that there was need of a special commission, to restore the modes of positive worship, according to the original institution."<#>17

It was while translating the Book of Mormon that Joseph Smith and his scribe continued to encounter references to baptism and other ordinances (sacraments), as well as the need for proper authority to perform the same. Feeling the need to inquire of God on the matter, they knelt in prayer on May 15, 1829, on the banks of the Susquehanna River near Harmony, Pennsylvania. According to Joseph, an angel who called himself John, known in the New Testament as John the Baptist (the one who had prepared the way for and baptized Jesus), appeared, laid his hands upon their heads, and ordained them to what Joseph Smith called the Aaronic Priesthood. The Aaronic Priesthood, known also as the Lesser Priesthood or the Preparatory Priesthood, contained the power to teach and preach, to call to repentance, to baptize, and to ordain others to the same authority. John explained that "he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:72.) Joseph Smith stated that within weeks the three ancient apostles did in fact appear and bestow the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. This authority contained the power to confirm individuals members of the Church after water baptism and confer the gift of the Holy Ghost. In addition, Joseph taught that the power he received from Peter, James, and John included the holy apostleship, the same authority given by Jesus anciently to bind and seal on earth and in heaven. (See Matt. 16:16-19; 18:18.) We will speak more of the organization of the Church, general and local ecclesiastical structure, and the rights and powers of the priesthood in chapter 8.

On April 6, 1830, Joseph Smith met with a large group at Fayette, New York, to formally organize what was called on that day the Church of Christ. Later the name was changed to the Church of the Latter Day Saints, and in 1838 to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Joseph Smith was then and thereafter acknowledged and sustained by his followers as a prophet, seer, revelator, and apostle, and as first elder of the Church. Missionaries were sent out from the earliest days, and congregations of Saints (followers of Christ and baptized members of the Church) were established in New York and Pennsylvania. By 1831 there were two church centers, one in Kirtland, Ohio, and one in Independence, Missouri. Severe persecution in Independence in 1833 and troubles in Ohio in the late 1830s forced the people into other parts of Missouri, and eventually the Mormons left the state in 1838 and settled on the banks of the Mississippi River at Commerce, Illinois. There, from 1839 to 1846, they enjoyed a brief season of peace and prosperity and built a city that came to be known as Nauvoo, the "city beautiful." Nauvoo grew during the time the Saints were there to become the second largest city in Illinois.

Missionaries were sent abroad, and tens of thousands, especially from Great Britain, converted to the Church. Many of these left their homelands as part of a modern gathering and came to America, the home of their newfound faith. But persecution and contention seemed to be ever a part of the lives of Joseph Smith and his followers. Fearing the Mormon prophet's increasing social and political strength and the capacity of the growing Church to wield more and more influence in the state—and being distressed by a number of the beliefs and practices of the Latter-day Saints, including plural marriage—the enemies of the Church (some from among dissident and disaffected members) eventually murdered Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum in Carthage, Illinois, on June 27, 1844.

Many across the nation felt that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would, with the death of its charismatic leader, succumb to this final, stunning blow. But the Saints proved that their faith was not founded in a mortal man; by now the personal conviction of the truthfulness of what Joseph Smith had established was deep, while the vision was broad. There was left to Brigham Young the responsibility to regroup the Saints and prepare them for departure from Illinois and then an arduous and now-famous trek across the plains to the Great Basin and what is now Salt Lake City, Utah. The formal date of entry into the Salt Lake Valley was July 24, 1847. Brigham Young served as the Church's second president for thirty years, and during that time, although the Mormons enjoyed some degree of autonomy in their remote gathering place, there were ongoing struggles with the U.S. government over plural marriage and what was perceived to be the growing theocratic power of Brigham Young himself. Those struggles continued through the nineteenth century until plural marriage was formally discontinued in 1890 and Utah became the forty-fifth state in the union in 1896. Growth and expansion throughout the world have characterized the twentieth-century church, and the movement set in motion by Joseph Smith continues to wield an influence.

1 Democracy in America, 2 vols. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1945), 2:164.

2 Boston Quarterly Review, 3 vols. (Boston: Cambridge Press, 1840), 3:265.

3 See W. E. Garrison and A. T. DeGroot, The Disciples of Christ (St. Louis: Mo., Bethany Press, 1958), pp. 133-39.

4 Ibid., pp. 146-48.

5 Christian Baptist, 7 vols., 13th ed., rev. Edited by D. S. Burnet (Bethany, West Virginia: H. S. Bosworth, 1861), 1:33.

6 Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 241.

7 Delivered before the senior class at the Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts, July 15, 1838; in Theology in America, ed. Sydney E. Ahlstrom (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1967), pp. 306, 315-16.

8 Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: F. D. Richards and Sons, 1851-86), 5:75.

9 Ibid., 4:99.

10 History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 2:470.

11 See Milton V. Backman, Jr., "Awakenings in the Burned-Over District: New Light on the Historical Setting of the First Vision," Brigham Young University Studies, vol. 9, no. 3, spring 1969, p. 302.

12 1835 account of the First Vision, in Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), p. 159.

13 1832 account, in ibid., p. 157; punctuation corrected.

14 1842 account, in ibid., p. 169.

15 1832 account, in ibid., p. 157; punctuation corrected.

16 John Winthrop, History of New England, 2 vols., edited by James Kendall Hosmer (New York: Barnes and Noble, 1946), 1:309.

17 John Callender, An Historical Discourse, on the Civil and Religious Affairs of the Colony of Rhode Island and Province Plantations (Boston, 1739; reprinted in Collections of the Rhode Island Historical Society, Providence, 1838), 4:109-11.
