Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

SCRIPTURE AND THE EXPANDING CANON

I remember very well sitting in a doctoral course entitled "Seminar on Biblical Studies" in the late 1970s. There were eight of us in the course, as I recall, from various religious backgrounds—two Southern Baptists, a couple of Methodists, a Reform Jew, a Roman Catholic, a Nazarene, and a Latter-day Saint. It was an excellent class and helped introduce me to the vocabulary of the academic study of religion, as well as some of the problems and challenges of biblical scholarship. The professor, a former Methodist minister, was a superb instructor. He was organized, well prepared, and considerate of students. He responded well to questions and was always available for consultation. We studied various topics, including the nature of scripture, covenant, prophecy, interpretation, authorship, and the dating of scriptural records. One of the things that stands out in my mind is our discussion of the canon of scripture. We had covered in some detail the historical roots of the Old and New Testament canons and had discussed at some length the relationship between canonicity and authority of scripture; that is, we had debated whether a document belonged in the canon because it was considered authoritative, or whether it was considered authoritative because it was included in the canon.

For two periods the instructor had emphasized that the word canon—referring, of course, to the biblical books that are generally included in the Judeo-Christian collection—implied the rule of faith, the standard against which we measure what is acceptable. Further, he stated that the canon, if the word meant anything at all, was closed, fixed, set, and established. I look back at my notes more than two decades later and realize that he must have stressed those four words at least ten times. I noticed in the second period that the instructor seemed a bit uneasy. I remember thinking that something must be wrong. Without warning, he stopped what he was doing, banged his fist on the table, turned to me, and said, "Mr. Millet, will you please explain to this group the Latter-day Saint concept of canon, especially given your acceptance of the Book of Mormon and other books of scripture beyond the Bible?" I was startled. Stumped. Certainly surprised. I paused for several seconds, looked up at the board, saw the now very familiar four words written under the word canon, and said somewhat shyly, "Well, I suppose you could say that the Latter-day Saints believe the canon of scripture is open, flexible, and expanding!" We spent much of the rest of the period trying to make sense out of what I had just said.

THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS AND THE BIBLE

Joseph Smith loved the Bible. It was his pondering upon a biblical passage that started his quest to know the will of the Almighty. Most of his sermons, writings, and letters are laced with quotations or paraphrasing summaries of biblical passages and precepts, from both the Old and New Testaments. Joseph once remarked that one can "see God's handwriting in the sacred volume; and he who reads it oftenest will like it best."<#>1 He believed that the Bible represented God's word to humanity, and he gloried in the truths and timeless lessons it contained.

The Completeness of the Bible. From his earliest days, however, Joseph did not believe that the Bible was complete, nor did he feel that religious difficulties could necessarily be handled quickly by turning to the Old or New Testaments for help. After speaking of how James 1:5-6 had made such a deep impression upon his soul, he wrote, "I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; . . . for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:12.) On another occasion he spoke concerning his belief in ongoing revelation from God:

From what we can draw from the Scriptures relative to the teaching of heaven, we are induced to think that much instruction has been given to man since the beginning which we do not possess now. This may not agree with the opinions of some of our friends who are bold to say that we have everything written in the Bible which God ever spoke to man since the world began, and that if He had ever said anything more we should certainly have received it. . . . We have what we have, and the Bible contains what it does contain: but to say that God never said anything more to man than is there recorded, would be saying at once that we have at last received a revelation: for it must require one to advance thus far, because it is nowhere said in that volume by the mouth of God that He would not, after giving what is there contained, speak again; and if any man has found out for a fact that the Bible contains all that God ever revealed to man he has ascertained it by an immediate revelation.<#>2

In a letter to his uncle, Silas Smith, Joseph wrote in the same vein in 1833 of the need for continual direction through prophets:

Seeing that the Lord has never given the world to understand by anything heretofore revealed that he had ceased forever to speak to his creatures when sought unto in a proper manner, why should it be thought a thing incredible that he should be pleased to speak again in these last days for their salvation? Perhaps you may be surprised at this assertion that I should say "for the salvation of his creatures in these last days" since we have already in our possession a vast volume of his word [the Bible] which he has previously given. But you will admit that the word spoken to Noah was not sufficient for Abraham. . . . Isaac, the promised seed, was not required to rest his hope upon the promises made to his father Abraham, but was privileged with the assurance of his [God's] approbation in the sight of heaven by the direct voice of the Lord to him. . . .

I have no doubt but that the holy prophets and apostles and saints in the ancient days were saved in the kingdom of God. . . . I may believe that Enoch walked with God. I may believe that Abraham communed with God and conversed with angels. . . . I may believe that Elijah was taken to heaven in a chariot of fire with fiery horses. I may believe that the saints saw the Lord and conversed with him face to face after his resurrection. I may believe that the Hebrew Church came to Mount Zion and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels. I may believe that they looked into eternity and saw the Judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant; but will all this purchase an assurance for me, or waft me to the regions of eternal day with my garments spotless, pure, and white? Or, must I not rather obtain for myself, by my own faith and diligence, in keeping the commandments of the Lord, an assurance of salvation for myself? And have I not an equal privilege with the ancient saints? And will not the Lord hear my prayers, and listen to my cries as soon [as] he ever did to theirs, if I come to him in the manner they did? Or is he a respecter of persons?<#>3

The Inerrancy of the Bible. One of the LDS articles of faith states, "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly." (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:8.) It appears that Joseph Smith meant to convey what is generally associated with the term transmitted; there was certainly more involved in how we got the Bible than translation matters, including copying, adding to, taking from, and interpretation, as well as problems of translation from the ancient tongues. In 1843 he added, "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors."<#>4 He felt that many plain and precious truths had been taken from the Bible before the documents were compiled into what we now know as the Old and New Testaments. This was one of the reasons Joseph Smith felt called to initiate a restoration of truth and power, not simply a reformation of existing religious matters. Latter-day Saints are obviously not Catholic, but they are not Protestant, either; they did not break away from the Mother Church, nor did they seek to reform her. They thus speak of the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ being restored through Joseph Smith, not the least of which was doctrinal and theological matters once clearly taught or practiced but since lost to the world through the centuries.

Thus Joseph Smith did not hold a traditional belief in the infallibility or inerrancy of the Bible. He believed, to be sure, that the essential message of the Bible was true and from God. We could say that he believed it was "God's word." I am not so certain that he or modern Church leaders would be convinced that every sentence recorded in the testaments necessarily contains "God's words," meaning a direct quotation or a transcription of divine direction. Joseph taught, and his successors have emphasized, that it is the spirit of revelation within the one called of God that is the energizing force, and that in most instances God places the thought into the mind or heart of the revelator, who then assumes the responsibility to clothe the oracle in language. Certainly there are times when a prophet records the words of God directly, but very often the "still small voice" (1 Kgs. 19:12) whispers to the prophet, who then speaks for God.

In short, an LDS view might be stated as follows: when God chooses to speak through a person, that person does not become a mindless instrument, an earthly sound system through which God can voice himself. Rather, the person becomes enlightened and filled with intelligence or truth. Nothing could be clearer in the Old Testament, for example, than that many factors affected the prophetic message—personality, experience, vocabulary, literary talent, and so on. The word of the Lord as spoken through Isaiah is quite different from the word of the Lord as spoken through Luke, and both are different from that spoken by Jeremiah or Mark. Some suggest that if the Bible cannot be trusted in all things it cannot be trusted at all. Because of the endless textual variants, some of those who believe in biblical inerrancy concede errors in our modern Bible while maintaining the infallibility of the original manuscripts. The difficulty, of course, is that the original manuscripts are no longer available.

Further, it is worth noting that stone, leaves, bark, skins, wood, metals, baked clay, and papyrus were all used anciently to record inspired messages. The LDS concern with the ancients is not the perfection with which such messages were recorded but with the inspiration of the message. More specifically, Latter-day Saints are interested in the fact that the heavens were opened to the ancients, that they had messages to record. In other words, knowing that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever (see Heb. 13:8), the fact that he spoke to them at all, however well or poorly it may have been recorded, attests that he can speak to men and women in the here and now. After all, the Bible is only black ink on white paper until the Spirit of God manifests its true meaning to us; if we have obtained that, there is little need to quibble over the Bible's suitability as a history or science text. Perhaps a statement from Brigham Young will serve as an effective summary of the LDS view of scriptural infallibility. "When God speaks to the people," he said, "he does it in a manner to suit their circumstances and capacities. . . . Should the Lord Almighty send an angel to re-write the Bible, it would in many places be very different from what it now is."<#>5

OTHER BOOKS OF SCRIPTURE

For Joseph Smith and his followers, the traditions of the past regarding scripture, revelation, and canon were altered dramatically by the First Vision. God had spoken again, they believed, the heavens were no longer sealed, and a "new dispensation" of truth was under way. The ninth article of faith states, "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:9.) One writer has described the "dynamic scriptural process" of the Latter-day Saints as follows:

Latter-day Saints hold a view of canon that does not restrict itself to God's revelations of the past, whether they be those which they revere in common with their fellow Christians or those believed uniquely by the Saints. Their view is broader: the canon is not closed, nor will it ever be. To them, revelation has not ceased; it continues in the Church. Future revelation is not only viewed as theoretically possible; it is needed and expected, as changing circumstances in the world necessitate new communication from God. This view of canon and scriptural authority is the legacy of Joseph Smith.<#>6

The LDS canon of scripture, called the "standard works," consists of the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

The Book of Mormon. Over three years passed from the time of Joseph Smith's first visionary experience, and during that interim he refrained from joining any of the existing churches in the area. One evening Joseph knelt in prayer to determine his standing before God, inasmuch as he had enjoyed no further communication from God since 1820. In his own words, "On the evening of the 21st of September, A.D. 1823, while I was praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of Scripture, on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room, indeed, the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded."<#>7 The angel announced himself as Moroni and explained that "God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people. He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:33-34.) In describing the plates, as well as the manner in which he translated them, Joseph Smith said in 1842:

These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold, each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long, and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings, in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. . . . With the records was found a curious instrument, which the ancients called "Urim and Thummim," which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breast plate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God.<#>8

For the Latter-day Saints, the Book of Mormon is an additional book of scripture, another testament of Jesus Christ. The majority of the Book of Mormon deals with a group of Hebrews (descendants of the tribe of Joseph, son of Jacob) who leave Jerusalem in the first year of the reign of King Zedekiah (ca. 600 B.C.), anticipating (being divinely directed concerning) the overthrow of Judah by the Babylonians. The people travel south and eventually set sail for a "promised land," a land "choice above all other lands," the land of America. The early story highlights the dissension between Nephi, a righteous and obedient leader of his people, and his rebellious and murmuring brothers, Laman and Lemuel. Prophet after prophet arises to call the people to repentance and declare the message of salvation. The Nephites are told repeatedly of the coming of Jesus, the Messiah, and the prophet leaders constantly strive to turn the hearts of the people to Christ. (The LDS belief in Christ's "eternal gospel" will be dealt with in a subsequent chapter.) Eventually the internal squabbles result in a total break of the migrants into two separate bodies of people—the followers of Nephi (Nephites) and the followers of Laman (Lamanites). The remainder of the Book of Mormon is essentially a story of the constant rise and fall of the Nephite nation (not unlike the accounts of the children of Israel contained in 2 Kings), as the people either choose to obey God or yield to the enticings of riches and pride.

The book of 3 Nephi, chapters 11-28, contains an account of a visit and brief ministry of Jesus Christ to the Nephites in America, following his death, resurrection, and ascension in the Holy Land. While teaching and comforting these "other sheep" (John 10:14-16; Book of Mormon, 3 Ne. 15:21), Jesus organizes a church and establishes standards for a Christian community. An era of peace and unity follows for almost two hundred years as the people see to the needs of one another through having "all things in common." Later, however, the misuse of material blessings leads to pride and class distinctions, resulting in a continuation of the former struggles between good and evil. The story of the Book of Mormon culminates in a final battle between the Nephites and the Lamanites in which the former (who had proven over time to be more wicked than their idolatrous enemies) are exterminated. The history and divine dealings of the people from the time of Nephi had been kept by the prophets or civic leaders, and the final task of completing and then editing the thousand-year collection of metal plates remained for the prophet-leader Mormon (for whom the book/collection is named) and his son, Moroni, in about A.D. 400. Joseph Smith said it was this same Moroni who returned as an angel with the plates in 1823. It is, by the way, because of the Latter-day Saints' acceptance of the Book of Mormon that they have come to be known as "Mormons."

Many people in the nineteenth century claimed revelation from God, claimed visions and oracles. But the Book of Mormon made Joseph's claims somewhat different, inasmuch as it represented to many a tangible evidence of divine intervention in history. People "touched the book," as Richard Bushman has written, "and the realization came over them that God had spoken again. Apart from any specific content, the discovery of additional scripture in itself inspired faith in people who were looking for more certain evidence of God in their lives."<#>9 In fact, Jan Shipps observed that as important as the First Vision was to the early Saints, "it was this `gold bible' that first attracted adherents to the movement. As crucial to the success of the whole Latter-day Saint enterprise as is Joseph Smith, it must never be forgotten that in the early years it was not the First Vision but the Book of Mormon that provided the credentials that made the prophet's leadership so effective."<#>10

The Doctrine and Covenants. Inasmuch as Joseph Smith claimed divine authority to speak for God, it was only natural that revelations and oracles given to him would be recorded. In fact, in a revelation recorded in November 1831, we find a demonstration of the broadened concept of scripture, one still held by the Latter-day Saints. This revelation stated that the elders of the Church "shall speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:3-4; cited hereafter as D&C.) In 1831 the leaders of the Church began to compile the revelations received by Joseph Smith to date, and by 1833 that collection was known as A Book of Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ, a volume consisting of approximately sixty-four of the present sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. Mob violence in Missouri led to the destruction of the press and the loss of all but a few copies of the Book of Commandments. In August of 1835 Joseph Smith published the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, an expanded form of the Book of Commandments, a collection that contained an additional forty-five revelations. Today the Doctrine and Covenants consists of 138 divisions, called "sections," and two "Official Declarations."

A perusal of the Doctrine and Covenants demonstrates that most of the revelations recorded were received during the Ohio era of the Church's history; more than twenty were received in Missouri, and fewer than ten were recorded in Illinois. In addition to the revelations through Joseph Smith, there are in the Doctrine and Covenants a revelation received by Brigham Young; a revelation to Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church (1901-1918); and official declarations from Wilford Woodruff (fourth president, 1899-1901) and Spencer W. Kimball (twelfth president, 1973-1985).

The dynamic scriptural process of the Latter-day Saints is illustrated through a brief look at revelations added to the collection in recent years. At the April 1976 general conference of the Church, two revelations were added to the canon. One had been received by Joseph Smith in January 1836 but had never been placed in the canon. Another was received by Joseph F. Smith in October 1918. Latter-day Saints believe that both of these oracles were inspired of God—that is, they represent the will, mind, voice, and word of the Lord, even from the time they were delivered and recorded. That is, since 1836 or 1918 they were scripture. But in 1976 they were added to the standard works, the canon, by a vote of the Church, thus making them canonized scripture. As such they become binding upon the Saints, and the members of the Church are expected to read and study them and to govern their beliefs and practices according to them.

The Pearl of Great Price. In 1850 Franklin D. Richards, a young member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, was called to serve as president of the British Mission of the Church. He discovered a paucity of either LDS scripture or Church literature among the Saints in England, in spite of the fact that a larger number of members resided in the British Isles at this time than in the United States. In 1851 he published a mission tract entitled Pearl of Great Price, a collection of various translations and narrations from Joseph Smith. Interest in and appreciation for the tract grew over the years, and by 1880 the entire Church voted to accept the Pearl of Great Price as the fourth standard work, the fourth book of scripture in the LDS canon. The Pearl of Great Price contains: (1) doctrinal details about Adam and Eve (and the Creation and Fall), Enoch, Noah, Moses, and Jesus' Olivet Discourse (Matt. 24) as made known to Joseph Smith as he undertook a serious study of the Bible; (2) more of God's dealings with Abraham; (3) an excerpt from Joseph Smith's 1838 history of the Church; and (4) thirteen statements of religious belief by Joseph Smith called the Articles of Faith.

Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible. Though not one of the standard works of the Church, Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible is an important historical and doctrinal work of the LDS prophet. In June of 1830, just three months after the publication of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith began a careful study of the King James Version of the Bible and prepared what came to be known as a "new translation" of the Bible. This task he pursued actively through July 2, 1833. Working without the use of ancient languages or manuscripts, Joseph suggested changes in the text that ought to be made, according to what he felt was the spirit of revelation. Recognizing (from his work with the Book of Mormon) that many truths had been taken away or kept back from the Bible before its compilation, he set out to restore many of those things that were lost.

There was nothing particularly unusual about a new translation of the Bible in the 1830s. As discussed earlier, religious revivalism reached a peak in upstate New York in the early nineteenth century, and with it came a heightened awareness of the need for the Bible as a divine standard for living. New England was not the only section of the country that manifested an intense interest at this time in a study and scrutiny of the Bible. Records indicate that from 1777 to 1833 more than 500 separate editions of the Bible (or parts thereof) were published in America. Many of these represented new translations or "modern translations," often with an attempt to prepare paraphrased editions or alternate readings based on comparisons with Hebrew and Greek manuscripts.

Joseph Smith's "translation" was, however, quite different. Here there were no language skills and no manuscripts with which to work. Joseph believed that he had been called of God to serve as a translator, as well as a prophet, seer, and revelator. On October 8, 1829, an associate of Joseph Smith named Oliver Cowdery purchased a large pulpit-style edition of the King James Bible (containing the Old and New Testaments and Apocrypha) in Palmyra, New York. It was this Bible that was used in the translation. It appears that Joseph would read the Bible aloud and dictate alterations to a scribe who then recorded the changes on manuscript pages. In all, Joseph Smith suggested changes in at least 3,410 verses. Some of the books received more revisions than others; these were (the number indicates the number of verses that differ from the King James text):

Old Testament

Genesis (662)

Exodus (66)

Psalms (188)

Isaiah (178)

New Testament

Matthew (483)

Luke (563)

John (159)

Romans (118)

1 Corinthians (68)

Hebrews (47)

Revelation (75)

Although the most intense period of the Bible work took place between 1830 and 1833, Joseph spent the rest of his life (until 1844) preparing the manuscript for publication. In fact, the Joseph Smith Translation was never published during the Prophet's lifetime but was made available to the public in complete published form in 1867. Joseph Smith took this project very seriously and considered it to be a "branch of his calling" as prophet and restorer of the ancient order of things. Numerous revelations in the present book of Doctrine and Covenants refer to the work of translation, and Joseph Smith taught that a number of revelations came as a direct result of the Bible translation.

THE SCRIPTURES AND WORSHIP

"The sacred writings of the Latter-day Saints," observes one writer, "perform a practical function within the faith; they are not used in any kind of ritual situation. They are not used in chanting, reciting, or praying, or in any similar rite . . . , nor is reading them a sacramental act. In Latter-day Saint theology the reading of scripture functions as a means to achieving an important end—education in the principles of the faith so that one can be in harmony with the will of God."<#>11 Latter-day Saints believe that the scriptures are to be read and searched and studied; readers of scripture are encouraged to open themselves to inspiration and to "liken the scriptures" to their own lives. In short, though the study of scripture may not be considered a sacramental act, Latter-day Saints believe that one essential key to the receipt of individual revelation—to know the mind and will of God in one's life—is the study of institutional revelation.

A modern apostle counseled Church leaders as follows: "Faith is . . . born of scriptural study. Those who study, ponder, and pray about the scriptures, seeking to understand their deep and hidden meanings, receive from time to time great outpourings of light and knowledge from the Holy Spirit. . . . However talented men may be in administrative matters; however eloquent they may be in expressing their views; however learned they may be in worldly things—they will be denied the sweet whisperings of the Spirit that might have been theirs unless they pay the price of studying, pondering, and praying about the scriptures."<#>12 "When this fact is admitted," Joseph Smith said in 1834, "that the immediate will of heaven is contained in the Scriptures, are we not bound as rational creatures to live in accordance to all [their] precepts?"<#>13

1 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 56; cited hereafter as Teachings.

2 Ibid., p. 61.

3 The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, edited by Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), pp. 297-301; spelling and punctuation corrected.

4 Teachings, p. 327.

5 Journal of Discourses 9:311.

6 Kent P. Jackson, "Latter-day Saints: A Dynamic Scriptural Process," in The Holy Book in Comparative Perspective, edited by Frederick M. Denny and Rodney L. Taylor (Columbia, South Carolina: University of South Carolina Press, 1985), p. 63.

7 History of the Church 4:536.

8 Ibid., 4:537.

9 Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1984), p. 142.

10 Mormonism: The Story of a New Religious Tradition (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1985), p. 33.

11 Jackson, "Latter-day Saints: A Dynamic Scriptural Process," p. 79.

12 Bruce R. McConkie, in Doctrines of the Restoration (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), p. 238.

13 Teachings, p. 54
