Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

GOD, MAN, AND ANGELS

For Latter-day Saints, Joseph Smith's First Vision represents the beginning of the revelation of God in modern times. They believe that the God who manifested his will through such prophet leaders as Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and Moses appeared in a grove of trees in upstate New York in the spring of 1820. Further, they feel that the same God has continued to manifest his mind to the Church in general through living prophets and to individuals through the power of the Holy Spirit.

THE GODHEAD

Latter-day Saints worship God the Father, in the name of Christ the Son, by the power of the Holy Ghost. These three—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—constitute the Godhead. Latter-day Saints believe that the members of the Godhead are three separate and distinct personages. Joseph Smith described them as "God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator."<#>1 The members of the Godhead are believed to be one in purpose, one in mind, one in glory, one in attributes and powers, but separate persons. Christ the Son and the Holy Spirit are subordinate beings to the Father, albeit divine beings, and partake of the attributes and powers of the Father. But because the second and third members of the Godhead have had extended to them the powers of the Father, because they enjoy a divine investiture of his authority, they may appropriately speak on his behalf.

God the Father. The Father is the primary personage in the Godhead. Though it is true that the term God is used throughout scripture (including LDS scripture) to refer to the persons or powers of Christ or the Holy Ghost, yet there is a singular and distinctive sense in which the term God refers to the Father. The Father is the source of light and truth, the source of all godly attributes and gifts, and the supreme intelligence over all things. Though Latter-day Saints generally refer to the Almighty as "God" or "the Lord" or "our Heavenly Father" or "Father in heaven" or simply "the Father," they also use the name-title Elohim, the Hebrew word used as a generic name of God. Joseph Smith taught that among the ancients God the Father was called "Man of Holiness," and thus his Only Begotten Son is known as the Son of Man of Holiness, or the Son of Man. (See Pearl of Great Price, Moses 6:57.)

It is in this context, the idea that God is a Man of Holiness, that we come upon several of the singular Latter-day Saint doctrines. First, the Latter-day Saints believe that God the Father is an exalted man, a corporeal being, a personage with flesh and bones. They do not believe he is a spirit, although they acknowledge that his Spirit or sacred influence is everywhere present. Joseph Smith taught in 1844 that God our Father was once a mortal, that he lived on an earth, died, was resurrected and glorified, and grew and developed over time to become the Almighty that he now is. To say this another way, they teach that God is all-powerful and all-knowing, but that he has not been so forever; there was once a time in an eternity past when he lived on an earth like ours. Joseph explained:

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible—I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man. . . . It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another, and that he was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did.<#>2

When considering how the rest of the Christian world views God, these things surely appear strange and unusual. The Latter-day Saints do not doubt that God has power to know all that needs to be known and to do whatever is possible to be done. They believe in a being in whom they can trust implicitly and with whom they can identify. For them, God is not simply an essence, a spirit influence, a force in the universe, the Prime Mover, or the First Great Cause; when they pray, as did Jesus, "Our Father which art in heaven" (Matt. 6:9), they mean what they say. They believe that God is not outside time, that he is approachable and knowable, and that, like his Beloved Son, he can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities (Heb. 4:15).

Jesus Christ. We will consider in more detail in a later chapter the LDS view of Christ's atonement and the way salvation comes to men and women through him. For now we will simply speak broadly of the person and work of Jesus. Latter-day Saints believe that Jesus the Christ is the same being as Jehovah (Yahweh), the God of the ancients, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; that under the direction of the Father he created the worlds (see John 1:3; Eph. 3:9; Heb. 1:2) that as an act of mercy and grace, an act of supreme condescension, Jehovah came to earth and took a body of flesh and bones and became Jesus of Nazareth.

Latter-day Saints teach that Jesus of Nazareth was and is the Son of God, the Savior and Redeemer of the world. As Ezra Taft Benson, thirteenth president of the Church, has written, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims that Jesus Christ is the Son of God in the most literal sense. The body in which He performed His mission in the flesh was sired by that same Holy Being we worship as God, our Eternal Father. Jesus was not the son of Joseph, nor was He begotten by the Holy Ghost. He is the Son of the Eternal Father."<#>3 The Saints teach that Mary was Jesus' mother and God was his Father. From Mary Jesus inherited mortality, the capacity to die. From God he inherited immortality, the capacity to live forever. His sufferings and death were a willing sacrifice, and no man took his life from him. Jesus thus had the capacity to die and the power to rise from death and live forever. (See John 10:18.)

There is no question among believing Latter-day Saints but that Jesus was divine. Let me say that another way. In this interesting age wherein scholars continue to debate what Jesus "really" said and did, Latter-day Saints have no problem accepting that the Jesus of history is indeed the Christ of faith. They see no need to doubt the united testimonies of the Gospel writers or to assume that the examples in the New Testament of visions, dreams, healings, predictive prophecies, or divine interventions were anything other than what they are described to be. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has at the core of its teachings the unshakable conviction that Jesus was the Son of God, that he lived, taught, suffered, died, rose from the dead, and lives again, and that because he lives we shall live also.

The Holy Ghost. Although the Father and the Son are beings of flesh and bones (albeit resurrected and glorified flesh and bones), the Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit is a personage of spirit, a spirit man. Heber C. Kimball, one of the early leaders of the Church, explained that "the Holy Ghost is a man; he is one of the sons of our Father and our God."<#>4 Joseph Smith likewise taught that "the Holy Ghost is yet a spiritual body and waiting to take to himself a [physical] body."<#>5 He is the messenger of the Father and the Son, the Comforter, the Witness or Testator. Some of his roles include: (1) to comfort in times of distress or uncertainty, to bring peace to the troubled soul; (2) to bring things to remembrance; (3) to reveal the things of God, to make known matters that can be known and understood only through faith, to bear witness of the truth; (4) to sanctify, to purify the human heart, to purge men and women of sins and of sinfulness.

THE NATURE OF MAN

Latter-day Saints believe that Adam and Eve were real people, our first parents, and that they lived in the Garden of Eden. The LDS view of the scenes in Eden are remarkably optimistic when compared to the traditional Catholic or Protestant views. Mormons believe that Adam and Eve went into the Garden to fall, that their partaking of the forbidden fruit was a necessary step in God's plan for the redemption and happiness of humankind. Though our first parents transgressed the law of God, their partaking opened the way to mortality, to trial and testing to be sure, but to happiness that comes from overcoming. As stated in the Book of Mormon, "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) Joseph Smith explained, "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression." (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:2.) From the above, Latter-day Saints conclude the following:

In a later chapter we will deal with the LDS view that men and women are the sons and daughters of God; that we are of the same species as God; that there is an element of godliness within each of us; and that we thus have the capacity to become like God. (See chapter 14, question 20; appendix 2, "Distinctive LDS Doctrines.") Further, we will attend to the matter of the spirit of man and its relationship to the physical body. For now, let it be stated that there is no pat, settled view on the nature of man. Is he good by nature? Is she depraved by nature? It depends upon what man or woman we are speaking of. If he has yielded to sin and refuses to repent and return to God, then it could be said that he is a natural man, an enemy to God and to things of godliness. If, on the other hand, she has fallen into sin but determines upon a course of sincere repentance, she is on the path to peace and happiness. The real issue is whether a man or woman, a being of moral agency, is moving toward or away from God and divinity. "We have to fight continually," Brigham Young observed, "as it were, sword in hand to make the spirit master of the tabernacle, or the flesh subject to the law of the spirit. If this warfare is not diligently prosecuted, then the law of sin prevails. . . . The rule of the flesh brings darkness and death, while, on the other hand, the rule of the [Holy] Spirit brings light and life."<#>6

Latter-day Saints believe that although people can be changed and renewed in Christ, yet the pull upon the human system from mortality and the Fall will be ever with us. There can come a time when people have no more disposition to do evil but to do good continually (see Book of Mormon, Mosiah 5:2), when they feel an abhorrence for sinful things (Book of Mormon, Alma 13:12), when they shake at the very appearance of sin (Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 4:31). But until mortality is ended, people will continue to be tempted, to be pained by the allurements of a sinful environment. Brigham Young said, "It requires all the atonement of Christ, the mercy of the Father, the pity of angels and the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ to be with us always, and then to do the very best we possibly can, to get rid of this sin within us."<#>7 "Will sin be perfectly destroyed?" he asked on another occasion.

No, it will not, for it is not so designed in the economy of heaven. . . . Do not suppose that we shall ever be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. . . . I think we shall more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death.<#>8

The Latter-day Saints believe that the physical body is a blessing, not something to be shunned or detested. In fact, although men and women can enjoy the peace and happiness associated with faithfulness in this life, a "fulness of joy" can come only after body and spirit have been reunited in the resurrection. (See D&C 93:33-34.) "Our bodies are important to us," Brigham Young stated, "though they may be old and withered,

emaciated with toil, pain, and sickness, and our limbs bent with rheumatism, all uniting to hasten dissolution, for death is sown in our mortal bodies. The foods we partake of are contaminated with the seeds of death, yet we partake of them to extend our lives until our allotted work is finished, when our tabernacles in a state of ripeness are sown in the earth to produce immortal fruit. Yet if we live our holy religion and let the spirit reign, it will not become dull and stupid, but as the body approaches dissolution the spirit [of man] takes a firmer hold on the enduring substance behind the veil, drawing from the depth of that eternal Fountain of Light sparkling gems of intelligence which surround the frail and sinking tabernacle with a halo of immortal wisdom.<#>9

GOD, MAN, AND ABSOLUTE TRUTH

Joseph Smith and his successors in the presidency of the Church have consistently instructed the Saints that truth is fixed, eternal, and undeviating. "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) Truth is not established by consensus, by popular vote, or by utility alone. Likewise, right and wrong are not defined by society. Latter-day Saints believe in absolute truths. They believe that because God's laws are constant and consistent, people may depend with certainty upon the consequences of obedience and disobedience.

Perhaps one of the clearest statements by a Church leader on this subject was an address delivered at Brigham Young University in 1977 by Spencer W. Kimball, twelfth president of the Church. His address was based upon a letter he had written to a young man whose faith had faltered because of his doubts.

God, our Heavenly Father—Elohim—lives. That is an absolute truth. All four billion of the children of men on the earth might be ignorant of him and his attributes and his powers, but he still lives. All the people on the earth might deny him and disbelieve, but he lives in spite of them. They may have their own opinions, but he still lives, and his form, powers, and attributes do not change according to men's opinions. In short, opinion alone has no power in the matter of an absolute truth. He still lives. And Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Almighty, the Creator, the Master of the only true way of life—the gospel of Jesus Christ. The intellectual may rationalize him out of existence and the unbeliever may scoff, but Christ lives and guides the destinies of his people. That is an absolute truth; there is no gainsaying.

The watchmaker in Switzerland, with materials at hand, made the watch that was found in the sand in a California desert. The people who found the watch had never been to Switzerland, nor seen the watchmaker, nor seen the watch made. The watchmaker still existed, no matter the extent of their ignorance or experience. If the watch had a tongue, it might even lie and say, "There is no watchmaker." That would not alter the truth.

"If men are really humble," President Kimball added, "they will realize that they discover, but do not create, truth."<#>10

It is an understanding of the constancy of God's laws, as well as the knowledge of God's perfections, that enables men and women to exercise faith in God unto salvation. The early leaders of the Church stressed that without the confidence that God has all power, knows all things, and is perfectly just, truthful, and merciful, it is impossible to trust in him sufficient to attain heaven. To believe otherwise, Joseph Smith taught, is to live without true faith, to live in doubt of God's powers and might, to fear that perhaps there might be one greater than He. "Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him."<#>11

ANGELS

Few things have gripped the United States like the recent craze over angels. Hundreds of books, lectures, movies, and television shows have come before the public possessing one common element—the involvement of angels in the lives of ordinary men and women. There are songs about angels, angel bookmarks, and in some cases designated experts who speak at length of how to encourage and benefit from the ministry of angels. Some religious leaders are concerned that angel mania has led many of their congregants to unwise and excessive measures, while the more cynical in our midst are somewhat amused by what they perceive to be massive gullibility.

C. S. Lewis, writing of the reality of demons, observed, "There are two equal and opposite errors into which our race can fall about the devils. One is to disbelieve in their existence. The other is to believe, and to feel an excessive and unhealthy interest in them. They themselves are equally pleased by both errors, and hail a materialist or a magician with the same delight."<#>12 This principle holds for Latter-day Saints in regard to angels as well as devils. The Latter-day Saints are not caught up in the angel craze, no doubt because the concept of the ministry of angels is so fundamentally crucial to the fabric of their faith to begin with. The Church claims to have begun with the ministry of angels and that this is one of the means whereby the Almighty communicates his mind and will to his children. Mormonism claims to be the fulfillment of a prophecy concerning the coming of an angel: "I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." (Rev. 14:6.)

Latter-day Saints believe that angels are men and women, human beings, sons and daughters of God, personages of the same type as we are. Parley P. Pratt, an early apostle, wrote, "Gods, angels and men are all of one species, one race, one great family."<#>13 Elder Bruce R. McConkie, a more recent apostle, wrote, "These messengers, agents, angels of the Almighty, are chosen from among his offspring and are themselves pressing forward along the course of progression and salvation, all in their respective spheres."<#>14 In spite of prevailing sentiments in the religious world, as well as in Christian traditions and legends, Joseph Smith taught that angels do not have wings.<#>15 These beings, Joseph explained, either have lived or will live on this earth at some time in its history. (D&C 130:5.) They do minister to people on earth, sometimes being seen and often unseen. They are subject to the will and power of Jesus Christ. (Moro. 7:30.) Further, there are various kinds of angels, including:

Â Unembodied spirits. Latter-day Saints believe that on some occasions angels have appeared who are unembodied spirits, men and women who have not yet taken a physical body through birth. The Bible speaks of the war in heaven in which "Michael and his angels" fought against Lucifer. (Rev. 12:7.) In LDS scripture, a story is told of Adam and Eve, after their expulsion from Eden but presumably before anyone had died, being commanded to worship God and to "offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord." They obeyed. "And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 5:5-8.) Latter-day Saints believe that Michael the Archangel later became the man Adam, while Gabriel was born into the world as Noah.<#>16

Â Disembodied spirits. Those who have completed their work on earth, have passed through death, and are now part of the postmortal spirit world may be sent to minister to mortals. Those who are called "just men [or women] made perfect" have not yet been resurrected but will yet receive a celestial resurrection. (Heb. 12:22-24; D&C 129:3.)

Â Resurrected beings. The scriptures record that when Jesus rose from the tomb, other Saints did the same; these resurrected beings ministered for a season to friends and loved ones. (Matt. 27:52-53; see also Book of Mormon, Hel. 14:25.) These, having bodies of flesh and bones, are able to minister in ways that spirits cannot. Such beings, like the risen Lord on the road to Emmaus, are able to shield their glory when they appear to mortals. (Luke 24:13-35.) <#>17

Â Mortals. There is a limited sense in which mortal men and women may assist God in bringing to pass the salvation of his sons and daughters. The Almighty can inspire good people to lift and lighten burdens and thus to liberate those who may be struggling with personal problems.

Angels enjoy a measure of the Spirit and power of God and can represent him in many ways, including: (1) Teaching and testifying of the truth or calling people to repentance. (2) Warning and delivering from peril. (3) Comforting and reassuring. (4) Serving as destroying angels. (5) Conferring divine authority and power. As the episode in Acts 9 concerning the call of Saul of Tarsus suggests, angels do not do for mortals what mortals could do for themselves.<#>18 Latter-day Saints believe, for example, that the love and tender regard parents have for their children do not cease when death separates the family for a season. One Church leader explained:

I believe we move and have our being in the presence of heavenly messengers and of heavenly beings. We are not separate from them. We begin to realize, more and more fully, as we become acquainted with the principles of the gospel, as they have been revealed anew in this dispensation, that we are closely related to our kindred, to our ancestors, to our friends and associates and co-laborers who have preceded us into the spirit world. We can not forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our hearts, in memory. . . . How much more certain it is and reasonable and consistent to believe that those who have been faithful, who have gone beyond and are still engaged in the work for the salvation of the souls of men, . . . can see us better than we can see them; that they know us better than we know them. They have advanced; we are advancing; we are growing as they have grown; we are reaching the goal that they have attained unto; and therefore, I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever. For now they see the dangers that beset us; they can comprehend, better than ever before, the weaknesses that are liable to mislead us into dark and forbidden paths. They see the temptations and the evils that beset us in life and the proneness of mortal beings to yield to temptation and to do wrong; hence their solicitude for us, and their love for us, and their desire for our well being, must be greater than that which we feel for ourselves.<#>19

In all of this there is no sensationalism, no aberrations, no encouragement from Church leaders to reach beyond the bounds of propriety in seeking to communicate or associate with those in the spirit world. Latter-day Saints believe there is order in the government of the kingdom of God and that heavenly messengers minister according to the will of God, not whim or fancy, either on the part of mortals or angels. Angels of God may thus not be conjured or somehow compelled by mortals to do their bidding. Angels are part of the divine program of Deity. Their reality attests to the significant truth that mortals are not alone, that we need not fear, for, in the language of the Old Testament prophet, "they that be with us are more than they that be with them." (2 Kgs. 6:16.)

1 Teachings, p. 190.

2 Ibid., pp. 345-46.

3 Come unto Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), p. 4.

4 Journal of Discourses 5:179.

5 Words of Joseph Smith, edited by Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980), p. 382; punctuation corrected.

6 Journal of Discourses 9:287-88.

7 Ibid., 11:301.

8 Ibid., 10:173.

9 Ibid., 9:288.

10 "Absolute Truth," 1977 BYU Speeches of the Year (Provo: BYU Publications, 1978), p. 138.

11 Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995), 4:11.

12 The Screwtape Letters, rev. ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1982), p. 3.

13 Key to the Science of Theology [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], p. 21.

14 Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 35.

15 Teachings, p. 162.

16 Ibid., p. 157.

17 See also Teachings, p. 325.

18 See Teachings, p. 265.

19 Joseph F. Smith, "In the Presence of the Divine," in Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols., compiled by James R. Clark (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 5:6-7.
