Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

THE ORIGIN AND DESTINY OF MAN

Three questions have haunted men and women from the beginning of time: Where did I come from? Why am I here? Where am I going? All three questions deal with meaning, with purpose in life. How we choose to answer or ignore them will determine largely how we live our lives. Latter-day Saints do not claim to have all the answers to life's puzzles, but they do claim to have some. This chapter will focus on the LDS view of life before, life now, and life hereafter.

THE LIFE BEFORE

From a Latter-day Saint perspective, we did not suddenly spring into existence at the time of our mortal birth. We have always lived. Others outside the LDS faith have sensed there is more to life than living and dying, more to what we do here than meets the physical eye. Many have perceived that this stage of our journey is but a part of a larger drama. William Wordsworth penned the following:

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home: Heaven lies about us in our infancy!<#>1

Marcel Proust, the influential French novelist, wrote, "Everything in our life happens as though we entered upon it with a load of obligations contracted in a previous existence . . . obligations whose sanction is not of this present life, [that] seem to belong to a different world, founded on kindness, scruples, sacrifice, a world entirely different from this one, a world whence we emerge to be born on this earth, before returning thither."<#>2

Latter-day Saints believe that men and women are literally the spirit sons and daughters of God, that we lived in a premortal existence before birth, that we grew and progressed in that "first estate," all in preparation for this "second estate." In that world men and women were separate and distinct spirit personages, and they had consciousness, volition, gender, and moral agency. They developed and matured according to their adherence to God's eternal law, and in spite of the fact that they walked and talked with God, it was necessary for them to exercise faith in God's plan for the ultimate salvation of his children. The Latter-day Saints believe that God is literally the Father of our spirits (Num. 16:22), that we inherit from him divine capacities, the seeds of godliness.

In 1909, the Church's First Presidency wrote, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, basing its belief on divine revelation, ancient and modern, proclaims man to be the direct and lineal offspring of Deity. . . . By His almighty power He organized the earth, and all that it contains, from spirit and element, which exist co-eternally with Himself. . . . Man is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes." Further, they said:

The doctrine of the pre-existence—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner.<#>3

In the long expanse of time before we were born into mortality, the spirit sons and daughters of God developed talents, strengths, and capacities. In a sense, no two people remained alike. Latter-day Saints teach that the greatest in the family of God was Jehovah, who eventually took a body and became Jesus of Nazareth, the Redeemer of mankind. Jehovah was the firstborn of the Father, meaning the first-born spirit child, the heir, the one entitled to the birthright of God. In this sense, the Latter-day Saints speak of Jehovah or Jesus Christ as their "elder brother" in the premortal spirit world. Jehovah was the advocate for the Father's plan of salvation, the one who volunteered in that premortal existence to put into effect the terms and conditions of that divine plan and, more specifically, to suffer and die as Savior. Another spirit child of God offered to save mankind by an alternative plan. Lucifer stepped forward and said, "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor."<#>4 God later explained to Moses:

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 4:2-4.)

"The contention in heaven was," Joseph Smith explained, "Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he could save them all, and laid his plans before the grand council, who gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ. So the devil rose up in rebellion against God, and was cast down, with all who put up their heads for him."<#>5 The Latter-day Saints believe that the fall of Lucifer and his followers—one third of the spirit children of the Father (Rev. 12:4; D&C 29:36), allusions to which are found in the Bible (Isa. 14:12-15; Luke 10:18; Rev. 12:7-9)—signaled the perpetuation of evil on earth. Lucifer, or Satan, with his minions, became the enemy of God and of all righteousness and to this day seeks to destroy the souls of men and women.

Truth was taught in that premortal sphere. The gospel was declared. The sons and daughters of God came to understand and appreciate the goodness and powers of Deity. They recognized that God the Father, the Supreme Being, was possessed of a physical, resurrected, immortal, and glorified body. They came to know that the fullness of eternal joy was to be had through becoming as God is; through coming to earth, taking a physical body, growing and maturing in their ability to overcome temptations and deal with the stresses of this world; and through qualifying, by accepting the gospel of Jesus Christ and incorporating the Lord's divine nature into their own, to return to the presence of God as living souls, spirits and bodies having been inseparably joined through the resurrection, never again to be divided.

Before coming to earth, the sons and daughters of God were told that as mortals they would be required to walk by faith, to operate in this second estate without full knowledge of what they did and who they were in the life before. A veil of forgetfulness would be placed over their minds. One early Church leader suggested what might have been said before we left: "Remember you go [to earth] on this condition, that is, you are to forget all things you ever saw, or knew to be transacted in the spirit world; . . . you must go and become one of the most helpless of all beings that I have created, while in your infancy, subject to sickness, pain, tears, mourning, sorrow and death. But when truth shall touch the cords of your heart they will vibrate; then intelligence shall illuminate your mind, and shed its lustre in your soul, and you shall begin to understand the things you once knew, but which had gone from you; you shall then begin to understand and know the object of your creation."<#>6

MORTAL LIFE

Mortality constitutes the second phase of our eternal existence. As we have observed, in this life we are to learn to walk by faith, to come to know the will of God—his purposes, his plan, his promises—through attuning ourselves to the quiet voice of conscience within us and by attending to eternal truths. Life is obviously a complex and in many ways incomprehensible experience, but to simplify, let me suggest that Latter-day Saints speak of two main purposes of mortality—to gain a physical body and to have experience.

As we mentioned in chapter 3, the Latter-day Saint view of the physical body is unusually optimistic in the Christian world. The body is corrupt in the sense that it is decaying and dying. The flesh is the means by which a fallen nature comes into being and thus the means by which sin and sorrow emerge. But the body is also the tabernacle of the human spirit and is, in conjunction with that spirit, a vital part of the living soul that will rise in the resurrection. Satan and his followers do not have a body. They are spirits; their consuming desire to possess a body is manifest in the New Testament account of the devils entering the Gadarene swine. (See Mark 5:1-13; Luke 8:26-33.) Joseph Smith taught, "We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom [the highest heaven]. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment. . . . All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not."<#>7 Also, "Salvation is nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our enemies and put them under our feet. . . . No person can have this salvation except through a tabernacle,"<#>8 meaning, of course, a physical body.

Evidently some types of experiential learning take place with the physical body that could not be had in the premortal spirit world. Men and women in that sphere were certainly capable of such emotions as love and tenderness and compassion—as well as envy, jealousy, rage, and even hate, as illustrated in Lucifer's rebellion, his orchestration of what has come to be known as the "war in heaven." Yet the feelings and challenges associated with such things as physical desire, lust, hunger, thirst, and fatigue seem perhaps more suited to the physical realm. Latter-day Saints believe that one of the major purposes of mortality is to learn to overcome, to put things into perspective, to keep our passions and desires within the bounds the Lord has set. In regard to one particular phase of the physical body, the sexual desire, a modern apostle has written, "The mortal body is the instrument of our mind and the foundation of our character. The sacred power of procreation gives us an essential part in the plan. There are laws, eternal laws, set to govern our use of it. It is to operate in very narrow limits."<#>9 Some of the greatest challenges to faith come in the form of pain, abuse, seemingly meaningless suffering, ironic tragedy, and man's inhumanity to man. It is a tenet of the LDS faith that pain and suffering are an essential part of the plan—not something we seek out, to be sure, but a vital dimension of mortality. In the midst of enormous suffering in a miserable jail in Missouri, Joseph Smith wrote by way of inquiry, "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries? Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them?" Within moments he wrote the divine reply: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes." And then later, to put all of Joseph's and the Saints' sufferings in perspective, the word came: "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? Therefore, hold on thy way, and . . . fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever." (D&C 121:1-3, 7-8; 122:7; emphasis added.)

Latter-day Saints believe that God is all-powerful, that he could prevent all suffering, stop all abuse, remove even the possibility of inhumanity, and erase all pain—but he will not. The war in heaven was fought over moral agency, and the price to be paid by abuse of agency on the part of some is not as great as the price that would naturally entail from surrendering agency and thereby aligning ourselves with Lucifer's nefarious plan. Further, Latter-day Saints are encouraged to view death with perspective, not with finality. As we will note later in this chapter, death is merely another phase of life. To die is not to cease to exist but to be transferred to another field of labor. "Those that live shall inherit the earth, and those that die shall rest from all their labors, and their works shall follow them." (D&C 59:2; compare Rev. 14:13.) In what may be one of the most important addresses on the place of human suffering in the development of an eternal character, Spencer W. Kimball said:

If we looked at mortality as the whole of existence, then pain, sorrow, failure, and short life would be calamity. But if we look upon life as an eternal thing stretching far into the premortal past and on into the eternal post-death future, then all happenings may be put in proper perspective.

Is there not wisdom in [God] giving us trials that we might rise above them, responsibilities that we might achieve, work to harden our muscles, sorrows to try our souls? Are we not exposed to temptations to test our strength, sickness that we might learn patience, death that we might be immortalized and glorified?

If all the sick for whom we pray were healed, if all the righteous were protected and the wicked destroyed, the whole program of the Father would be annulled and the basic principle of the gospel, free agency, would be ended. No man would have to live by faith.

If joy and peace and rewards were instantaneously given the doer of good, there could be no evil—all would do good but not because of the rightness of doing good. There would be no test of strength, no development of character, no growth of powers, no free agency, only satanic controls. . . .

Being human, we would expel from our lives physical pain and mental anguish and assure ourselves of continual ease and comfort, but if we were to close the doors upon sorrow and distress, we might be excluding our greatest friends and benefactors. Suffering can make saints of people as they learn patience, long-suffering, and self-mastery. The sufferings of our Savior were part of his education.<#>10

I hasten to add that Latter-day Saints are not ascetic. They do not seek out persecution or glory in pain. Rather, they believe we all had in the first estate an understanding of the nature of the second estate, even the difficult and challenging times ahead. And we agreed to face it all, knowing it would be a crucial part of our spiritual development. "Life is an obstacle course," one LDS philosopher observed. "And sometimes it is a spook alley. But the before [the premortal existence] was a time of visioning the after [this life]. And some of our prayers [here in this life] are like the gamblers', `Give me the money I made you promise not to give me if I asked for it.' What does a true friend do in such a case? God will honor our first request, to let us go through it; and He will provide you with . . . the way to make it bearable. More, to make it productive."<#>11

THE LIFE BEYOND

Birth and death are inextricably intertwined. We are born to die and die to live. In a sense, mortal birth is tantamount to a death in premortality: we die as to things as they were in order to enter the realm of mortality. In so doing, we move from eternity into time. Second, in this fallen world we must crucify the old man of sin within us and rise to a newness of life through the cleansing power of Christ's blood. Finally, we must pass beyond this vale of tears to inherit a far greater and grander existence; it is in dying that we are born into immortality. In mortal death we leave the realm of time and return to eternity.

Life's starkest reality is death. Death is "a subject which strikes dread—even terror—into the hearts of most men. It is something we fear, of which we are sorely afraid, and from which most of us would flee if we could."<#>12 It is universal, one thing that every mortal shares with every other mortal, in spite of earthly status or accomplishments. Every man or woman is born, and every man or woman must die. All are born as helpless infants, and all are equally helpless in the face of death. Even among those who see by the lamp of understanding, death is frequently viewed with fear and trembling. Joseph Smith is reported to have taught that "if the people knew what was behind the veil, they would try by every means to commit suicide that they might get there, but the Lord in his wisdom had implanted the fear of death in every person that they might cling to life and thus accomplish the designs of their Creator."<#>13

Latter-day Saints teach that the transition from time into eternity is immediate. As the physical self breathes its last breath, the spirit self passes through a thin veil separating this world from the next. The powers of intellect and the feelings of the heart reside within the spirit of man, and so consciousness, awareness, identity, affection, and receptivity to truth continue with us into the next world. Early leaders instructed the Saints that the postmortal spirit world was all about us, and that very often loved ones who have passed away "are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions."<#>14 On the one hand, death is a great leveler: it breaks all the bands of poverty, infirmity, and worldly caste and station. On the other hand, death is a great separator, an occasion wherein a "partial judgment" of the spirit results in a designated area of residence.<#>15

One Book of Mormon prophet explained that there are two major divisions within the postmortal spirit world. The first is called paradise, the abode of the faithful, those who sought the truth, lived the truth, and embodied the truth. It is "a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow." (Book of Mormon, Alma 40:12.) Those things that burdened the obedient—the worldly cares and struggles, the vicissitudes of life—are shed with the physical body. Paradise is a place hereafter where the spirits of the faithful expand in wisdom and grow in understanding, where the spirit is free to think and act with a renewed capacity and with the vigor and enthusiasm that characterized one in his or her prime. Though a person does not rest per se from the work to do in the world of spirits, he or she is delivered from the cares and worries associated with a fallen world and a corrupt body.

The other division of the spirit world, according to LDS teachings, is variously called hell, outer darkness, or spirit prison. In this realm of the life beyond, those who were wicked in mortality come face to face with their waywardness and come to see things as they really are. For them it is a time of confrontation, of painful awareness, of humiliation and repentance. "The great misery of departed spirits," Joseph Smith declared, "in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers."<#>16 On another occasion he said: "A man is his own tormenter and his own condemner. Hence the saying, They shall go into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. The torment of disappointment in the mind of man is as exquisite as a lake burning with fire and brimstone. I say, so is the torment of man."<#>17 Here those who died without a knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ will have an opportunity to be taught by those who officiate in the spirit world. They are not required to accept the message of Christ, for moral agency continues. But the opportunity will be provided for every living soul to hear the glad tidings of salvation, either in this mortal world or in the world to come.

Latter-day Saints believe that the resurrection began when Jesus rose from the tomb in the first century. The Bible teaches that "the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." (Matt. 27:52-53.) The Book of Mormon records that many people in the Americas rose from the dead at the same time. (Hel. 14:25; 3 Ne. 23:9-10.) The resurrection will resume at the time of the second coming of Christ. (See 1 Thes. 4:13-17.) At that point, many in the spirit world, specifically the faithful ones, will be resurrected and become immortal beings. Eventually everyone, even those who lived in gross wickedness, will rise from the dead. Coupled with the resurrection is the judgment, the time spoken of by many of the prophets wherein all men and women will account to God for their lives. "I saw the dead," John wrote, "small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works." (Rev. 20:12.)

"In my Father's house are many mansions," Jesus said at the Last Supper. (John 14:2.) As to the nature of life after resurrection and judgment, Joseph Smith taught that there was not simply a division of heaven or hell. "From sundry revelations which had been received," he noted, "it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body, the term `Heaven,' as intended for the Saints' eternal home, must include more kingdoms than one."<#>18 Joseph then described a vision in which he saw three main kingdoms of glory—the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial (see D&C 76; compare 1 Cor. 15:40-42), likened respectively unto the glories of the sun, the moon, and the stars.

As recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, the celestial kingdom of glory is made up of those who receive the covenant gospel, participate in the necessary sacraments or ordinances, keep their covenants, and remain true and faithful to the end of their lives. These are they "who have received of [God the Father's] fulness, and of his glory. . . . Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's. . . . These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection. These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just. . . . These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." (D&C 76:56, 59, 64-65, 69.)

The terrestrial kingdom of glory is made up of those who chose not to receive the testimony of Jesus in mortality but afterward received it; who are "honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men. These are they who receive of [God's] glory, but not of his fulness. These are they who receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father." In short, the terrestrial are those who "are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus." (D&C 76:75-77, 79.) The telestial kingdom of glory is made up of those who "received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets, neither the everlasting covenant." (D&C 76:101.) These are they who were in life murderers, liars, sorcerers, adulterers, whoremongers, and divisive influences. (See D&C 76:82, 99-101, 103; compare Rev. 21:8; 22:15.)

Joseph Smith's Vision of the Glories included another category of persons—those who are resurrected, judged, and accounted unworthy of a kingdom of glory. These are the "sons of perdition," those who blaspheme or sin against the Holy Ghost, "vessels of wrath" who deny and defy the faith after having gained a sure knowledge of the truth. These have received the Holy Spirit, have had the heavens opened, have known God, and then have willfully chosen to sin against him. They say the sun does not shine while they see it. They are an enemy to the faith. Their sin is unpardonable. These are cast into outer darkness forever. (D&C 76:31-39, 44-48.) <#>19

The Latter-day Saints believe that one does not require all of the answers to life's puzzling questions in order to face the challenges ahead; he or she only needs to know there is a plan, that there is meaning and purpose to it all. When we know who we really are, we come to act accordingly. Boyd K. Packer, a twentieth-century apostle, wrote, "If we have come to know our Father's plan, we are never completely lost. We know something of how it was before our mortal birth. We know much of what lies beyond the horizon on either side, and which path will be safe for us to follow. With a knowledge of the plan comes also the determination to live the principles leading to eternal life."<#>20

1 "Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood," English Romantic Poetry and Prose, ed. Alfred Noyes (New York: Oxford University Press, 1956), pp. 327-28.

2 In Gabriel Marcel, Homo Viator (New York: Harper & Row, 1963), p. 8.

3 From "The Origin of Man," November 1909, in Messages of the First Presidency 4:199-206; emphasis added.

4 Pearl of Great Price, Moses 4:1.

5 Teachings, p. 357.

6 John Taylor, in "The Mormon," August 29, 1857, New York City; in The Vision, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), pp. 146-47; emphasis added.

7 Teachings, p. 181; see also p. 190.

8 Ibid., p. 297.

9 Boyd K. Packer, Our Father's Plan (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), pp. 24, 26.

10 "Tragedy or Destiny?" in Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), pp. 97-98.

11 Truman G. Madsen, "Human Anguish and Divine Love," in Four Essays on Love (Provo: Communications Workshop, 1971), p. 59.

12 Bruce R. McConkie, in Conference Report, October 1976, p. 157.

13 Diary of Charles L. Walker, 2 vols., edited by A. Karl and Katherine Miles Larson (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980), 1:595-96.

14 Teachings, p. 326.

15 See Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 448-49.

16 Teachings, pp. 310-11.

17 Ibid., p. 357.

18 Ibid., pp. 9-10; emphasis added.

19 See also Matt. 12:31-32; Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26; Teachings, pp. 24, 357-58, 361.

20 Our Father's Plan, p. 60.
