Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

GRACE, WORKS, AND SALVATION

Few things are more difficult to achieve than balance—balance in our perspective and in our approach to life. It seems so much easier to swing to one extreme or the other. So it is in regard to the role of men and women in the process of salvation. The religious world is divided sharply on the issue: Are we saved by the grace of God alone, without works or righteous deeds on our part? Or are we saved by virtue of our efforts to be righteous? Or is there some combination of the two, some balance between God's mercy and man's obedience that leads to eternal reward? In this chapter we will suggest an LDS approach to grace and works, an approach that seeks to highlight the centrality and absolute necessity of the merits and mercy of the Redeemer, while at the same time placing appropriate responsibility upon the disciple of Christ for living the good life.

THE GOSPEL COVENANT

Latter-day Saints view the plan of life and salvation as a covenant, a two-way promise between God and man. On his part, God has done for us what we could never do for ourselves. He created the earth and all things on its surface. He opened the door for Adam and Eve to partake of the forbidden fruit and introduce mortality, a time of testing but also a time of experience and opportunity. And, of course, he made available redemption from individual sins and renovation from a nature that is easily enticed by the world. The act of redemption is indeed the great act of love on the part of the Eternal Father: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.)

Like his Father, Jesus Christ has done for us what we could never do for ourselves. He suffered and bled and died for us. He redeems us from sin. He offers to change our nature, to make us into new creatures, people bent on goodness. He rose from the dead and thereby opened the door for us to do the same thing at the appointed time. The gospel of Christ is "the power of God unto salvation." (Rom. 1:16.) The new life in Christ is not merely a cosmetic change, not only an alteration in behavior. It is in fact a new creation. Ezra Taft Benson, thirteenth president of the LDS Church, remarked, "The Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature."<#>1 Only Christ, who possesses the powers of a God, can do such things.

The scriptures are consistent in their declaration that no unclean thing can enter into God's kingdom. In theory there are two ways by which men and women may inherit eternal life. The first is simply to live the law of God perfectly, to make no mistakes. To do so is to be justified—pronounced innocent, declared blameless—by works or by law. To say this another way, if we keep the commandments completely (including receiving the sacraments or ordinances of salvation), never deviating from the strait and narrow path throughout our mortal lives, then we qualify for the blessings of the obedient. And yet we encounter on every side the terrible truth that all are unclean as a result of sin. (Rom. 3:23.) All of us have broken at least one of the laws of God and therefore disqualify ourselves for justification by law. Moral perfection may be a possibility, but it is certainly not a probability. Jesus alone trod that path. "Therefore," Paul observed, "by the deeds of the law"—meaning the law of Moses, as well as any law of God—"there shall no flesh be justified in his sight." (Rom. 3:20; compare Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 2:5.)

The second way to be justified is by faith; it is for the sinner to be pronounced clean or innocent through trusting in and relying upon the merits of Him who answered the ends of the law. (Rom. 10:4; compare Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 2:6-7.) Jesus owed no personal debt to justice. Because we are guilty of transgression, if there had been no atonement of Christ, no amount of good deeds on our part, no nobility independent of divine intercession, could make up for the loss. Truly, "since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself." (Book of Mormon, Alma 22:14.) Thus He who loved us first (1 Jn. 4:10, 19) reaches out to the lost and fallen, to the disinherited, and proposes a marriage. The Infinite One joins with the finite, the Finished with the unfinished, the Whole with the partial, in short, the Perfect with the imperfect. Through covenant with Christ and thus union with the Bridegroom, we place ourselves in a condition to become fully formed, whole, finished—to become perfect in Christ. (See Book of Mormon, Moro. 10:32.)

The means by which the Savior justifies us is wondrous indeed. It entails what might be called "the great exchange." It is certainly true that Jesus seeks through his atoning sacrifice and through the medium of the Holy Spirit to change us, to transform us from fallen and helpless mortals into "new creatures in Christ." But there is more. Jesus offers to exchange with us. In his epistle to the Philippians, Paul speaks of his eagerness to forsake the allurements of the world in order to obtain the riches of Christ. "I count all things but loss," he said, "for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ"—and now note this important addition—"and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith." (Philip. 3:8-9; emphasis added.) Paul's point is vital: justification comes by faith, by trusting in Christ's righteousness, in His merits, mercy, and grace. (See Rom. 10:1-4; compare Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 2:3; Hel. 14:13; D&C 45:3-5.)

Latter-day Saints acknowledge that though our efforts to be righteous are necessary, they will forevermore be insufficient. Paul teaches a profound truth—that as we come unto Christ by the covenant of faith, our Lord's righteousness becomes our righteousness. He justifies us in the sense that he imputes—meaning, he reckons to our account—his goodness and takes our sin. This is the great exchange. To the Corinthians Paul explained that "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. . . . For he [God the Father] hath made him [Christ the Son] to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." (2 Cor. 5:19, 21, emphasis added.) As Paul explained elsewhere, Christ "hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us." (Gal. 3:13; compare Heb. 2:9.) From one LDS scholar's perspective, then, being justified is not only a matter of "acquittal" from guilt and sin but also of "being regarded as righteous in a future divine judgment."<#>2 Those who enter the gospel covenant and thereafter seek to do their duty and endure to the end the Lord["hold[s] guiltless." (Book of Mormon, 3 Ne. 27:16; compare D&C 4:2.) It is not that they are guiltless in the sense of having never done wrong; rather, the Holy One removes their blame and imputes—accounts or decrees to the repentant sinner, the one who comes unto Christ by covenant—His righteousness. "For as by one man's disobedience"—the fall of Adam—"many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one"—Jesus Christ—"shall many be made righteous." (Rom. 5:19.)

No one of us, of ourselves or on our own, is qualified to go where Christ is or to inherit what he has. But when we accept him as Savior by covenant, he treats us as though we had arrived. "A comparison may be made by reference to a man on an escalator. We anticipate that he will reach a given floor if he stays on the escalator. So a person will eventually be justified, but may be regarded as being so now, if he retains a remission of sins and continually shows his faith in God."<#>3 What, then, is expected of us? Latter-day Saints believe that more is required than a verbal expression of faith, more than a confession with the lips that we have received Christ into our hearts. There is no question but that the power to save, to change, to renew is in Christ. There is no question but that only Christ can do this. But Latter-day Saints feel that men and women must, to refer to the analogy, stay on the escalator, that is, stay in covenant. People who come unto Christ must have faith in Jesus Christ, repent of their sins, be baptized for the remission of sins, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and endure faithfully to the end of their days.

It is not that the Latter-day Saints believe that each of us must become perfect in this life to be saved, at least not as most people think of becoming perfect. Rather, it is expected that after we sin we return quickly to the light through godly sorrow and repentance and thus not continue in sin. The scriptures call for us to become perfect "in Christ" in the sense of yielding ourselves to his will, becoming one with him through the Holy Spirit, and becoming whole, fully formed, and complete in him. Stephen Robinson, an LDS professor of religion at Brigham Young University, has written:

The only other way of being justified, of being declared not guilty before God [other than the hypothetical means of living perfectly and thus being justified by law], is to admit our own imperfections, admit we can't be perfect on our own or save ourselves by our own efforts, and have faith in Christ our Savior. We must accept his offer of help by entering into a completely new covenant in which his efforts are added to our own and make up for our deficiencies. This is called justification by faith in Christ.

In the new covenant of faith, perfect innocence is still required, but it is required of the team or partnership of Christ-and-me, rather than of me alone. Because Christ and I are one in the gospel covenant, God accepts our combined total worthiness, and together Christ and I are perfectly worthy. As a result, in Christ I am clean and worthy today. My individual perfect performance remains a long-term personal goal and will be the eventual outcome of the covenant relationship, but it is not a prerequisite to being justified in the short run by faith in Christ.<#>4

SALVATION BY GRACE

The theological debate over whether we are saved by grace or by works has continued for centuries. In reality, it is a fruitless argument that generates more heat than light. It is, in the words of C. S. Lewis, "like asking which blade in a pair of scissors is most necessary."<#>5 Mormons have too often criticized those who stress salvation by grace alone, and they have too often been criticized for a type of works-righteousness.

What is required of us, then? We must receive the ordinances of salvation, the sacraments of the Church. We must strive to live a life befitting that of our Christian covenant. We must do all in our power to overcome sin, put off the natural man, and deny ourselves of all ungodliness. These things evidence our part of the gospel covenant. They allow us, in fact, to remain in the covenant with Christ, even as we occasionally stumble and fall short of the ideal. Latter-day Saint scripture attests that good works are necessary, but they are not sufficient. The harder questions are: In whom do I trust? On whom do I rely? Is my reliance on Christ's works, or do I strive to save myself?

The doctrine that we must rely on the grace of Christ is found throughout LDS scripture. One Book of Mormon prophet taught that since man had fallen, he could not merit anything of himself, but that deliverance from sin and death comes through the sufferings and death of Christ. (Alma 22:14.) Another called upon his people to exercise unshaken faith in the Redeemer, "relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save." (2 Ne. 31:19, emphasis added.) A later Book of Mormon leader beckoned to his people to be "watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith." (Moro. 6:4, emphasis added.) Perhaps one of the best-known Book of Mormon passages in LDS circles is the following: "We labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23; see also 10:24.) People are redeemed because of the righteousness of the Redeemer. (See Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 2:3.) Finally, from the Doctrine and Covenants comes a touching invitation to believe in Christ, a reminder of the importance of the Master's merits: "Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified; wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." (D&C 45:3-5, emphasis added.)

"How else could salvation possibly come?" Bruce R. McConkie, an LDS leader asked. "Can man save himself? Can he resurrect himself? Can he create a celestial kingdom and decree his own admission thereto? Salvation must and does originate with God, and if man is to receive it, God must bestow it upon him, which bestowal is a manifestation of grace. . . . Salvation does not come by the works and performances of the law of Moses, nor by `circumcision,' nor by `the law of commandments contained in ordinances' . . . , nor does it come by any good works standing alone. No matter how righteous a man might be, no matter how great and extensive his good works, he could not save himself. Salvation is in Christ and comes through his atonement."<#>6 Or as another Church leader, Dallin H. Oaks, observed, "Man unquestionably has impressive powers and can bring to pass great things by tireless efforts and indomitable will. But after all our obedience and good works, we cannot be saved from the effect of our sins without the grace extended by the atonement of Jesus Christ."<#>7

To Latter-day Saints, the grace of Jesus Christ is not only a final spiritual boost that will allow us to move into heaven hereafter but also an enabling power, a divine dynamism that enables us to meet life's challenges in the here and now, to do things we could never do on our own. The Great Physician does more than heal the sin-sick soul. He ministers relief to the disconsolate, comfort to the bereaved, strength to those who have been battered and scarred by the ironies of this existence. "The Savior's victory," writes one author, "can compensate not only for our sins but also for our inadequacies; for our deliberate mistakes but also for our sins committed in ignorance, our errors of judgment, and our unavoidable imperfections. Our ultimate aspiration is more than being forgiven of sin—we seek to become holy, endowed affirmatively with Christlike attributes, at one with him, like him. Divine grace is the only source that can finally fulfill that aspiration, after all we can do."<#>8

THE DELICATE BALANCE

As we have seen already, the grace of God, manifest primarily in the gift of his Son Jesus Christ, is a necessary condition for salvation; there is no way, in time or eternity, that man could produce the plan of salvation, for such is the work of God. But, from an LDS perspective, the grace of God is a gift to humankind, a gift that must be perceived and received to be efficacious. The works of man—the ordinances or sacraments of salvation, the deeds of service and acts of Christian charity and mercy—are necessary for salvation; they evidence man's commitment and fulfill his covenant with Christ to do all in his power to live the life of a member of the body of Christ, or the church. But the works of man will never be enough to qualify one for the eternal prize; acting alone, without the grace and mercy and condescension of God, these deeds are but paltry offerings and are thus not sufficient for salvation. And thus it is that Moroni, the last prophet in the Book of Mormon, invites the reader to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind, and strength then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ." (Moro. 10:32, emphasis added.)

Few things would be more serious than encouraging lip service to God but discouraging or even downplaying wholehearted obedience and faithful discipleship. On the other hand, surely nothing could be more offensive to God than a belief that encourages the kind of smug self-assurance that comes from trusting in one's own works, relying upon one's own strength, and seeking to prosper through one's own genius. The Latter-day Saints teach that the key to understanding this sacred principle—the relationship between the grace of God and the works of man—is balance, balance and perspective provided through a careful search of the scriptures and a careful attention to the feelings of one's heart. One writer offered a parable that might prove helpful in understanding an LDS point of view on this vital matter:

A man is wandering in a hot and barren waste, and about to die of thirst, when he is caused to look up at the top of the hill where he sees a fountain of water in a restful setting of green grass and trees. His first impulse is to dismiss it as a mirage sent to torture his weary soul. But, being wracked with thirst and fatigue, and doomed to certain destruction anyway, he chooses to believe and pursue this last hope. As he drives his weary flesh to the top of the hill, he begins to see evidence of the reality of his hope; and, renewing his efforts, struggles on to the summit where he wets his partched lips, cools his fevered brow, and restores life to his body as he drinks deeply from the fountain. He is saved!

The author of the parable then offers these comments by way of interpretation:

What saved him? Was it the climb up the hill? Or was it the water? If he had remained at the foot of the hill either because of disbelief or lack of fortitude, his only means of salvation would have remained inaccessible. On the other hand, if he had climbed to the top and found he had labored in vain, he would have been worse off, if possible. . . .

The climb up the hill represents obedience to the gospel (faith in Christ, repentance, baptism of water, baptism of the Spirit, and endurance to the end); the water is that same eternal drink which Jesus offered the woman at the well. It is the atonement of Christ which is supplied as an act of grace.<#>9

Latter-day Saints recognize the central, saving place of Jesus Christ. In response to William Ernest Henley's "Invictus," the haughty declaration that man is the master of his own fate and the captain of his soul, an LDS apostle, Orson F. Whitney, wrote:

Art thou in truth? Then what of him Who bought thee with his blood? Who plunged into devouring seas And snatched thee from the flood? Who bore for all our fallen race What none but him could bear— The God who died that man might live And endless glory share? Of what avail thy vaunted strength Apart from his vast might? Pray that his Light may pierce the gloom That thou mayest see aright. Men are as bubbles on the wave, As leaves upon the tree. Thou, captain of thy soul, forsooth! Who gave that place to thee? Free will is thine—free agency, To wield for right or wrong; But thou must answer unto him To whom all souls belong. Bend to the dust that head "unbowed," Small part of life's great whole! And see in him, and him alone, The Captain of thy soul.<#>10

1 Conference Report, October 1985, p. 5.

2 Sidney B. Sperry, Paul's Life and Letters (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), p. 176.

3 Ibid., p. 176.

4 Believing Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992), pp. 43-44.

5 Mere Christianity, p. 129.

6 Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 2:499-500.

7 Conference Report, October 1988, p. 78.

8 Bruce C. Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), p. 20.

9 Glenn L. Pearson, Know Your Religion (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1961), pp. 92-93.

10 Improvement Era, April 1926, p. 611.
