Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

THE SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH

Joseph Smith taught that when God chose to restore his everlasting gospel, it was fundamentally necessary to restore the priesthood or divine authority as well. In addition, the Latter-day Saints came to understand that the sacraments of the Church, what they call the ordinances of the gospel, were needed as channels of divine power, one of the means whereby men and women could partake of "the power of godliness." (D&C 84:21.) The Mormon prophet-leader consistently taught that the fundamental ordinances of salvation, like the gospel of Jesus Christ itself, have been in existence since the days of Adam and are forever the same.<#>1

An ordinance is a law, a statute, a decree, a commandment, a requirement. "Among his laws and commandments, the Lord has provided certain rites and ceremonies which are called ordinances. These ordinance-rites might be pictured as a small circle within the larger circle of ordinance-commandments. Most of these rites and ceremonies . . . are essential to salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of God; some of them . . . are not ordinances of salvation, but are performed for the comfort, consolation, and encouragement of the saints."<#>2 In this chapter we will deal briefly with the ordinances or sacraments so fundamental to the faith.

ORDINANCES OF SALVATION

Latter-day Saints believe that the first principle of the gospel is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. We have faith in Christ when we acknowledge him, not only as a great moral teacher but also as the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind, when we feel to trust in and rely upon his merits and mercy and grace. Once we come to know of him—of his majesty and greatness and holiness—it is but natural that we would begin to sense our own inadequacies and sins. And thus repentance is the second principle of the gospel. We repent when we literally "turn away" from our wrongdoings, when we confess and forsake them (D&C 58:42-43), when we come to have a new way of thinking and viewing the world. Forgiveness comes only from God through Jesus Christ.

Baptism. For Latter-day Saints, the first ordinance or sacrament of salvation is baptism by immersion. It is not optional; it is mandatory. It is an evidence of one's acceptance of the death and resurrection and atonement of Jesus. As the initiate is immersed completely beneath the baptismal waters, he or she participates symbolically in Christ's descent into the tomb of death and His rise to newness of life in the resurrection. "Know ye not," the Apostle Paul asked, "that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection." (Rom. 6:3-5.) Joseph Smith taught why baptism must be performed in a prescribed manner:

God has set many signs on the earth, as well as in the heavens; for instance, the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb of the field, all bear a sign that seed hath been planted there; for it is a decree of the Lord that every tree, plant, and herb bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth after any other law or principle. Upon the same principle do I contend that baptism is a sign ordained of God, for the believer in Christ to take upon himself in order to enter into the kingdom of God. . . . Those who seek to enter in any other way will seek in vain; for God will not receive them, neither will the angels acknowledge their works as accepted, for they have not obeyed the ordinances, nor attended to the signs which God ordained for the salvation of man, to prepare him for, and give him a title to, a celestial glory. . . .

Baptism is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby God hath ordained for man to come to him to be saved, and enter into the Kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in vain.<#>3

Water baptism satisfies the first half of the Savior's commission to be born of water and of the Spirit. (John 3:5.) Though the Latter-day Saints speak often of having their sins "washed away" in the waters of baptism (compare Acts 22:16; D&C 39:10), in fact the actual cleansing of sins does not take place until they are confirmed members of the Church and receive the Holy Spirit (see Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 31:17; Moro. 6:4).

The covenant with Christ at the time of baptism entails more than individual worthiness and a life of personal purity, more than a vertical obligation. The Saint's horizontal obligation, his obligation to his fellow mortals, is enunciated (along with his obligation to God) by a Book of Mormon prophet as follows: "As ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life—now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you?" (Mosiah 18:8-10.)

Laying on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost. The next ordinance of salvation is confirmation, the laying on of hands, by those with proper authority (the Melchizedek Priesthood), for the reception of the Spirit. This also is not optional; it is mandatory. Latter-day Saints believe that one must have hands laid upon the head, be confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and be told, "Receive the Holy Ghost." The gift of the Holy Ghost is the right to the companionship of the Spirit, the third member of the Godhead, based upon personal worthiness. (See 1 Cor. 3:16-17; 6:19) Joseph Smith taught that one may receive promptings or impressions of the Spirit prior to baptism, but that the gift of the Holy Ghost or constant companionship is granted only after an authorized baptism. "There is a difference," he said, "between the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Cornelius [see Acts 10] received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the truth of the gospel, but he could not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after he was baptized. Had he not taken this sign or ordinance upon him, the Holy Ghost which convinced him of the truth of God, would have left him."<#>4

Jesus taught that all people must be born again, born from above, born of the Spirit. (John 3:3-5; see also Book of Mormon, Mosiah 27:24-26.) Being born again comes as the Holy Spirit of God begins to quicken or make alive the spiritual capacity of men and women, as the candidate for salvation begins to put away "the old man of sin" and put on Christ. (Rom. 6:6.) Baptism, standing alone, is insufficient to enable one to be born again. The Holy Ghost, who serves as a revelator and a sanctifier, has the power to burn filth and dross from the human soul as though by fire, thus giving rise to the phrase baptism by fire. Though that new birth may come in a dramatic, sudden encounter with the powers of godliness, Latter-day Saints believe that most men and women are born again gradually, steadily over time, as the Spirit begins to work a mighty change within them. Ezra Taft Benson, president of the Church in the late twentieth century, thus taught, "We must be cautious as we discuss . . . remarkable examples [of rebirth]. Though they are real and powerful, they are the exception more than the rule. For every [one of these], there are hundreds and thousands of people who find the process of repentance much more subtle, much more imperceptible. Day by day they move closer to the Lord, little realizing they are building a godlike life."<#>5

For a large segment of the Christian world, being born again comes through receiving the sacraments of the church. For another large segment, being born again comes through a personal spiritual experience. Joseph Smith taught that truth takes a road between these two extremes—that "being born again comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances."<#>6 Finally, as to its necessity, he said, "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This eternal truth settles the question of all men's religion. A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God, without being born of water and the Spirit, . . . unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God."<#>7

Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. As an outgrowth of the Passover meal at the Last Supper, Jesus introduced what Christians have come to know as the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or Communion. Like other Christians, Latter-day Saints partake of the sacrament (they use bread and water) in remembrance of his suffering and death, and more specifically, of his broken body and spilt blood. The prayer offered upon the broken bread illustrates the nature of the covenant, of man's promises to God as well as God's promised blessing:

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (D&C 20:77.)

The sacrament is distributed during the sacrament meeting, the main worship service in the Church on the Sabbath, as well as on other special occasions. It is a solemn and sacred period of devotion, a time of reflection, introspection, and covenant. It is a time for men and women to examine their lives, consider their commitment to Christ, and renew their covenants with God made at the time of baptism. David O. McKay, ninth president of the Church, observed:

There are three things fundamentally important associated with the administration of the sacrament. The first is self-discernment. It is introspection. . . .

Secondly, there is a covenant made; a covenant even more than a promise. . . .

Thirdly, there is another blessing, and that is a sense of close relationship with the Lord. There is an opportunity to commune with oneself and to commune with the Lord. We meet in the house that is dedicated to Him; we have turned it over to Him; we call it His house. Well, you may rest assured that He will be there to inspire us if we come in proper attune to meet Him.<#>8

Latter-day Saints teach that in the same way the ancient Israelites presented their offering to the Levitical priest so that through that sacrifice their sins might be remitted, men and women in our day who have been baptized and received the Holy Ghost may, through their own offering—a broken heart and a contrite spirit (see Ps. 51:17; Book of Mormon, 3 Ne. 9:20; D&C 59:8)—be forgiven, have sins remitted, and be at peace through partaking of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

How can we have spiritual hunger? Who is there among us that does not wound his spirit by word, thought, or deed, from Sabbath to Sabbath? We do things for which we are sorry, and desire to be forgiven, or we have erred against someone and given injury. If . . . there is a feeling in our souls that we would like to be forgiven, then the method to obtain forgiveness is not through rebaptism, it is not to make confession to man, but it is to repent of our sins, to go to those against whom we have sinned or transgressed and obtain their forgiveness, and then repair to the Sacrament table where, if we have sincerely repented and put ourselves in proper condition, we shall be forgiven, and spiritual healing will come to our souls. It will really enter into our being.<#>9

Ordination to the Priesthood. As we will discuss in more detail in the next chapter, Latter-day Saints believe that the priesthood is the power to act in the name of God. The priesthood is essential to the operation of the Church and vital to the promulgation of the gospel itself. Men must be ordained to the priesthood in order to participate in the sacraments of the Church and, more especially, in the saving ordinances of the temple.

THE ORDINANCES OF THE TEMPLE

Most of the official meetings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints take place in church houses. These chapels are found throughout the earth and are erected whenever a group of Latter-day Saints in the area is in a position to operate the programs of the Church. Sermons, worship services, religious instruction and study, many Church sacraments, and social gatherings either take place in the chapel or are organized there. The chapel is thus an important locus of Church activity. But it does not house all that takes place in the Church, especially some of the most important work of the LDS faith. The most sacred and lasting of Church sacraments are administered and received in temples.

The temple is the house of the Lord. It is a place where Latter-day Saints go to participate in ordinances of the gospel that are administered nowhere else. Some of the ordinances or sacraments that take place in temples include:

The Temple Endowment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the period of the great apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements. . . .

The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity, to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation that the earth may be made ready to receive her King—the Lord Jesus Christ. With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions.

No jot, iota, or tittle of the temple rites is otherwise than uplifting and sanctifying. In every detail the endowment ceremony contributes to covenants of morality of life, consecration of person to high ideals, devotion to truth, patriotism to nation, and allegiance to God. The blessings of the House of the Lord are not restricted to a privileged class; every member of the Church may have admission to the temple with the right to participate in the ordinances thereof, if he comes duly accredited as of worthy life and conduct.<#>10

Within the power to perform temple marriage (also called eternal marriage, celestial marriage, and the new and everlasting covenant of marriage) is the power to unite man and woman according to the laws of the land. But also within that power (the "sealing power"), Latter-day Saints affirm, is the right to seal that union through death and into the world to come. This sealing power also binds and seals children to their parents, thus making the parents and children an eternal family. Joseph Smith taught that in the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees, and that in order to enter into the highest, one must participate in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. (D&C 131:1-4.) "Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity," he explained, "while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection."<#>11

Paul wrote to the Corinthians and sought to point up the inconsistency of believing in the atonement and redemption of Jesus Christ and yet doubting the truthfulness and reality of the resurrection: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor. 15:29.) That is to say (from an LDS perspective), "Why are you being baptized on behalf of others [The Revised English Bible, The New Revised Standard Version] if you do not believe in the resurrection?" Mormons believe that this New Testament passage alludes to a true practice of the first-century Christian Church, a practice wherein members of the Church were being baptized by proxy, in behalf of others who had died without proper Christian baptism.

Joseph Smith observed, "Aside from knowledge independent of the Bible, I would say that [baptism for the dead] was certainly practiced by the ancient churches; . . . The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit [world], through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them."<#>12 On another occasion he said, "If we can, by the authority of the Priesthood of the Son of God, baptize a man in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, for the remission of sins, it is just as much our privilege to act as an agent, and be baptized for the remission of sins for and in behalf of our dead kindred, who have not heard the Gospel, or the fullness of it."<#>13

This practice is closely tied to another doctrinal belief of the Latter-day Saints—that the gospel is preached in the postmortal spirit world. Latter-day Saints believe this is what Peter meant when he wrote, "Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison." Further: "For this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Pet. 3:18-19; 4:6; emphasis added.) In short, every person will have the opportunity, either in this life or the next, to receive the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ and enter into the everlasting covenant. As we noted in chapter 5, one dimension of the spirit world is sometimes designated as the "spirit prison," not necessarily because people who are there are in pain or agony, but because (1) they view the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage (D&C 45:17; 138:50), and (2) they are in the process of receiving and learning the truth, the receipt of which makes them free (John 8:31-32).

Between the time of Christ's death on the cross and his rise from the tomb, he went into the postmortal spirit world, preached his message, and organized the faithful, so that the message of truth might be available to all who are willing to receive it. (See D&C 138.) But the sacraments or ordinances of baptism, confirmation, ordination, and marriage/sealing are earthly ordinances and must be performed on this side of the veil of death. Thus the Latter-day Saints go into temples, receive the sacraments for themselves, and then return frequently to perform them in behalf of those who have died without them. "Every man," Joseph Smith pointed out, "that has been baptized and belongs to the kingdom has a right to be baptized for those who have gone before; and as soon as the law of the Gospel is obeyed here by their friends who act as proxy for them, the Lord has administrators there [in the spirit world] to set them free."<#>14 He also taught, "Jesus Christ became a ministering spirit (while His body was lying in the sepulchre) to the spirits in prison, to fulfill an important part of His mission, without which He could not have perfected His work, or entered into his rest. . . . It is no more incredible that God should save the dead, than that he should raise the dead."<#>15 And so Latter-day Saints are baptized, confirmed, endowed, married, and sealed by proxy for men and women who have gone on to the next world. In that sense, Mormons feel the need to be anxiously engaged in the work of the ministry on both sides of the veil of death.

ORDINANCES OF COMFORT

Some of the other sacraments of the faith are, as noted earlier, for the comfort and consolation of the Saints and are not required for salvation. Some of these include:

Ordinances or sacraments are a critical part of the LDS faith. Latter-day Saints believe they are one means by which the heavens are linked to the earth, by which the powers of God are accessed. Thus in a revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants are found these words: "This greater [Melchizedek] priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh." (D&C 84:19-21; emphasis added.)

1 See Teachings, pp. 59-60, 168, 264, 308.

2 Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, pp. 548-49; emphasis in original.

3 Teachings, p. 198.

4 Ibid., p. 199.

5 Ensign, October 1989, p. 5.

6 Teachings, p. 162.

7 Ibid., p. 12.

8 Conference Report, April 1946, p. 112.

9 Melvin J. Ballard, Improvement Era, October 1919, pp. 1,026-27.

10 James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., rev. ed., 1976), pp. 83-84.

11 Teachings, pp. 300-301.

12 Ibid., p. 179.

13 Ibid., p. 201.

14 Ibid., p. 367.

15 Ibid., p. 191.
