Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

THE CHURCH AND THE PRIESTHOOD

Joseph Smith gave instructions early on regarding the establishment of a church. As we noted in chapter 1, on April 6, 1830, the Church of Christ was formed, an organization that by the mid-1830s came to be known as the Church of the Latter Day Saints, and by 1838 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. For the LDS prophet it was clear that the reestablishment of the kingdom of God entailed more than the reintroduction of saving truths or even of divine powers and authorities. The restoration of the gospel included the restoration of the "ancient order of things," both Old and New Testament principles and practices, especially those of the first-century Christian Church. He wrote in 1842, "We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, and so forth." (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:6.)

THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH

Latter-day Saints believe that even though individuals are responsible to receive the truth, love the truth, and live the truth on their own, rich blessings come through working together with others. Joseph Smith explained that "the greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always come from faithfulness and concerted effort, never attended individual exertion or enterprise."<#>1 The Church is the organized collection of believers, the body of Christ. Members of the Church are known as the Saints, the Latter-day Saints, to distinguish them from the Former-day Saints, believing Christians from earlier ages and dispensations of time.

The mission of the Church is to invite all men and women to come unto Christ. That overarching mission—to which all other doctrines are secondary and thus to which all Church programs and policies must be tied—is to be accomplished through three major endeavors:

The Church maintains a worldwide Church Educational System that has the primary responsibility for building gospel literacy and strengthening the faith and commitment of young people. Hundreds of thousands of LDS high school students are enrolled in seminary, a weekday religious education program established in 1912. In seminary, students study the Old Testament for a full year, then New Testament for a year, followed in subsequent years by the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. College-age young people become involved in institutes of religion, programs of weekday religious instruction established in 1926, carried out adjacent to hundreds of colleges and universities throughout the world. Early in its history the Church established schools, colleges, and academies. Brigham Young University (Provo, Utah), the largest private, church-owned institution in the country, was established by Brigham Young in 1875. Since that time, the LDS Church has established Brigham Young University—Hawaii in Laie, a junior college (Ricks College in Rexburg, Idaho), LDS Business College (Salt Lake City), and a Church College in New Zealand. Though the thrust of the academic institutions is of necessity toward secular education, the schools are founded on religious principles, and students are expected to enroll for a designated number of religion courses as a part of a balanced curriculum.

Perhaps the proclamation of the gospel with which non-Latter-day Saints are most familiar is the Church's worldwide missionary program. All members of the LDS Church are asked to be missionaries, to look for occasions to share what they feel about God and Christ, about Joseph Smith and the Restoration, with family and friends not of the faith. In addition, young men and women, as well as older couples, devote themselves to voluntary, full-time missionary service for a period of time as an outgrowth of their desire to share their commitment about the faith with others.

The Church is financed by the tithes of its members, who are asked to pay one-tenth of their income to the Church. Tithing monies are used to build chapels and temples; finance missionary work; cover individual congregational costs for building maintenance and upkeep, as well as youth and social programs; and otherwise build the Church throughout the world. In addition, members are asked to participate in a monthly fast (to refrain from eating or drinking for two meals) and to contribute the cost of those meals or more to what is called a fast offering. Fast offerings are used to care for the poor, for those who may have had a financial setback, or for those who are temporarily out of work. These funds are administered by the local Church leader, the bishop or branch president. Those who have been assisted are asked, in an effort to maintain their dignity and self-reliance, to either repay the assistance or to work for a prescribed period of time on a Church project.

The family is the most important unit in time or eternity. The Church and its auxiliary organizations (for children, for youth, for men and women, and for single adults) exist to bless the lives of individuals and to help families in their quest for eternal life. The Church administers the gospel. That is, the Church is the vehicle, the organized structure, by which the plan of salvation is taught, the sacraments of the Church are administered, charitable service to others is orchestrated, and men and women come to develop a meaningful spiritual union with Jesus Christ.

THE CHURCH AND PRIESTHOOD ORGANIZATION

Though the LDS Church does not have a paid ministry, men who are called to positions of responsibility in the Church are given authority to preside. That authority is the priesthood. It is received by ordination, through the laying on of hands of those with authority. (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:5.) The priesthood is the power of God, delegated to men on earth, to act in all things for the salvation of men and women. It is divine authority, the authority Joseph Smith stated that he received in 1829 from John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John. In the Church, and on the local level, worthy young men who reach the age of twelve have the Aaronic Priesthood conferred upon them. Worthy young men at the age of eighteen or nineteen have the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood conferred upon them. As to the manner in which the work of the Church is carried on by a lay clergy, Rex E. Lee, former U.S. Solicitor General and later president of Brigham Young University, has written:

The dominant characteristic of almost all Church service is that nonprofessionals donate it. There is no such thing as a professional Mormon cleric who has trained for the ministry and then gone into it because he chose to do so. All ecclesiastical positions in the LDS Church, at all levels, are callings, and the calling comes to the individual, through inspiration, from someone else who has the authority and responsibility to make the calling. . . .

As a consequence, the tens of thousands of positions, which include responsibilities for attending to the needs of the poor, comforting the widows, administering to the sick, conducting funerals, teaching the gospel, handling administrative and clerical details, serving members, conducting meetings, and counseling families are performed in the Mormon Church not by divinity school graduates, but by men and women age twelve and up who work at regular jobs for a living. . . .

This does not mean, however, that trained professionals have no place in the Church. In cases where members work in administrative or teaching positions that replace secular jobs, those persons receive wages. For example, a well-developed administrative corps of paid staff employees handle the details of welfare, genealogy, missionary work, chapel construction, supply of manuals and other materials, the direction of the Church's educational system, and many other programs for the entire Church. Even locally, persons are hired to do such things as maintain the buildings and lands and administer some parts of the welfare and genealogy programs. . . .

Sermons too are given by local members. The sacrament meetings (Sunday worship services) usually consist of one or two youth speakers who present three- to five-minute sermonettes, and one or two adult speakers, who deliver ten- to fifteen-minute talks. The sermons typically discuss scriptures, doctrine, and principles for living. . . .

How can a church be run efficiently like this? How can it afford to entrust not only the organization, management, and policy making to amateurs, but also the expounding of doctrinal principles? I have two answers to these questions. The first is pragmatic; the system works. The Church has been run this way since its organization in 1830. And quite well. The second is that the fundamental gospel principles of governance, cooperation, participation, and direction by the Spirit are plain and simple. They are principles that can be understood without the benefit of specific, college-level training, by the young and the old. They can be understood and taught today by people from all walks of life because they are the same principles that were understood and taught by carpenters and fishermen two thousand years ago.<#>4

The Reformers sought to extricate themselves from what they believed to be a stifling priesthood hierarchy. In so doing, Protestant religious leaders began to refer to a "priesthood of all believers," men and women in the church whose sole authority was God and scripture. An early revelation to Joseph Smith declared that the gospel had been restored "that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world." (D&C 1:20.) Each person, man, woman, or child, is entitled to pray, to come to God without human mediation, to know the will of the Almighty. Each person is entitled to feel divine promptings, become aware of what is the right and proper thing to do. And yet, Joseph Smith and his successors have explained, there must be order. The Mormon prophet thus observed that "it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselves."<#>5 Further, he taught that "the Presidents or Presidency [the First Presidency, to be discussed shortly] are over the Church; and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of this Priesthood. It is also the privilege of any officer in this Church to obtain revelations, so far as relates to his particular calling and duty in the Church."<#>6

At the general level, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is presided over by a group of men known as the General Authorities. These men are headquartered in Salt Lake City, Utah, but in recent years some have assumed administrative responsibilities in different countries throughout the world. The president of the Church is acknowledged and upheld by the people as the presiding Prophet, Seer, and Revelator. He holds the same position in regard to the Church that Joseph Smith held. He has two counselors that officiate with him jointly; they constitute the First Presidency of the Church. Joseph Smith recorded the following in 1835: "Of the Melchizedek Priesthood, three Presiding High Priests, chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church." (D&C 107:22.)

Working closely with the First Presidency are twelve men who form the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The counselors in the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles are sustained by the Church membership as prophets, seers, and revelators. Latter-day Saints believe that the apostolic power held anciently by Peter, James, and John, and restored to Joseph Smith in 1829, is held by the First Presidency and the Twelve. "The twelve traveling councilors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world." Further, this traveling council is called "to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, agreeable to the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations." (D&C 107:23, 33.)

Other General Authorities include the Seventy, priesthood ministers mentioned by Jesus in the New Testament (Luke 10), and the Presiding Bishopric. The Seventy have apostolic callings in the sense that they are called to be special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world and to build up the Church and regulate its affairs in all the world, under the direction of the Twelve Apostles. (D&C 107:25, 34.) The Presiding Bishopric are responsible for temporal affairs—for real estate, buildings and maintenance, welfare resources and projects, and so on. The First Presidency, the Twelve Apostles, and the Presiding Bishopric constitute the Council on the Disposition of Tithes, a group responsible for the expenditures of the Church. (D&C 120.) The General Authorities travel throughout the earth and are to be found in meetings and conferences of the Saints most every Sabbath.

THE DESTINY OF THE CHURCH

For Joseph Smith, the Church of Jesus Christ was also the organized kingdom of God on earth. As we have already noted, the Church is a service agency, an auxiliary to the priesthood in the blessing and benefiting of individuals and families. The Church deals in temporal matters, and it deals in spiritual matters. Latter-day Saints believe that all things are spiritual to God (D&C 29:34), that how we conduct our business and everyday affairs ought to reflect and bear witness of the spiritual realities within our souls. An LDS apostle has written, "A church and kingdom guided by the inspiration of heaven will always have whatever helps and governments are needed to save men temporally and spiritually. A religion that does not have power to save a man temporally and to care for all of his needs in this life certainly does not have power to save him spiritually and provide for all of his needs in the life to come."<#>7

The Apostle Paul wrote to the early Christians concerning Christ's establishment of the Church: "He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Eph. 4:11-13.) Because we are not yet perfect, because we are not yet united, and because all are in need of constant edification, the Latter-day Saints believe that the Church has performed and will continue to perform a vital function for the body of believers. Their leaders have taught that as the Saints become more united; as the individual members take more seriously their responsibility to serve and build others; as fathers and mothers devote themselves first and foremost to the preservation and development of the family, then eventually the Church will largely have fulfilled its role, and the Lord will make other provisions for his people. "The purpose of the church on earth is to prepare us for an inheritance in the church in heaven."<#>8

1 Teachings, p. 183.

2 Ibid., p. 217.

3 Words of Joseph Smith, p. 78.

4 What Do Mormons Believe? (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992), pp. 74-76.

5 Teachings, p. 21.

6 Ibid., p. 111.

7 Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 354.

8 Ibid., p. 337.
