Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

QUEST FOR THE CITY OF GOD

Joseph Smith boldly announced: "I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of [God envisioned by] Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world." And how was this to be realized? "It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on," the Prophet said. "The power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the gospel."<#>1 Joseph Smith's vision of the kingdom of God was expansive. It consisted of more than preaching and study and Sabbath services; it entailed the entire renovation of the order of things on earth, the transformation of man and the elevation of society. And at the heart of that sublime scene was the doctrine of Zion, a doctrine and a worldview that would shape the early Church and point the Saints of the twentieth century toward the eschatological ideal. In this chapter we will speak broadly of the LDS idea and the ideal—Zion as a people or community of believers, Zion as a specific place, and Zion as a state of being—the pure in heart.

THE DISCOVERY OF ZION

Joseph Smith seems to have first encountered the concept of Zion (in a sense other than the holy mount or holy city in Jerusalem) in his translation of the Book of Mormon. The Book of Mormon prophets spoke of Zion as a holy commonwealth, a society of the Saints, a way of life that was to be established or brought forth under God's direction; those who fought against it were to incur God's displeasure. The municipals "labor for the welfare of Zion" rather than for money. In addition, in the words of the resurrected Savior, Zion was identified as a specific place in the land of America, a land of promise and inheritance for the descendants of Joseph of old. (Book of Mormon, 1 Ne. 13:37; 2 Ne. 10:11-13; 26:29; 28:20; 3 Ne. 16:16-18.)

A key moment in LDS Church history came during Joseph Smith's translation of the King James Bible. By December 1830, particulars concerning the patriarch Enoch and his ancient city of Zion were made known. A King James text of three verses on Enoch and his people was expanded to more than one hundred verses, uncovering knowledge of such things as the manner in which an entire society of antediluvians was spiritually awakened and stimulated to transcendent righteousness; the means by which this ancient people, formerly bent on selfishness and pride, had their souls changed, saw to the needs of the poor, and became "of one heart and one mind"; and how, through the application of such a divine philosophy, they were translated, taken from the earth into the bosom of God. (See Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7.) Enoch's Zion became the pattern, the scriptural prototype for the Latter-day Saints. In the months that followed, several revelations now in the Doctrine and Covenants spoke of the ancient Zion of Enoch and also provided the broad framework whereby the Latter-day Saints, through the principles of consecration and stewardship of properties, could lay the foundation for a modern society of Zion.

Consecration and stewardship was a means of establishing economic oneness among the Saints. Latter-day Saints were asked to consecrate all of their properties and holdings to God through the bishop of the Church. This they did by covenant. They then had deeded back to them a stewardship or inheritance, that portion of property or that assignment that they were to manage, expand upon, and be accountable for. Whenever the amount consecrated exceeded what was deeded back as stewardship, the residue or surplus went into the storehouse, the center of economic interests in the community. When the amount of resource generated by the stewardship exceeded the original agreed-upon stewardship, the excess or surplus also went into the storehouse. Surplus consecration and surplus production were used by the community to assist the poor, the widows, and dependent children. Many of the early Saints lived under this system in Ohio and Missouri, but by 1834 the specific implementation of this order of things was discontinued. Latter versions of consecration and stewardship, sometimes known as the United Order or the Order of Enoch, were implemented in the Great Basin after the Latter-day Saints came West.

In some of the earliest revelations recorded was the repeated command, "Now, as you have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion." (D&C 6:6; see also 11:6; 12:6; 14:6.) Zion thus came to be associated with the restored Church and the grander work of the Restoration, and the faithful could take heart in the midst of their troubles, for Zion was the city of God. (D&C 97:19.) Indeed, in speaking of the sacred spot where the people of God congregated, the Lord said, "Behold, the land of Zion—I, the Lord, hold it in mine own hands." (D&C 63:25.) Surely the King of Zion (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 7:53) would deal mercifully with his subjects.

ZION'S MULTIPLE MEANINGS

The idea that there was a specific location for the city of Zion within North and South America was made known by Joseph Smith very early. Some of the early Saints were called to preach among "the Lamanites" or Native Americans. Yet at that point in time, "it is not revealed, and no man knoweth where the city Zion shall be built, but it shall be given hereafter." They were told, however, that the location would "be on the borders by the Lamanites." (D&C 28:9.) It was on July 20, 1831, just as the leaders of the Saints had begun to arrive in Missouri, that the word came concerning the specific location of Zion. The Latter-day Saints were told that the land of Missouri was "the land which I [God] have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints. Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. . . . The place which is now called Independence [Missouri] is the center place." (D&C 57:1-3.)

Zion is spoken of in scripture as a banner or ensign around which a weary or beleaguered people may rally. It is also a standard against which the substance and quality of all things are to be evaluated. The Saints were expected to judge all things by a set of guidelines obtained from a source beyond that of unenlightened man. Note the language of one of the revelations: "Behold, I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations. For it shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion." (D&C 64:37-38.) As an illustration of this principle, Joseph Young, brother of Brigham Young, explained that Joseph Smith the Prophet "recommended the Saints to cultivate as high a state of perfection in their musical harmonies as the standard of the faith which he had brought was superior to sectarian religion. To obtain this, he gave them to understand that the refinement of singing would depend upon the attainment of the Holy Spirit. . . . When these graces and refinements and all the kindred attractions are obtained that characterized the ancient Zion of Enoch, then the Zion of the last days will become beautiful, she will be hailed by the Saints from the four winds, who will gather to Zion with songs of everlasting joy."<#>2

In addition, Zion was to be the focus, the convergence, and the concentration of all that is good, all that is ennobling, all that is instructive and inspirational. In Zion all things are to be gathered together in one in Christ. (Eph. 1:10.) In short, according to Brigham Young, "every accomplishment, every polished grace, every useful attainment in mathematics, music, in all science and art belong to the Saints."<#>3 The Saints "rapidly collect the intelligence that is bestowed upon the nations," Brigham said on another occasion, "for all this intelligence belongs to Zion."<#>4

Zion is people, the people of God, those people who have come out of the world into the marvelous light of Christ. In this vein the early Saints were encouraged: "Let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mourn." (D&C 97:21.) Thus Zion is a state of being, a state of purity of heart that entitles one to be known as a member of the household of faith. Brigham Young therefore spoke of the Saints having Zion in their hearts: "Unless the people live before the Lord in the obedience of His commandments," he said, "they cannot have Zion within them." Further, "As to the spirit of Zion, it is in the hearts of the Saints, of those who love and serve the Lord with all their might, mind, and strength."<#>5 On another occasion Brigham affirmed. "Zion will be redeemed and built up, and the saints will rejoice. This is the land of Zion; and who are Zion? The pure in heart are Zion; they have Zion within them. Purify yourselves, sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and have the Zion of God within you."<#>6 Finally, he asked, "Where is Zion? Where the organization of the Church of God is. And may it dwell spiritually in every heart; and may we so live as to always enjoy the Spirit of Zion."<#>7

ZION AS THE PLACE OF GATHERING

Isaiah the Prophet had spoken some seven hundred years before Christ of the "mountain of the Lord's house" being established in the tops of the mountains. (Isa. 2:2.) In July 1840 Joseph Smith declared that "the land of Zion consists of all North and South America, but that any place where the Saints gather is Zion."<#>8 The latter part of this statement—that Zion represented more than a place, a single location, but rather any locus of gathering—is significant. It broadens the notion of Zion to include areas around the world where the people of the covenant congregate. There was a larger vision of Zion manifest in some of the earliest revelations, especially in one recorded during a particularly difficult time of persecution in Missouri: "Zion shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered. They that remain, and are pure in heart, shall return, and come to their inheritances, they and their children, with songs of everlasting joy, to build up the waste places of Zion—and all these things that the prophets might be fulfilled. And, behold, there is none other place appointed than that which I have appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed than that which I have appointed, for the work of the gathering of my saints—until the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and then I have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion." (D&C 101:17-21; emphasis added.) The ward or branch is a local congregation. A stake is a geographical collection of wards, comparable in concept to the diocese in the Roman Catholic Church. In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland, Ohio Temple, Joseph the Prophet pleaded in behalf of the Saints, "that they may come forth to Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment, with songs of everlasting joy." (D&C 109:39; emphasis added.) The Saints came to understand that safety and refuge are to be found in the stakes of Zion: "Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations; and that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth." (D&C 115:5-6; emphasis added.)

As to the center place of Zion, Bruce R. McConkie, a twentieth-century apostle, has written, "The center place! Let Israel gather to the stakes of Zion in all nations. Let every land be a Zion to those appointed to dwell there. Let the fulness of the gospel be for all the saints in all nations. Let no blessing be denied them. Let temples arise wherein the fulness of the ordinances of the Lord's house may be administered. But still there is a center place, a place where the chief temple shall stand, a place to which the Lord shall come, a place whence the law shall go forth to govern all the earth in that day when the Second David [Christ, the Millennial King] reigns personally upon the earth. And that center place is what men now call Independence in Jackson County, Missouri, but which in a day to come will be the Zion of our God and the City of Holiness of his people. The site is selected; the place is known; the decree has gone forth; and the promised destiny is assured."<#>9 And so, while the Latter-day Saints believe that Zion is a holy community, a gathering place for the Saints, a state of being, they also look to the day yet future when the center place of Zion will be built up and established, when the headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will shift from Salt Lake City, Utah, to Independence, Missouri.

Although the Church will establish a significant presence in Independence, Missouri, and it will become a gathering place, the Center Place, yet there will always be, as suggested above, a need for the stakes of Zion throughout the earth far and wide, a need for the Saints to gather to their own lands and congregate with their own people. Spencer W. Kimball, twelfth president of the Church, explained, "The gathering of Israel consists of joining the true Church and . . . coming to a knowledge of the true God. . . . Any person, therefore, who has accepted the restored gospel, and who now seeks to worship the Lord in his own tongue and with the Saints in the nations where he lives, has complied with the law of the gathering of Israel and is heir to all of the blessings promised the saints in these last days."<#>10 In addition, President Kimball taught, "The First Presidency and the Twelve see great wisdom in the multiple Zions, many gathering places where the Saints within their own culture and nation can act as a leaven in the building of the kingdom—a kingdom which seeks no earthly rewards or treasures. Sometimes, inadvertently, we have given artificial encouragement to individuals to leave their native land and culture and, too often, this has meant the loss of the leaven that is so badly needed, and the individuals involved have sometimes regretted their migrations."<#>11

AN EXPANDING CONCEPT

Like the Church itself, the concept of Zion has grown and expanded as the Latter-day Saints feel they have perceived the plans and purposes of the Almighty. Erastus Snow, an early apostle, pointed out in 1884 that when the early Saints "first heard the fullness of the Gospel preached by the first Elders, and read the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, our ideas of Zion were very limited. But as our minds began to grow and expand, why we began to look upon Zion as a great people, and the Stakes of Zion as numerous. . . . We ceased to set bounds to Zion and her Stakes."<#>12 Likewise, Joseph Young explained that many Saints of the nineteenth century—moved upon by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, such that future events appeared close at hand—misconstrued and miscalculated on a number of matters, including the time when the Saints should return to Missouri and build up the center place of Zion. "The Holy Spirit brought many things close to their minds—they appeared right by, and hence many were deceived. . . . I knew that faith and the Holy Ghost brought the designs of Providence close by, and by that means we were enabled to scan them, . . . but we had not knowledge enough to digest and fully comprehend those things."<#>13

Zion is a place. Zion is a people. Zion is a holy state of being. In the words of Spencer W. Kimball, Zion is "the highest order of priesthood society."<#>14 It is the heritage of the Saints. "The building up of Zion," Joseph Smith taught, "is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory."<#>15 In that sense, as Joseph Smith stated, "We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object."<#>16

1 Teachings, p. 366.

2 Cited in "Vocal Music," in History of the Organization of the Seventies (Salt Lake City: Deseret Steam Printing Establishment, 1878), pp. 14-15.

3 Journal of Discourses 10:224.

4 Ibid., 8:279.

5 Ibid., 2:253.

6 Ibid., 8:198; emphasis added.

7 Ibid., 8:205; emphasis added.

8 Words of Joseph Smith, p. 415; emphasis added; spelling and punctuation corrected.

9 A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 595; emphasis added.

10 Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, edited by Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 439.

11 Ibid., p. 440.

12 Journal of Discourses 25:30-31.

13 Ibid., 9:230.

14 Conference Report, October 1977, p. 125.

15 Teachings, p. 231.

16 Ibid., p. 160.
