Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

THE HOUSE OF ISRAEL

W. D. Davies once observed in an address at Brigham Young University that "Christianity has forgotten its Jewish roots":

Mormonism arose in a place and time when many utopian, populist, socialistic ideas were in the air. It gave these a disciplined, organized American outlet and form: what it did was re-Judaize a Christianity that had been too much Hellenized. . . . Mormonism certainly injected and I hope will continue to inject, into the American scene the realism of Judaism and thus challenged a too-Hellenized Christianity to renew its contact with its roots in Israel.<#>1

Indeed, the Latter-day Saints have a most unusual conceptual tie to ancient Israel and a serious engagement with the prophetic motif of the gathering of Israel. In this chapter we will examine the LDS views of the house of Israel, the gathering of Israel, and the manner in which the Latter-day Saints feel the ancient prophecies are to some degree being fulfilled through them.

A CHOSEN PEOPLE

Joseph Smith's hold on ancient Israel and commitment to a "covenant theology" was strengthened in several ways. First, the Latter-day Saints placed great stock in the Old Testament and felt a kinship with its characters and events. Joseph Smith claimed that many of the ancient personalities—for example, Adam, Abraham, Moses—appeared to him and conferred priesthood authorities that they had held on earth. Second, the Saints' acceptance of the Book of Mormon further tied them to the people of Israel, inasmuch as the Book of Mormon is essentially a narrative and commentary upon God's dealings with another branch of the house of Israel. Third, Joseph Smith and his people saw themselves as Israel wandering toward a promised land, "in . . . the beginning of the rising up and the coming forth of [the] church out of the wilderness." (D&C 5:14; compare 33:5.)

Fourth, the Latter-day Saints came to believe they were of the actual physical lineage of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, literally modern "children of Israel." "The Mormons," noted Davies, "are a continuation of what the Fathers of the Christian Church were to come to call the Old Israel. But for the Mormons there is no Old Israel. They simply regard themselves as Israel in a new stage of its history."<#>2 Fifth, as children of Israel, the inhabitants of Zion were "covenant" people, participants in what they called the "new and everlasting covenant." Finally, the center of all religious activity was the temple. As with Israel of old, the ritual and religion of the holy temple gave broadened meaning to all that was undertaken in a city of holiness.

LDS theology attests that coming to earth through a chosen lineage or family is not accidental or coincidental, that one's actions and life in the premortal world affect how and under what circumstances we enter mortality. Following our birth as spirits, being endowed with agency, each of the spirit sons and daughters of God developed and progressed according to their desires for truth and righteousness. "Being subject to law," Bruce R. McConkie has written,

and having their agency, all the spirits of men, while yet in the Eternal Presence, developed aptitudes, talents, capacities, and abilities of every sort, kind, and degree. During the long expanse of life that then was, an infinite variety of talents and abilities came into being. As the ages rolled, no two spirits remained alike. . . . Abraham and Moses and all of the prophets sought and obtained the talent for spirituality. Mary and Eve were two of the greatest spirit daughters of the Father. The whole house of Israel, known and segregated out from their fellows, was inclined toward spiritual things.<#>3

LDS doctrine attests that, like Christ (1 Pet. 1:18-20) and Jeremiah (Jeremiah 1:5-6), many men and women were foreordained or foredesignated in that premortal world to specific assignments, callings, and blessings on earth. "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world," Joseph Smith taught, "was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was."<#>4 Perhaps the greatest foreordination—based on premortal faithfulness—is foreordination to lineage and family: certain individuals come to earth through a designated channel, through a lineage that entitles them to remarkable blessings, but also a lineage that carries with it burdens and responsibilities. As a people, therefore, they enjoy what Brent L. Top calls "a type of collective foreordination—a selection of spirits to form an entire favored group or lineage." Yet, he adds, "although it is a collective foreordination it is nonetheless based on individual premortal faithfulness and spiritual capacity."<#>5 In the words of Melvin J. Ballard, a twentieth-century apostle, Israel is "a group of souls tested, tried, and proven before they were born into the world. . . . Through this lineage were to come the true and tried souls that had demonstrated their righteousness in the spirit world before they came here."<#>6

"Remember the days of old," Moses counseled his people, "consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee: thy elders, and they will tell thee. When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance." (Deut. 32:7-9; emphasis added.)

In speaking to the Athenians, the Apostle Paul declared: "God that made the world and all things therein, . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." (Acts 17:24, 26; emphasis added.) President Harold B. Lee explained:

Those born to the lineage of Jacob, who was later to be called Israel, and his posterity, who were known as the children of Israel, were born into the most illustrious lineage of any of those who came upon the earth as mortal beings. All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth [life] was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here?<#>7

Who are we, then? President Lee answered:

You are all the sons and daughters of God. Your spirits were created and lived as organized intelligences before the world was. You have been blessed to have a physical body because of your obedience to certain commandments in that premortal state. You are now born into a family to which you have come, into the nations through which you have come, as a reward for the kind of lives you lived before you came here and at a time in the world's history, as the Apostle Paul taught the men of Athens and as the Lord revealed to Moses, determined by the faithfulness of each of those who lived before this world was created.<#>8

And yet the Latter-day Saints believe that coming to earth through a peculiar lineage involves much more than boasting of a blessing; it entails bearing a burden. "Once we know who we are," Russell M. Nelson said, "and the royal lineage of which we are a part, our actions and directions in life will be more appropriate to our inheritance."<#>9 Years ago a wise man wrote of the burdens of chosenness and of why it is that God had selected a particular people as his own. "A man will rise and demand," he suggested, "`By what right does God choose one race or people above another?'"

I like that form of the question. It is much better than asking by what right God degrades one people beneath another, although that is implied. God's grading is always upward. If he raises up a nation, it is that other nations may be raised up through its ministry. If he exalts a great man, an apostle of liberty or science or faith, it is that He might raise a degraded people to a better condition. The divine selection is not [alone] a prize, a compliment paid to the man or the race—it is a burden imposed. To appoint a chosen people is not a pandering to the racial vanity of a "superior people"; it is a yoke bound upon the necks of those who are chosen for a special service.

In short, God "hath made [Israel] great for what He is going to make [Israel] do."<#>10

ISRAEL IN MORTALITY: THE SCATTERING AND GATHERING

As we pointed out in a previous chapter, those of Israel who follow the Light of Christ in this life will be led eventually to the higher light of the Holy Ghost and will come to know the Lord and come unto him. Latter-day Saints teach that in time those who follow this course come to know of their noble heritage and of the royal blood that flows within their veins. They come to earth with a predisposition to receive the truth, with an inner attraction to the message of the gospel. "My sheep hear my voice," the Master said, "and I know them, and they follow me." (John 10:27.) Those chosen to come to the earth through the favored lineage "are especially endowed at birth with spiritual talents. It is easier for them to believe the gospel than it is for the generality of mankind. Every living soul comes into this world with sufficient talent to believe and be saved, but the Lord's sheep, as a reward for their devotion when they dwelt in his presence, enjoy greater spiritual endowments than their fellows."<#>11 "The blood of Israel has flowed in the veins of the children of men," Wilford Woodruff, the fourth LDS president declared, "mixed among the Gentile nations, and when they have heard the sound of the Gospel of Christ it has been like vivid lightning to them; it has opened their understandings, enlarged their minds, and enabled them to see the things of God. They have been born of the Spirit, and then they could behold the kingdom of God."<#>12

And yet chosenness implies a succession of choices. Those who became Israel before the world was, those who were called in that pristine existence, must exercise wisdom and prudence and discernment in this life before they become truly chosen to enjoy certain privileges hereafter. LDS scriptures thus teach that "there are many called, but few are chosen." (D&C 121:34.) "This suggests," Harold B. Lee explained, "that even though we have our free agency here, there are many who were foreordained before the world was, to a greater state than they have prepared themselves for here. Even though they might have been among the noble and great, from among whom the Father declared he would make his chosen leaders, they may fail of that calling here in mortality."<#>13 And so the vivid reality is that lineage and ancestry alone do not qualify one for a divine family inheritance. To use Paul's language, "they are not all Israel, which are of Israel: neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children." (Rom. 9:6-7.) In fact, as a Book of Mormon prophet reminded his readers, only those who receive the gospel and commit themselves by obedience and continued faithfulness to the Mediator of that covenant are really covenant people. "As many of the Gentiles as will repent are the covenant people of the Lord," he said, "and as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be cast off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his Son, who is the Holy One of Israel." (2 Ne. 30:2.)

Both the Old Testament and the Book of Mormon set forth in consistent detail the reasons why over the generations Israel has been scattered and how it is they are to be gathered. Speaking on behalf of Jehovah, Moses warned ancient Israel that if they should reject their God, they would be scattered among the nations, dispersed among the Gentiles. "If thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God," he said, "to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day [you will be] removed into all the kingdoms of the earth. . . . And ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess it. And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known." (Deut. 28:15, 25, 63-64.) The Lord spoke in a similar vein through Jeremiah centuries later: "Because your fathers have forsaken me, saith the Lord, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law; and ye have done worse than your fathers; . . . therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know not, . . . where I will not shew you favour." (Jer. 16:11-13.) The people of God became scattered—alienated from Jehovah and the ways of righteousness, lost as to their identity as covenant representatives, and displaced from the lands set aside for their inheritance—because they forsook the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and partook of the worship and ways of unholy men.

Though Israel is generally scattered because of her apostasy, the Latter-day Saints also believe that the Lord scatters certain branches of his chosen people throughout the earth in order to accomplish his purposes—to spread the blood and influence of Abraham throughout the globe. (See Book of Mormon, 1 Ne. 17:36-38; 21:1; 2 Ne. 10:20-22.) Through this means eventually all the families of the earth will be blessed—either through being of the blood of Abraham themselves, or through being ministered to by the blood of Abraham—with the right to the gospel, the priesthood, and eternal life. (See Pearl of Great Price, Abr. 2:8-11.)

On the other hand, the gathering of Israel is accomplished through repentance and turning to the Lord. Individuals were gathered in ancient days when they aligned themselves with the people of God, with those who practiced the religion of Jehovah and received the ordinances of salvation. They were gathered when they gained a sense of covenant identity, when they came to know who they were and whose they were. They were gathered when they congregated with the Former-day Saints, when they settled on those lands that were designated as promised lands—lands set apart as sacred sites for people of promise. The hope of the chosen people from Adam to Jacob, and the longing of the house of Israel from Joseph to Malachi, was to be reunited with their God and to enjoy fellowship with those of the household of faith. "But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob," Isaiah recorded, "and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine."

When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour. . . . Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west; I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth. (Isa. 43:1-6.)

"Ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel," Isaiah declared. (Isa. 27:12.) The call to the dispersed of Israel has been and ever will be the same: "Turn, O backsliding children, saith the Lord, for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion." (Jer. 3:14.) That is to say, Latter-day Saints teach that gathering is accomplished through individual conversion, through faith, repentance, baptism, reception of the Holy Ghost, and the acceptance of and obedience to the ordinances of the holy temple.

Indeed, the Old Testament and Book of Mormon prophets longed for the day when the scattered remnants of Israel—those lost as to their identity and lost as to their relationship with the true Messiah and his church and kingdom—would be a part of a work that would cause all former gatherings to pale into insignificance. "Therefore, behold," Jeremiah recorded, "the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them." And how is such a phenomenal gathering to be accomplished? "Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks." (Jer. 16:14-16.) Latter-day Saints sense that through the great missionary work of the Church, they seek and teach and baptize and thereby gather the strangers home.

The crowning tie to Israel, however, comes only by the worthy reception of the blessings of the temple, through being endowed and sealed in family units. (See D&C 131:1-4.) "What was the [ultimate] object," Joseph Smith asked, "of gathering the Jews, or the people of God, in any age of the world?" He then answered: "The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose."<#>14 "Missionary work," Russell M. Nelson observed, "is only the beginning" to the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. "The fulfillment, the consummation, of these blessings comes as those who have entered the waters of baptism perfect their lives to the point that they may enter the holy temple. Receiving an endowment there seals members of the Church to the Abrahamic Covenant."<#>15

THE CALL OF A MODERN ABRAHAM

In September of 1823 the angel Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith. "This messenger proclaimed himself," Joseph wrote, "to be an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign. I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation."<#>16 The early leaders of the LDS Church taught that Joseph Smith was a descendant of Abraham. (See D&C 86:8-10; 124:58; 132:31, 49.) By lineage he had a right to the priesthood, the gospel, and eternal life. (See Pearl of Great Price, Abr. 2:8-11.)

One of the most fascinating parts of LDS theology follows on the heels of the above: what is true in regard to Joseph Smith's lineage—his right to the priesthood and the gospel, and his duty in regard to the salvation of the world—is equally true for all others who receive the covenant gospel and the sacraments or ordinances of salvation. A modern revelation thus speaks of the Latter-day Saints as "a remnant of Jacob, and those who are heirs according to the covenant." (D&C 52:2.) "Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion," Isaiah recorded; "put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city." (Isa. 52:1.) Joseph Smith recorded the following commentary: Jehovah "had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost." (D&C 113:8.) The Lord encouraged Israel through Isaiah to shake herself from the dust and loose herself from the bands about her neck. (Isa. 52:2.) That is, "the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation." In so doing, Israel rids herself of "the curses of God upon her," her "scattered condition among the Gentiles." (D&C 113:10.)

Mormons believe that Joseph Smith became a "father of the faithful" to those of this dispensation, the means by which the chosen people could be identified, gathered, organized as family units, and sealed forevermore into the house of Israel to their God. Joseph Smith explained that on April 3, 1836, Moses appeared in the temple in Kirtland, Ohio, and restored the keys (directing power) of the gathering of Israel. A messenger named Elias then committed unto Joseph and Oliver Cowdery the "dispensation of the gospel of Abraham," making it possible that through those first elders all generations after them would be blessed. (Compare Gen. 17:1-7.) That is, Elias restored the power necessary to organize eternal family units through the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. Joseph Smith said that Elijah then appeared and restored the power to bind and seal those family units for eternity, as well as the power to legitimize all priesthood sacraments and give them efficacy, virtue, and force in and after the resurrection. (D&C 110:11-15.)

THE FUTURE

Latter-day Saints believe that the gathering of Israel entails more than a movement of Jews to the Holy Land. From an LDS perspective, the Jews are indeed God's chosen people, but they are only one branch of many branches of the whole house of Israel. The LDS prophetic picture is one of increased numbers of people joining the Church and thus coming into the covenant, a gathering of more and more of Abraham's descendants—who are scattered throughout the world—unto the God of their fathers. What the Book of Mormon calls "the work of the Father"—the work of gathering Israel into the fold—though begun in the early nineteenth century, will continue into and through the Millennium. In that glorious era of peace and righteousness, the dispersed of Israel will receive the message of truth, traverse the "highway of righteousness" (Isa. 35:8) into the true fold, and take their place beside their kinsmen in the household of faith. Truly, "such of the gathering of Israel as has come to pass so far is but the gleam of a star that soon will be hidden by the splendor of the sun in full blaze; truly, the magnitude and grandeur and glory of the gathering is yet to be."<#>17

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints declares that the prophecy of Jeremiah, partially fulfilled in the coming of Jesus to earth, will have its ultimate realization in the Millennium. "Behold," Jeremiah wrote, "the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:"

Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:

But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. (Jer. 31:31-34.)

1 "Israel, the Mormons, and the Land," in Reflections on Mormonism, ed. Truman G. Madsen (Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1978), pp. 91-92.

2 Ibid., p. 81.

3 The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81), 1:23; emphasis added).

4 Teachings, p. 365.

5 The Life Before (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 144.

6 "The Three Degrees of Glory," in Melvin J. Ballard: Crusader for Righteousness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), pp. 218-19.

7 Conference Report, October 1973, pp. 7-8.

8 Ibid., p. 7.

9 "Thanks for the Covenant," 1988-89 BYU Devotional Speeches of the Year (Provo: BYU Publications, 1989), p. 59.

10 W. J. Cameron, "Is There a Chosen People?" in James H. Anderson, God's Covenant Race (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 300-302.

11 McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 34.

12 Journal of Discourses 15:11.

13 Conference Report, October 1973, p. 7.

14 Teachings, pp. 307-8; emphasis added.

15 "Thanks for the Covenant," p. 59.

16 History of the Church 4:536-37.

17 Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah: The Second Coming of the Son of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), p. 196.
