Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

REASON, REVELATION, AND THE DEVOTIONAL LIFE

One of the purposes of this life is to continue our growth toward God and godliness. In doing so, men and women are expected to use their heart, might, mind, and strength. The Almighty is to be approached and served through the intelligent application of divine truths, through a mature cultivation of both mind and heart, through reason and revelation.

SPIRITUALITY

For Joseph Smith, spirituality was a state of being, a condition achieved through the merging of the temporal and the spiritual, the finite and the infinite. Spirituality was essentially the result of a righteous life coupled with heightened perspective, an increased sensitivity to the things of God among men. To possess spirituality was to recognize that in the end all things are spiritual and that God has never given a purely temporal (time-bound or temporary) command or directive. In this sense, the Latter-day Saints seek to reconcile the irreconcilable. Indeed, the growth and spread of the Church may be attributed largely to what some might consider to be competing or contradictory processes: (1) constancy and adherence to "the ancient order of things"; and (2) development and change, according to needs and circumstances. The LDS faith may thus be characterized as a religious culture with both static and dynamic, priestly and prophetic elements, a movement acclimated to both conservative and progressive postures. Joseph Smith held tenaciously to and grounded his people in what he believed to be the particular beliefs and rites of both ancient Israel and first-century Christianity. At the same time, because of their belief in modern and continuing revelation, the LDS people have sought for and welcomed new developments and changes as such have seemed essential to the perpetuity of the Saints' vision of the holy city.

Spirituality consisted of tying the heavens to the earth, imbuing man with the powers of God, and thereby elevating society. Such a change in one's nature was to be undertaken "in the world," amid the throes of spiritual opposition; one need not resort to monasticism in order to come out of the world. It was to be accomplished by every man and woman, not just priest or minister, "for God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve [Apostles], and even the least saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them."<#>1 Brigham Young spoke of Joseph Smith's ability to communicate spiritual matters:

When I saw Joseph Smith, he took heaven, figuratively speaking, and brought it down to earth; and he took earth, brought it up, and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God. The excellency of the glory of the character of Brother Joseph Smith was that he could reduce heavenly things to the understanding of the finite. When he preached to the people—revealed the things of God, the will of God, the plan of salvation, the purposes of Jehovah, the relation in which we stand to Him and all the heavenly things—he reduced his teachings to the capacity of every man, woman, and child, making them as plain as a well-defined pathway. . . .

When you hear a man pour out eternal things, how [good] you feel! To what nearness you seem to be brought to God! What a delight it was to hear Brother Joseph talk upon the great principles of eternity!<#>2

David O. McKay, ninth president of the LDS Church, explained that spirituality is "the consciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the Infinite. Spirituality impels one to conquer difficulties and acquire more and more strength. To feel one's faculties unfolding and truth expanding the soul is one of life's sublimest experiences."<#>3 This statement is a distillation expression characterizing an LDS view of the spiritual and contemplative life. Mormons believe that men and women are literally the spirit children of God the Father, that God is in reality an exalted man, a Man of Holiness, and that men and women are thus of the same species as their Creator. Men and women are to pray to their Maker as "Our Father in heaven" and mean what they pray.

Latter-day Saints believe that "communion with the Infinite" is to be accomplished most often through personal prayer. Members of the faith are encouraged to pray on their knees morning and night, and in their hearts at other times throughout the day. They are instructed to pray to the Father, in the name of the Son, by the power of the Holy Ghost. Joseph Smith himself taught and demonstrated that prayers should be simple and direct, never ostentatious or delivered for any reason other than to communicate with and petition one's God. One member of the Church recalled, "Speaking about praying to our Father in heaven, I once heard Joseph Smith remark, `Be plain and simple, and ask for what you want, just like you would go to a neighbor and say, I want to borrow your horse to go to the mill.'"<#>4 Earnest and sincere prayers are rewarded. "The Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith." (D&C 42:14.)

REASON AND REVELATION

From the time of his First Vision in the spring of 1820 until the time of his death, Joseph Smith declared that revelation is essential to the highest of eternal opportunities: "Salvation cannot come without revelation; it is vain for anyone to minister without it."<#>5 Joseph stressed that revelation—communion with the Almighty—is as essential to individual growth and salvation as it is to institutional growth and perpetuation: "No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator."<#>6

On the relationship between our rational faculties—the power of reason—and our spiritual capacities—the place of revelation—a modern apostle, Dallin H. Oaks, has written, "Reason is a thinking process using facts and logic that can be communicated to another person and tested by objective (that is, measurable) criteria. Revelation is communication from God to man. It cannot be defined and tested like reason. Reason involves thinking and demonstrating. Revelation involves hearing or seeing or understanding or feeling. Reason is potentially public. Revelation is invariably personal." Then, in stressing the innate limitations upon reason, he continued, "Despite the importance of study and reason, if we seek to learn of the things of God solely by this method, we are certain to stop short of our goal. We may even wind up at the wrong destination. Why is this so? On this subject God has prescribed the primacy of another method. To learn the things of God, what we need is not more study and reason, not more scholarship and technology, but more faith and revelation."<#>7

For the Latter-day Saints, however, revelation does not represent a mystical distancing of oneself from reality, a transcendental separation of one's reason from the receipt of a revelation. The will of God is meant to be understood and to be as satisfying to the mind as it is soothing to the heart. Latter-day Saints are never instructed to give themselves wholly to feelings any more than they are instructed to surrender all thought. In a revelation given to Joseph Smith and an early Church leader, Oliver Cowdery, in April of 1829, are found these words: "Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart." (D&C 8:2.) Joseph F. McConkie, a professor of religion at Brigham Young University, has commented on this passage:

We observe that neither [Oliver Cowdery] nor Joseph was to experience any suspension of their natural faculties in the process of obtaining revelation. Quite to the contrary, their hearts and minds were to be the very media through which the revelation came. Prophets are not hollow shells through which the voice of the Lord echoes, nor are they mechanical recording devices; prophets are men of passion, feeling, intellect. One does not suspend agency, mind, or spirit in the service of God. It is . . . with heart, might, mind and strength that we have been asked to serve, and in nothing is this more apparent than the receiving of revelation. There is no mindless worship or service in the kingdom of heaven.<#>8

Frequently members of the LDS Church are encouraged by their leaders to utilize a pattern for revelation in the resolution of personal problems—they are to study out the alternatives, make an intelligent choice, and then present the same to God in prayer for his confirmation or rejection. (See D&C 9:7-9.)

Latter-day Saints believe that faith has its own type of discipline. Some things that are obvious to the faithful sound like the gibberish of alien tongues to the faithless. The discipline of faith, the concentrated and consecrated effort to become single to God, has its own reward, a reward that includes the expansion of the mind. Those who follow such discipline come to be filled with light and are able in time to "comprehend all things." (D&C 88:67.) It is worth considering the words of a revelation given in Kirtland, Ohio. The early Saints were told: "As all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.) We note that the counsel to seek learning out of the best books is prefaced by the negative clause, "As all have not faith . . ." One wonders whether what was not intended was something like the following: Since all do not have sufficient faith—have not "matured in their religious convictions"<#>9 to learn by any other means—then they must seek learning by study, through the use of the rational processes. Perhaps learning by studying from the best books would then be greatly enhanced by revelation. Latter-day Saints believe that honest truth seekers may learn things in this way that they could not know otherwise. This may be what Joseph Smith meant when he taught that "the best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching."<#>10 It is surely in this same context that another of the Prophet's famous yet little-understood statements finds meaning: "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes," he declared, "you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject" of life after death.<#>11 "I believe in study," Marion G. Romney, a member of the Church's First Presidency for many years, stated. "I believe that men learn much through study. As a matter of fact, it has been my observation that they learn little concerning things as they are, as they were, or as they are to come without study. I also believe, however, and know, that learning by study is greatly accelerated by faith."<#>12

Harold B. Lee, eleventh president of the Church, expressed the following to Brigham Young University students just weeks before his death in 1973: "The acquiring of knowledge by faith is no easy road to learning. It will demand strenuous effort and continual striving by faith. In short, learning by faith is no task for a lazy man. Someone has said, in effect, that `such a process requires the bending of the whole soul, the calling up from the depths of the human mind and linking the person with God. The right connection must be formed; then only comes knowledge by faith, a kind of knowledge that goes beyond secular learning, that reaches into the realms of the unknown and makes those who follow that course great in the sight of the Lord.'"<#>13 On another occasion, President Lee taught that "learning by faith requires the bending of the whole soul through worthy living to become attuned to the Holy Spirit of the Lord, the calling up from the depths of one's own mental searching, and the linking of our own efforts to receive the true witness of the Spirit."<#>14

GROWING IN SPIRITUAL GRACES

Latter-day Saints believe that the most universal form of revelation is what they call the Light of Christ. The Light of Christ is a light that dwells within every person born into this world. (John 1:9; D&C 84:46-47.) In a sense the Light of Christ might be viewed as light along a grand continuum. On one end of this continuum (the "less refined" realm) is the light of the sun, moon, and stars, the physical light that allows us to see and live and function, as well as the light that constitutes the laws and powers of nature by which order in the cosmos is maintained. On the other end of the continuum (the "more refined" realm) are the revelatory, cleansing, and regenerating powers of the Spirit. This Light of Christ therefore has both natural and redemptive functions—it is the source of light for photosynthesis, the source of light for instinct in animals, and the source of reason, understanding, innate moral awareness, and revelation in men and women.<#>15

One Church leader has explained:

As part of life itself, all mortals are endowed with a heavenly gift called the light of Christ. This divine endowment manifests to us the difference between good and evil. We do not need to be taught what is right and wrong. This knowledge is bred in our bones; it is hereditary; it is innate, inborn, and intuitional in nature. Call it conscience, if you will; say that it is a divine inheritance from a Divine Parent; identify it as a spark of divinity sent by Deity to fire the soul with the flames of righteousness. . . .

The light of Christ, conforming to the will of that God whose influence and spirit it is, dwells in the hearts of all men. If it were not present, life would cease, for it is the light of life as that life comes from God. It is the instrumentality and agency by which Deity keeps in touch and communes with all his children, both the righteous and the wicked. It has an edifying, enlightening, and uplifting influence on men. . . .

It is the means by which the Lord invites and entices all men to improve their lot and to come unto him and receive his gospel. It is the agency through which the Lord strives with men, through which he encourages them to forsake the world and come unto Christ, through which good desires and feelings are planted in the hearts of decent people. It is the medium of intelligence that guides inventors, scientists, artists, composers, poets, authors, statesmen, philosophers, generals, leaders, and influential men in general, when they set their hands to do that which is for the benefit and blessing of their fellowmen. By it the Lord guides in the affairs of men and directs the courses of nations and kingdoms.<#>16

Again, all men and women are entitled to the Light of Christ. Those who hearken to the voice of conscience, who earnestly seek to be true to moral values, will be led to the greater light of the Holy Ghost—the right to a more intense and constant instruction and sanctifying power—within the covenant gospel, either in this life or the next.<#>17

Jesus instructed his disciples after his resurrection, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:15-18.) The Latter-day Saints believe that one of the signs of Christ's Church is the gifts of the Spirit, those wonders and miracles that characterized the faithful in generations past. "We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, and so forth." (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:7.) Latter-day Saints believe that whenever the powers and truths of salvation are on earth, then the signs of the faith—so clearly discussed in the New Testament (1 Cor. 12)—follow naturally. Faith itself is not established by miracles or physical evidence alone, but signs follow those that believe. (See D&C 63:7-12.)

Though it is true that members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe strongly in miracles and in God's ability to heal and lift and strengthen through spiritual gifts, yet they are cautious as to the visibility of the gifts. They sense that sacred matters are to be spoken of and participated in reverently and without fanfare. It is thus the case that while tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints will express an intense faith in spiritual gifts and the working of miracles—many of these same people testifying that they have thereby been the recipient of God's mercy and healing grace—they are cautious about sensationalism and sensitive about public display or advertisement.

Paul taught that the things of God can be discerned and known only by the Spirit of God. (1 Cor. 2:11-14.) "Nothing is a greater injury to the children of men," Joseph Smith said, "than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God."<#>18 The powers of God ought to bring honor and glory to God, and thus any action that detracts from the divine dignity of the Almighty is suspect. There is "nothing indecorous" in the doings of God, and that "there is nothing unnatural in the Spirit of God."<#>19

Both the Book of Mormon (Moroni 10) and the Doctrine and Covenants (section 46) provide listings of the gifts of the Spirit. Both stress, with the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 12), that these gifts are provided by God as a reward to the faithful, a blessing to the believers, that they are as parts of the body of Christ, all of which are essential to a functioning and dynamic church. In addition, they are given to help members of the body of Christ avoid deception:

Beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given;

For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts.

And again, verily I say unto you, I would that ye should always remember, and always retain in your minds what those gifts are, that are given unto the church.

For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God.

To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby.

Then follows the recitation of such gifts as the testimony of Jesus, the gifts of administration, wisdom, knowledge, faith to be healed, faith to heal, miracles, prophecy, discernment, tongues, and the interpretation of tongues. (D&C 46:8-25; compare Book of Mormon, Moro. 10:8-18.)

The Latter-day Saints are taught to purify their hearts and minds of all duplicity or double-mindedness; to consecrate and prioritize their lives in such a way that they are not seduced by worldly attachments that too often dilute their Christian discipleship; and to avoid moral pollution, harshness, crudeness, or any such thing that would desensitize them to matters of eternal worth. Further, they are instructed to pray with all the energy of their hearts to be endowed with the gifts of the Spirit and the fruit of the Spirit—"love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." That is, they are counseled regularly to "live in the Spirit," that they might thereby "walk in the Spirit." (Gal. 5:22-23, 25; compare Book of Mormon, Moro. 7:48.)

Joseph Smith taught that one of the greatest revelations a man or woman could receive was the peaceful assurance that the tests in mortality had been passed, that the Lord was pleased with one's performance in life, and that exaltation—the glory and life associated with the highest heaven hereafter—was a reality. To receive such an assurance was to receive the promise of eternal life.<#>20 Traditional Protestant Christians speak of "being saved" at the time they accept Jesus Christ as Savior. Similarly, the Latter-day Saints believe that receiving a testimony that God is our Father and Jesus is the Christ is fundamental and foundational to one's faith. But the quest for righteousness through Christian service, relying upon the mercy and grace of Jesus, allows people to know, through the peaceful presence and comfort of the Holy Spirit throughout their lives, that they are on course, in covenant, and that the Lord is pleased. "It is present salvation and the present influence of the Holy Ghost that we need every day to keep us on saving ground," Brigham Young declared.

When an individual refuses to comply with the further requirements of heaven, then . . . his former righteousness departs from him, and is not accounted to him for righteousness: but if he had continued in righteousness and obedience to the requirements of heaven, he is saved all the time, through baptism, the laying on of hands, and obeying the commandments of the Lord and all that is required of him by the heavens—the living oracles. He is saved now, next week, next year, and continually, and is prepared for the celestial kingdom of God whenever the time comes for him to inherit it.

I want present salvation. I preach, comparatively, but little about the eternities and Gods, and their wonderful works in eternity; and do not tell who first made them, nor how they were made; for I know nothing about that. Life is for us, and it is for us to receive today, and not wait for the millennium. Let us take a course to be saved today, and, when evening comes, review the acts of the day, repent of our sins, if we have any to repent of, and say our prayers; then we can lie down and sleep in peace until the morning, arise with gratitude to God, commence the labours of another day, and strive to live the whole day to God and nobody else.<#>21

Devoting oneself to the service of God and the blessing of mankind entails yielding one's heart unto God and consecrating one's faculties to higher ideals. Spirituality thus becomes a process, a focused journey from the finite to the infinite, but a journey whose sublime by-products are worth the struggle. As Joseph Smith stated:

We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him.<#>22

1 Teachings, p. 149.

2 A combined expression of Brigham Young from three separate addresses; in Journal of Discourses 4:54; 5:332; 8:206.

3 Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: The Improvement Era, 1953), p. 390.

4 As cited in They Knew the Prophet, compiled by Hyrum L. and Helen Mae Andrus (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974), p. 100.

5 Teachings, p. 160.

6 Ibid., p. 328.

7 The Lord's Way (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), pp. 16-17, 19.

8 "The Principle of Revelation," in Studies in Scripture Vol. 1: The Doctrine and Covenants, edited by Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), p. 83.

9 B. H. Roberts, as cited by Harold B. Lee in Conference Report, April 1968, p. 129.

10 Teachings, p. 191.

11 Ibid., p. 324.

12 Learning for the Eternities (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), p. 72; emphasis added.

13 "Be Loyal to the Royal within You," 1973 BYU Speeches of the Year (Provo: BYU Publications, 1974), p. 91.

14 Conference Report, April 1971, p. 94; emphasis added.

15 See Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 1978 ed., p. 25; Charles W. Penrose, Journal of Discourses 26:21-23; Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, April 1977, pp. 59-63; Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, pp. 45, 70, 257-59, 309.

16 Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, pp. 45, 258-59.

17 See D&C 84:47-48; Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 67-68.

18 Teachings, p. 205.

19 Ibid., pp. 209, 214.

20 See 2 Pet. 1; see also Teachings, pp. 149-51, 298-301.

21 Journal of Discourses 8:124-25; emphasis added.

22 Teachings, p. 51.
