Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

THE GOOD LIFE

Up to this point we have dealt almost exclusively with LDS theology. In this chapter we will comment briefly on some of the more visible aspects of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, about the lifestyle and fruits of the faith.

ETHICS FLOW FROM THEOLOGY

The Latter-day Saints do not believe that their actions in society, and any good that may come from Christian labors, can be separated from their doctrine. To begin with, Latter-day Saints believe that a people cannot really be built upon Christ's gospel if they do not believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ. Those who labor tirelessly to lighten burdens or alleviate human suffering, but at the same time deny the fact that Jesus Christ is God, cannot have the lasting impact on society that they could have through drawing upon those spiritual forces that center in the Lord. Those in our day who focus endlessly on the moral teachings of Jesus but who downplay the divine Sonship miss the mark.

For some people, Jesus stands as the preeminent example of kindness, the ultimate illustration of social and interpersonal graciousness and morality. A favorite text for this group is the Sermon on the Mount, while their highest aspiration is the call to live the Golden Rule. A Roman Catholic philosopher has observed, "According to the theological liberal, [the Sermon on the Mount] is the essence of Christianity, and Christ is the best of human teachers and examples. . . . Christianity is essentially ethics. What's missing here?" he asks. "Simply, the essence of Christianity, which is not the Sermon on the Mount. When Christianity was proclaimed throughout the world, the proclamation (kerygma) was not `Love your enemies!' but `Christ is risen!' This was not a new ideal but a new event, that God became man, died, and rose for our salvation. Christianity is first of all not ideal but real, an event, news, the gospel, the `good news.' The essence of Christianity is not Christianity; the essence of Christianity is Christ."<#>1

For many, the doctrine of Christ has been replaced by the ethics of Jesus. Those who insist that ethics must be taught or stressed point toward the declining moral standards of our day, the increase of drug abuse or teenage pregnancy, the prevalence of our inhumanity to each other. They contend that if Christianity is to make a difference in the world, we must find ways to transform ethereal theology into religious practice in a decaying society. They thus seek to promote a social gospel, a relevant religion. The problem with a social gospel, for the Latter-day Saints, is that it is inherently deficient as far as engaging the real problems of human beings. It almost always focuses on symptoms rather than causes. Ethics is not the essence of the gospel. Ethics is not necessarily righteousness. The very word ethics has come to connote socially acceptable standards based on current consensus, as opposed to absolute truths based on God's eternal laws. Ethics is too often to virtue and righteousness what theology is to religion—a pale and powerless substitute. Indeed, ethics without the virtue that comes through the cleansing powers of the Redeemer is like religion without God, at least the true and living God.

"It is one thing," Bruce R. McConkie has written, "to teach ethical principles, quite another to proclaim the great doctrinal verities, which are the foundation of true Christianity and out of which eternal salvation comes. True it is that salvation is limited to those in whose souls the ethical principles abound, but true it is also that Christian ethics, in the full and saving sense, automatically become a part of the lives of those who first believe Christian doctrines." In summary, "It is only when gospel ethics are tied to gospel doctrines that they rest on a sure and enduring foundation and gain full operation in the lives of the saints."<#>2 The Latter-day Saints are occasionally criticized for expending so much of the resources of the Church on missionary work or the construction of temples. Some say that the institutional Church should be more involved in leading or officially supporting this or that crusade, in laboring for this or that social cause. "Where is your charity?" they ask. "Of what avail are your noble theological principles?"

I agree with Bruce Hafen, who pointed out, "The ultimate purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ is to cause the sons and daughters of God to become as Christ is. Those who see religious purpose only in terms of ethical service in the relationship between man and fellowmen may miss that divinely ordained possibility. It is quite possible to render charitable—even `Christian'—service without developing deeply ingrained and permanent Christlike character. Paul understood this when he warned against giving all one's goods to feed the poor without charity. . . . While religious philosophies whose highest aim is social relevance may do much good, they will not ultimately lead people to achieve the highest religious purpose, which is to become as God and Christ are."<#>3 Latter-day Saints believe that when people have been true to their trusts and live worthy of the gifts and influence of the Holy Ghost, then the works of the Father—the works of righteousness, the actions and behaviors of the faithful, including deeds of Christian service—flow forth from regenerate hearts. Those works are not just the works of mortals but rather the doings of people who have become new creatures in Christ. Their works are therefore the works of the Lord, for they have been motivated by the power of his Spirit. To the Philippian Saints the Apostle Paul beckoned, "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." (Philip. 2:12-13; emphasis added.)

In short, Latter-day Saints believe that only when ethical behaviors are founded on theology will the change in individuals and society be lasting. As a modern apostle observed, "True doctrine, understood, changes attitudes and behavior. The study of the doctrines of the gospel will improve behavior quicker than a study of behavior will improve behavior. Pre-occupation with unworthy behavior can lead to unworthy behavior. That is why we stress so forcefully the study of the doctrines of the gospel."<#>4

FRUITS OF THE FAITH

Like members of all churches, the Latter-day Saints try their best to live their religion but fall short occasionally. They teach and reach toward the ideal, but the ideal is still, with many, an unblemished reality. Nevertheless, some things do seem to work.

Focus on Families. For one thing, the LDS belief in the plan of salvation puts tremendous stress upon the family as the most important unit in time or eternity. Families, not classes, are saved and exalted. Families, not church groups, are saved. "The home is the basis of a righteous life, and no other instrumentality can take its place, nor fulfill its essential functions."<#>5 Neal A. Maxwell, a modern Church leader warned the Latter-day Saints that "healthy, traditional families are becoming an endangered species! Perhaps, one day, families may even rank with the threatened spotted owl in effective attention given!" He continued:

When parents fail to transmit testimony and theology along with decency, those families are only one generation from serious spiritual decline, having lost their savor. [See Matt. 5:13. The law of the harvest [see Gal. 6:7-8] is nowhere more in evidence and nowhere more relentless than in family gardens!. . .

Society should focus anew on the headwaters—the family—where values can be taught, lived, experienced, and perpetuated. Otherwise, brothers and sisters, we will witness even more widespread flooding downstream, featuring even more corruption and violence (see Gen. 6:11-12; Matt. 24:37). . . .

As the number of dysfunctional families increases, their failures will spill into already burdened schools and streets. It is not a pretty scene even now.

Nations in which traditional idealism gives way to modern cynicism will forfeit the blessings of heaven, which they so urgently need, and such nations will also lose legitimacy in the eyes of their citizens.<#>6

Anticipating attacks on the family, in the 1960s a general directive from Church headquarters asked that Monday evenings be set aside by all members for family home evening. No church meetings or group activities were to be scheduled. The family home evening is to be a time for gospel instruction as well as social activity. It is a time for the family to put aside work, school, and pressures and focus on the things that matter most—parents and children, fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters. In addition, parents have been encouraged, as mentioned in chapter 8, to read the scriptures and hold regular family devotionals, pray, and communicate meaningfully with their children. Family togetherness and family religious observance are intended to instill within the children the need for individual involvement with spiritual things.

To be sure, Mormons struggle to hold their families together, just as do people of other faiths. But on the whole, studies show that LDS young people, especially those who have incorporated the teachings of the Church and the family—those who engage in private religious behavior—are much less prone to delinquency than other youth. The young people studied "appear to have internalized a set of religious values and practices that are related to less frequent participation in delinquent activity in both high and low moral communities. The relationship of religion with delinquency for this population is not entirely a cultural or social phenomenon. The link between religion and delinquency was just as robust in the low-LDS religious climate of the eastern states as it was in the powerful religious environments of Southern California, Idaho, and Utah."<#>7

Marriage and Divorce. Latter-day Saints believe there is a commitment to the marriage union, a commitment to family life, and a commitment to Christian principles that flow from the ennobling concept of the eternal family. Once a couple realizes that their covenant with each other and God is eternal, intended to span the veil of death and transcend time, then they can hardly view one another in quite the same way. Small provocations between marriage partners, for example, seldom result in serious discussions about divorce, inasmuch as marriage and family have been exalted beyond the realm of social dynamics to that of an everlasting religious institution. One sociologist commented:

Mormons are more likely than other groups to marry; they are less likely to divorce; if they do divorce, they are more likely to remarry; and they are likely to bear a larger number of children. On each measure [of the study performed], there is a clearly-defined impact associated with one's religious affiliation. Those with no religion are generally least likely to marry, most likely to divorce if they marry, least likely to remarry following a divorce, and most likely to have the smallest family size. . . . Among Latter-day Saints, differences between temple and nontemple marriages enlarge the differences between frequent and infrequent attenders at religious services. Temple marriages are characterized by lower divorce rates and larger family sizes. Non-temple marriages are almost five times more likely to result in divorce than are temple marriages.<#>8

Education and Religiosity. For some time now, studies have indicated that higher education tends to have a strong negative influence on religiosity. Various explanations have been offered, but perhaps the most popular is the secularizing effect of post-high-school study on one's commitment to the faith. The British physicist Paul Davies observed, "If the church is largely ignored today it is not because science has finally won its age-old battle with religion, but because it has so radically reoriented our society that the biblical perspective of the world now seems largely irrelevant."<#>9 A related explanation posits that "higher education tends to both expand one's horizons and increase exposure to countercultural values. Such exposure works to erode the traditional plausibility structures which maintain the poorly understood religious convictions so typical of American religion. In other words, poorly grounded religious beliefs have simply been unable to stand in the face of challenges generated by modern science and higher education."<#>10

Since their beginnings, the Latter-day Saints have placed tremendous stress on the value of education; it is a religious principle that men and women should strive to gain all of the education and training possible to better themselves and their circumstances in life. Thus for both males and females, the percentage of Latter-day Saints who have completed post-high-school education or training is significantly higher than the nation as a whole. Research demonstrates that 53.5 percent of LDS males have some type of post-high-school education, compared to 36.5 for the U.S. population. For females, 44.3 percent have received some post-high-school education, 27.7 percent for the U.S. population. In addition, the Latter-day Saints defy the long-held thesis concerning higher education and religiosity. Weekly attendance at church for males works as follows: those with only a grade-school education attended 34 percent of the time, while LDS males with post-high-school education attended 80 percent of the meetings. The same results followed in such other areas of religiosity as financial contributions, frequency of personal prayer, and the frequency of personal scripture study. In short, the secularizing influence of higher education does not seem to hold for the Latter-day Saints.<#>11

The Church Welfare Program. In the 1930s and during the time of the Great Depression, many members of the LDS Church found themselves in the same plight as their neighbors. The leader of one of the ecclesiastical units in Salt Lake City found, for example, that of the 7,300 people under his care, 4,800 were receiving some form of government welfare assistance. The leader, Harold B. Lee (who became the eleventh president of the Church in 1972), with his counselors, set about to establish a program of assistance for the members that would preserve their dignity and allow them to work for what they received. His welfare program was successful, was eventually implemented Churchwide, and he was asked to oversee what came to be known as the Church Welfare Services Program. The primary purpose of the program, as announced by Church leaders in 1936, was "to set up . . . a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift, and self respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be reenthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership."<#>12

As mentioned in chapter 8, members of the Church are asked to pay 10 percent of their income as a tithing. These funds are used to build chapels and temples and to finance missionary service. In addition, members are asked to fast from food and drink (two meals) once per month and then to donate the equivalent cost to a fast offering to be used for the care of the poor. Those in need are expected to exhaust every personal, family, and extended family resource before turning to the Church; having surveyed all options, members should feel no hesitation in seeking temporary assistance from the Church as administered by the local bishop. This use of fast offerings is a vital part of the Church Welfare Program. Further, the Church maintains employment centers, as well as Social Services agencies that deal in foster care, unwed mother care, adoptions, and individual and family counseling. Helping members meet their needs entails more in this complex age than just seeing to a proper diet; social, emotional, occupational, and literacy needs are just as important, and so the Church maintains formal programs to help individuals and families become independent and self-reliant. Finally, it might be observed that through the fast offering program the LDS Church has in the past been able to send tons of supplies—food, clothing, bedding, and so on—to needy people (Mormon and non-Mormon) in such areas as Germany following World War II and, more recently, to many third-world countries.

The Health Code. In 1833 Joseph Smith introduced to the Church what has come to be known as the Word of Wisdom, a health code that the Saints believe has both physical and spiritual benefits. Believing that the body is the temple of God (1 Cor. 3:16-17; 6:19), members are asked to abstain from alcohol, tobacco, harmful drugs, coffee, and tea. Complete observance of the Word of Wisdom is considered requisite for good standing in the Church and admittance into temples. In recent years, studies by cancer experts have shown a significantly lower cancer rate for the Utah population than the U.S. in general. James E. Enstrom, UCLA epidemiologist, conducted a study on 10,000 nonsmokers and nondrinkers. "It illustrates a group of individuals [that] have healthy practice in regard to diet because of the large Mormon population. There is an absence among most of the population [and] alcohol is not consumed. These are factors that are often related to cancer risk."<#>13

Because the body and the spirit are both so critical to the full development of the individual, members believe that spirituality is adversely affected by the consumption of harmful substances. In the revelation on the Word of Wisdom is found this promise: "All saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones; and shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures; and shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint. And I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them." (D&C 89:18-21.)

GROWTH AND THE FUTURE

The LDS Church grew to become an established body of believers by the time of Joseph Smith's death and the exodus across the plains to the Great Basin. As missionary work has intensified, the number of converts has steadily grown to more than 300,000 per year at the time of this writing. As recently as the 1950s the Church was viewed as largely a Western American church; however, congregations are now found in Africa, Asia, the Philippines, Europe, the islands of the Pacific, and in large numbers in Central and South America. Rodney Stark, a noted sociologist of religion, following a serious investigation of patterns of LDS growth, observed, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Mormons, will soon achieve a worldwide following comparable to that of Islam, Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, and the other dominant world faiths. . . . Indeed, today they stand on the threshold of becoming the first major faith to appear on earth since the Prophet Mohammed rode out of the desert." Stark then suggested that a 30-percent growth rate per decade will result in more than 60 million Latter-day Saints by the year 2080. A 50-percent-per-decade growth rate, which is actually lower than the rate each decade since World War II, will result in 265 million Mormons by 2080.<#>14

What are the reasons for such growth? What attracts people generally to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? First of all, many people, weary of moral decline and what they perceive to be an erosion of time-honored values, are drawn to a church and a people who seem to be, as one journalist put it, "a repository of old-fashioned values, an American success story."<#>15 The Latter-day Saints hold to absolute truths concerning God and man, and right and wrong. Second, the Latter-day Saint doctrines concerning God's plan for his children provide answers to such questions as where we came from, why we are here, and where we are going—and these answers appeal to large numbers of men and women who are searching for meaning in life and for answers to the perplexities of our existence. The focus on the family is seen as refreshing and, as we noted above, badly overdue in a world that seems to be drifting rapidly from its moorings.

One aspect of the doctrine of a divine plan—that which deals with heaven and the hereafter—is especially appealing to those who encounter the LDS Church. "Expressions of the eternal nature of love and the hope for heavenly reunion," Colleen McDannell and Bernhard Lang have written, "persist in contemporary Christianity."

Such sentiments, however, are not situated within a theological structure. Hoping to meet one's family after death is a wish and not a theological argument. While most Christian clergy would not deny that wish, contemporary theologians are not interested in articulating the motif of meeting again in theological terms. The motifs of the modern heaven—eternal progress, love, and fluidity between earth and the other world—while acknowledged by pastors in their funeral sermons, are not fundamental to contemporary Christianity. Priests and pastors might tell families that they will meet their loved ones in heaven as a means of consolation, but contemporary thought does not support that belief as it did in the nineteenth century. There is no longer a strong theological commitment.

The major exception to this caveat is the teaching of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whose members are frequently referred to as the Mormons. The modern perspective on heaven—emphasizing the nearness and similarity of the other world to our own and arguing for the eternal nature of love, family, progress, and work—finds its greatest proponent in Latter-day Saints' (LDS) understanding of the afterlife. While most contemporary Christian groups neglect afterlife beliefs, what happens to people after they die is crucial to LDS teachings and rituals. Heavenly theology is the result not of mere speculation, but of revelation given to past and present church leaders. . . .

. . . There has been . . . no alteration of the LDS understanding of the afterlife since its articulation by Joseph Smith. If anything, the Latter-day Saints in the twentieth century have become even bolder in their assertion of the importance of their heavenly theology. . . . In the light of what they perceive as a Christian world which has given up belief in heaven, many Latter-day Saints feel even more of a responsibility to define the meaning of death and eternal life.<#>16

Though it may seem odd at first glance, there is another reason why the Church seems to be growing so rapidly—because of the requirements and the demands it makes upon its members. "Let us here observe," the early Saints were taught, "that a religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation."<#>17 In other words, a religion that does not ask anything of its congregants can promise them little. Easy religion and convenient theology are not satisfying to the soul. People yearn for something to which they can commit themselves completely, something worthy of their devotion and their investment of time, talents, and means. It is worth noting, therefore, that recent studies in the sociology of religion indicate that the religious organizations that are growing the fastest are, ironically, those whose costs of membership—material, social, and spiritual—are greater. The greater the investment in terms of participation and involvement, the greater the sticking power and the attractiveness to the seeker of truth.<#>18

A number of years ago an article appeared in Christianity Today entitled "Why Your Neighbor Joined the Mormon Church." Five reasons were given:

After a brief discussion of each of the above, the author of the article concluded, "In a day when many are hesitant to claim that God has said anything definitive, the Mormons stand out in contrast, and many people are ready to listen to what the Mormons think the voice of God says. It is tragic that their message is false, but it is nonetheless a lesson to us that people are many times ready to hear a voice of authority."<#>19

Jesus taught of the importance of judging things—prophets, for example—by their fruits, by what comes of their ministry and teachings. (Matt. 7:15-20.) It is not the place of this book to argue for the truthfulness of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; rather, this work is intended to inform, to build understanding. I say only that there must be some reason why large numbers of people are coming into the LDS Church. If the Lord is right, evil trees cannot bring forth good fruit. Something is working.

1 Peter Kreeft, Back to Virtue (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1992), p. 83.

2 A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, pp. 699-700.

3 The Broken Heart, pp. 196-97.

4 Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1986, p. 20.

5 David O. McKay, in Family Home Evening Manual (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1965), preface.

6 Conference Report, April 1994, p. 119-22.

7 Bruce A. Chadwick and Brent L. Top, "Religiosity and Delinquency among LDS Adolescents," Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, vol. 32, no. 1, 1993, pp. 51-67; see also Brent L. Top and Bruce A. Chadwick, "The Power of the Word: Religion, Family, Friends, and Delinquent Behavior of LDS Youth," Brigham Young University Studies, vol. 33, no. 2, 1993, pp. 293-310.

8 Stan L. Albrecht, "The Consequential Dimension of Mormon Religiosity," Brigham Young University Studies, vol. 29, no. 2, 1989, pp. 88, 91; see also Stan L. Albrecht and Howard M. Bahr, "Patterns of Religious Disaffiliation: A Study of Lifelong Mormons, Mormon Converts, and Former Mormons," Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, vol. 22, no. 4, 1983, pp. 366-79.

9 God and the New Physics (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983), p. 2.

10 Albrecht, "The Consequential Dimension to Mormon Religiosity," p. 100.

11 See Stan L. Albrecht and Tim B. Heaton, "Secularization, Higher Education, and Religiosity," Review of Religious Research, vol. 26, no. 1, 1984, pp. 49-54.

12 Heber J. Grant, in Conference Report, October 1936, p. 3.

13 As reported in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, December 1989.

14 "The Rise of a New World Faith," Review of Religious Research, vol. 26, no. 1, 1984, pp. 18-23.

15 Peter Steinfels, "Despite Growth, Mormons Find New Hurdles," New York Times, September 15, 1991, D&C 1, p. 1.

16 Heaven: A History (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1988), pp. 313, 322.

17 Lectures on Faith 6:7.

18 See Roger Finke and Rodney Stark, The Churching of America, 1776-1990 (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1992), p. 255.

19 Christianity Today, October 11, 1974, pp. 11-13.
