Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

THE END TIMES

Eschatology, or the study of "end times," is an important dimension of LDS life and theology. What the Latter-day Saints believe about the events to come significantly affects how they now live and conduct their affairs. Without a knowledge of what lies ahead, one cannot have the proper perspective of the overall plan of God to save his children. LDS scriptures are thus filled with references to the last days, to both great and dreadful things that lie ahead. A knowledge of the glories and the trials does much to motivate individuals and congregations to greater fidelity and devotion, to "hold on" to the iron rod, the word of God. The growing fascination in today's world with such phenomena as the Near Death Experience, angels, and miracles attest to our deepest desires to make sense out of what would otherwise be a chaotic existence, a yearning to know that there is a God, that there is life after death, that there is purpose to life's challenges and tragedies.

Latter-day Saints believe that God can and does speak to men and women through inspiration. They believe the Almighty can make his will known for the world through prophets, and that those prophets have the capacity not only to speak for the present but also to predict future occurrences. Mormons therefore accept wholeheartedly the predictive prophecies in the Old and New Testaments, as well as other prophetic oracles that have come subsequently through Joseph Smith and his successors. Prophet leaders have counseled the members of the Church to take a wholesome and sane approach to prophecy, to study and be aware of the prophetic word but to live each day with confidence and conviction that God is in his heavens and will bring to pass his purposes in process of time. Church leaders have therefore counseled against what might be called either eschatomania (an unhealthy obsession with signs of the times) or eschatophobia (an unhealthy fear of what lies ahead).<#>1

THE SECOND COMING

Jesus came to earth as a mortal being in the meridian of time. He taught the gospel, bestowed divine authority, organized the Church, and suffered and died as an infinite atoning sacrifice for the sins of the world. He stated that he would come again, would return, not as the meek and lowly Nazarene but as the Lord of Sabaoth, the Lord of Hosts, the Lord of Armies. His second coming is thus spoken of as his coming "in glory," meaning in his true identity as the God of all creation, the Redeemer and Judge. His second coming is described as both great and dreadful—great for those who have been faithful and therefore look forward to his coming, and dreadful to those who have done despite to the spirit of grace and who therefore hope against hope that he will never return. The Second Coming in glory is in fact "the end of the world," meaning the end of worldliness, the destruction of the wicked. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:4, 31.) At this coming the righteous will be quickened and caught up to meet him, and the earth will be transformed from a fallen orb to a paradisiacal sphere. The wicked will be destroyed by the brightness of the Lord's coming; their spirits will take up a residence in the postmortal spirit world to await the last resurrection at the end of the thousand years. (Rev. 20:4-5; D&C 43:18; 63:17; 76:81; 88:100) The Second Coming in glory will initiate the Millennial reign.

The scriptures speak of the Master returning as "a thief in the night." (1 Thes. 5:2; 2 Pet. 3:10.) It is true that no mortal has known, does now know, or will yet know the precise day of the Lord's Second Advent. This is true for prophets and apostles as well as the rank and file of society and the Church. On the other hand, the people of God are promised that if they are in tune with the Spirit, they can discern the season. The Apostle Paul chose the descriptive analogy of a pregnant woman about to deliver. She may not know the exact hour or day when the birth is to take place, but one thing she knows for sure: it will be soon. It must be soon! The impressions and feelings and signs within her own body so testify. In that day, surely the members of the body of Christ will be pleading for the Lord to deliver the travailing earth, to bring an end to corruption and degradation, to introduce an era of peace and righteousness. And those who give heed to the words of scripture, and especially to the living oracles, will stand as the "children of light, and the children of the day," those who "are not of the night, nor of darkness." (1 Thes. 5:2-5.) In the Doctrine and Covenants is found this admonition: "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief." (D&C 106:4-5; emphasis added.)

When Christ comes in glory, all will know. "Be not deceived," the Master warned in a modern revelation, "but continue in steadfastness, looking forth for the heavens to be shaken, and the earth to tremble and to reel to and fro as a drunken man, and for the valleys to be exalted, and for the mountains to be made low, and for the rough places to become smooth." (D&C 49:23.) "Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him. For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion. And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people; and it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found." (D&C 133:19-22; emphasis added.)

The righteous dead from ages past—those who died true in the faith since the resurrection was initiated in Christ's day—will come with the Savior when he returns in glory. The Prophet Joseph altered a passage in Paul's first epistle to the Thessalonians as follows: "I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that they who are alive at the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent [precede] them who remain unto the coming of the Lord, who are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then they who are alive, shall be caught up together into the clouds with them who remain, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we be ever with the Lord." (Joseph Smith Translation, 1 Thes. 4:13-17.)

Those who are of at least a terrestrial level of righteousness—good and noble men and women—will continue to live as mortals after the Lord returns. The faithful will live to "the age of man"—in the words of Isaiah, the age of one hundred (Isa. 65:20)—and will then pass through death and be changed instantly from mortality to resurrected immortality. "Yea, and blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, . . . when the Lord shall come, and old things shall pass away, and all things become new, they shall rise from the dead and shall not die after, and shall receive an inheritance before the Lord, in the holy city. And he that liveth when the Lord shall come, and hath kept the faith, blessed is he; nevertheless, it is appointed to him to die at the age of man. Wherefore, children shall grow up until they become old"—that is, no longer shall little ones die before the time of accountability; "old men shall die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye." (D&C 63:49-51; see also JST, Isa. 65:20.)

Malachi prophesied that "the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." (Mal. 4:1; compare Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 26:4; D&C 133:64.) The second coming of Christ in glory is a day wherein "every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; and also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth." (D&C 101:24-25; compare 133:41; 2 Pet. 3:10.) Joseph Fielding Smith wrote, "Somebody said, `Brother Smith, do you mean to say that it is going to be literal fire?' I said, `Oh, no, it will not be literal fire any more than it was literal water that covered the earth in the flood.'"<#>2

THE MILLENNIUM

The doctrine of the Latter-day Saints is that the second coming in glory of Jesus Christ ushers in the Millennium. In a sense, the Latter-day Saints might be called premillennialists; the Millennium will not come because men and women on earth have become noble and good, because Christian charity will have spread across the globe and goodwill is the order of the day. The Millennium will not come because technological advances and medical miracles will have extended human life or because peace treaties among warring nations will have soothed injured feelings and eased political tensions. The Millennium will be brought in by power, by the power of him who is the King of kings and Lord of lords. Satan will be bound by power, and the glory of the Millennium will be maintained by the righteousness of those who are permitted to live on earth during that time. (Book of Mormon, 1 Ne. 22:15, 26.)

At the beginning of the Millennium, the earth and all things upon it will be quickened, made alive, and transfigured—lifted to a higher plane for a season. The earth will be transformed from a telestial to a terrestrial glory, to that paradisiacal condition that prevailed in Eden before the Fall. (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:10.) There will indeed be a new heaven and a new earth. (Isa. 65:17; Rev. 21:1.) Further, as Orson Pratt, an early apostle, explained, "All the inhabitants who are spared from this fire [the fire accompanying the glory of Christ at his coming]—those who are not proud, and who do not do wickedly, will be cleansed more fully and filled with the glory of God. A partial change will be wrought upon them, not a change to immortality [which would come after their death and resurrection], . . . but so great will be the change then wrought that the children who are born into the world will grow up without sin unto salvation. Why will this be so? Because that fallen nature, introduced by the fall, and transferred from parents to children, from generation to generation, will be, in a measure, eradicated by this change."<#>3

Latter-day Saints affirm that the "first resurrection" began with the resurrection of Christ. (See Matt. 27:52-53.) All of the prophets and those who gave heed to the words of the prophets, the faithful who lived from the days of Adam to the time of the rise of Jesus from the tomb, came forth with the Master from the dead. (Book of Mormon, Mosiah 15:21-22.) When the Redeemer returns in glory to take charge of affairs on earth, with him will come a host of the righteous dead, men and women who will possess physical, resurrected, immortal bodies. The first resurrection will thereby resume and continue for the period of one thousand years we know as the Millennium. Those who have died true to the faith, those who have lived from the time of Christ's resurrection to the time of his second coming, will come to earth to dwell with their Lord and God. Although men and women who are alive at the time of Christ's second coming will be changed and quickened, they will yet continue to live as mortals until, as we mentioned earlier, they arrive at the "age of man," at which time they will be "changed in the twinkling of an eye," changed instantaneously from mortality to resurrected immortality. (Isa. 65:20; D&C 63:50-51.)

President Brigham Young stated, "If the Latter-day saints think, when the kingdom of God is established on the earth, that all the inhabitants of the earth will join the church called Latter-day Saints, they are egregiously mistaken. I presume there will be as many sects and parties then as now."<#>4 On another occasion he stated, "When Jesus comes to rule and reign King of Nations as he now does King of Saints, the veil of the covering will be taken from all nations, that all flesh may see his glory together, but that will not make them all Saints. Seeing the Lord does not make a man a Saint, seeing an Angel does not make a man a Saint by any means." Brother Brigham then added that the leaders of the nations in that day, "kings and potentates of the nations will come up to Zion to inquire after the ways of the Lord, and to seek out the great knowledge, wisdom, and understanding manifested through the Saints of the Most High. They will inform the people of God that they belong to such and such a Church, and do not wish to change their religion."<#>5 In short, "in the millennium men will have the privilege of being Presbyterians, Methodists or Infidels, but they will not have the privilege of treating the name and character of Deity as they have done heretofore. No, but every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God the Father that Jesus is the Christ."<#>6

The Millennium will be a life without physical pain, premature death, and in general the sorrow that accompanies sin and waywardness, as well as dishonesty and greed. Isaiah declared that in that day "the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their little ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain." (Isa. 11:6-9; compare 65:25.) As described in the Doctrine and Covenants, "in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh"—an animosity, a natural tension and unrest that came as a result of the Fall—"shall cease from before [the Lord's] face." (D&C 101:26.)

Mortals will inhabit the earth, alongside immortals, during the entirety of the thousand years. Men and women who abide the day of the Lord's coming in glory will continue to live on the earth in an Edenic or paradisiacal state. They will labor and study and grow and interact and love and socialize as before, but such things will be undertaken in a totally moral environment. "When the Savior shall appear," Joseph Smith instructed the Latter-day Saints in 1843, "we shall see him as he is. We shall see that he is a man like ourselves. And that same sociality that exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy." (D&C 130:1-2.) Thus, for the Latter-day Saints, eternal life or salvation consists of two things: (1) being fully sanctified and empowered by God, and (2) continuing with the family unit into eternity. (D&C 132:19-20.) The relationships that result in the deepest and most profound love in this life—family relationships—are intended to be eternal.

Isaiah prophesied that people in the Millennium will "build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat." (Isa. 65:21-22.) That is to say, in the Millennium men and women will enjoy the fruits of their labors. In a world where there is no extortion, no bribery, no organized crime, where there are no unjust laws, no class distinctions of men and women according to income or chances for learning, people will no longer be preyed upon by the perverse or the malicious or forced to relocate because of financial demands or pressures. Our longings for stability, longevity, and permanence will be largely satisfied, for Satan and those who have spread his influence will have no place on the earth during this glorious era. For a thousand years men and women will live lives of quiet nobility, will bow the knee and acknowledge Jesus the Messiah as the King of Zion and the Redeemer of all humankind.

Latter-day Saints teach, in harmony with the Bible (see Rev. 20:1-8), that there will come a time at the end of the thousand years when "men again begin to deny their God." (D&C 29:22.) Some will choose, despite the light and truth that surround them, to come out in open rebellion against God the Father, his Beloved Son, and the plan of salvation. Satan will be loosed again "for a little season" that he might "gather together his armies." (D&C 88:111; see also 43:31.) "Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven. And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies. And then cometh the battle of the great God"—known as the Battle of Gog and Magog—"and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, and they shall not have power over the saints any more at all." (D&C 88:112-14.) At the end of the thousand years those who will receive a telestial glory will come forth in the resurrection, as will the sons of perdition. (D&C 76:38-39; 88:15, 102.)

After the Battle of Gog and Magog, we come to that time known to the Latter-day Saints as the "end of the earth" (D&C 88:101; Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:55), the final cleansing and celestialization of the planet. The earth will then be a fit abode for the true and faithful, "that bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they [the Saints of God] sanctified." (D&C 88:20.) The Day of Judgment follows the last resurrection. Inasmuch as the Father has committed all judgment to the Son (John 5:22), Christ, who is the "Holy One of Israel," the "keeper of the gate" (Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 9:41), will pronounce the final judgment upon all men and women, righteous and wicked. The children of God will then be assigned forevermore to their respective kingdoms of glory—celestial, terrestrial, and telestial. The sons of perdition will likewise be assigned to outer darkness or eternal hell, to a kingdom of no glory. (D&C 88:24.)

Unlike so many in the religious world, the Latter-day Saints anticipate celestial life on a material world. Orson Pratt eloquently made the point as follows: "A Saint who is one in deed and truth, does not look for an immaterial heaven, but he expects a heaven with lands, houses, cities, vegetation, rivers, and animals; with thrones, temples, palaces, kings, princes, priests, and angels; with food, raiment, musical instruments, etc., all of which are material. Indeed, the Saints' eternal home is a redeemed, glorified, celestial material creation, inhabited by glorified material beings, male and female, organized into families, embracing all the relationships of husbands and wives, parents and children, where sorrow, crying, pain, and death will be known no more." On this earth, Elder Pratt continued, the Saints of God "expect to live, with body, parts, and holy passions; on it they expect to move and have their being." In short, "materiality is indelibly stamped upon the very heaven of heavens, upon all the eternal creations; it is the very essence of all existence."<#>7

1 See Millard J. Erickson, Christian Theology (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1986), p. 1, 152.

2 The Signs of the Times (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1942), p. 41.

3 Journal of Discourses 16:319.

4 Ibid., 11:275.

5 Ibid., 2:316.

6 Ibid., 12:274.

7 Masterful Discourses and Writings of Orson Pratt (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1962), pp. 62-63.
