Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

There are obvious limitations upon what can be said in a book of this type. An introduction can do no more than leave an impression or two and encourage the interested reader to pursue the subject in more detail at leisure. Because we simply cannot cover all the bases, and because there may be matters that are still unresolved in the minds of readers, I have felt the need to pose and then respond to what I believe to be some of the most frequently asked questions. Although some of these issues may have been explained or touched upon in the preceding chapters, this chapter is written so as to be read independent of the rest of the work.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints did not break away from Roman Catholicism and thus is not a Protestant church. Latter-day Saints claim to be a restoration of primitive Christianity, of the church Jesus established in the first century. They believe that with the deaths of the apostles came also a loss of divine authority as well as a loss of plain and precious doctrinal truths. They feel that God chose to begin a restoration of that authority and those truths when he called Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820. Thus it might be appropriate to speak of the LDS Church as neither a Catholic church nor a Protestant church but rather as a restored church.

In recent years the criticism of Latter-day Saints and a movement to exclude them from the category of Christian have intensified. There are those who feel uncomfortable with them because of their belief in modern prophets and additional scripture. Others reject the LDS claim to Christianity because the Church does not subscribe to the creeds of Christendom or is not in the historical Christian tradition. On what basis, then, do the Latter-day Saints themselves claim to be Christian? They believe in Jesus Christ; that he is the Son of the Eternal Father, the Only Begotten in the flesh; that Christ is God, that he is Lord and Savior, the Redeemer of the world; that we are saved by obedience to his commandments and by virtue of his atoning blood; that only through reliance upon his merits, mercy, and grace can people find happiness here and eternal reward hereafter; and that his was the only perfect and sinless life, a life to be emulated and followed. Jesus Christ is the central figure in the doctrine and practice of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That so many misunderstand, prejudge, and exclude is sad and strangely ironic.

The Latter-day Saints worship God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. These members of the Godhead are divine, immortal, and glorified beings. The Latter-day Saints revere Joseph Smith as a modern prophet, as a covenant spokesman, as a mouthpiece for Deity in the same sense that Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, and Jeremiah were. Joseph Smith was a mortal man. The Mormons do not worship Joseph Smith. They value his words, study his sermons and writings (along with scriptural teachings found in the Bible), and treasure his legacy. Joseph Smith claimed to be no more than a servant in the hands of God, and Latter-day Saints do not afford him more honor and devotion than is appropriate.

The Latter-day Saints believe that all of the presidents of the Church who have succeeded Joseph Smith (see appendix 3) have held the same divine calling, the same rights and priesthood authority, and have been entitled to the designation of prophet, seer, and revelator to the Church. Joseph Smith is in a significant position in the sense that he is what is called a dispensation head, a man called to restore the knowledge of God, of Christ, and of the plan of salvation following a period of apostasy. The dispensation head, a prophet's prophet, establishes those doctrines and authorities once again on earth, and those who follow him, though prophets in their own right, stand as echoes and affirmations of his original testimony to the world, and they also seek for and declare new revelation as it comes.

Latter-day Saints believe that truth is to be found throughout the earth—among men and women in all walks of life, among sages and philosophers, and among people of differing religious persuasions. But they do claim that through the call of Joseph Smith and his successors, and through the establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to earth. They value the truths had among the children of God everywhere but believe that theirs is the "only true church" in the sense that the same divine authority and the same doctrines of salvation had from the beginning are now to be found in their fullness in the LDS faith. It is odd that Protestant Christianity should be so offended with Joseph Smith's statement that 19th-century Christianity was off course; is that not exactly what those protesters like Luther, Calvin, and Zwingli said in regard to the Roman Catholic Church?

First of all, it appears that the passages in the Old Testament that warn against such things (Deut. 4:2; 12:32) are actually warning against adding to the books of Moses, the Pentateuch. This certainly could not have reference to adding to the Old Testament in general, or else we could not in good conscience accept the thirty-four books that follow the Pentateuch. Furthermore, the warning attached to the end of the Revelation of John is a warning against adding to or taking away from "the words of the prophecy of this book" (Rev. 22:18), namely, the Apocalypse. Most important, Latter-day Saints believe that these warnings have to do with the condemnation associated with a man, an uninspired man, a man not called of God, taking upon himself the responsibility to add to or take from the canon of scripture. But it is God's right to speak beyond what he has spoken already (as he certainly did in the person and messages and works of Jesus himself), and Latter-day Saints feel that God should be allowed to direct and empower his children as need arises. It is not for us to set up bounds and stakes for the Almighty. Nowhere in the Bible itself do we learn that God will no longer speak directly to his children or add to past scripture.

It is important to be a good person, a moral person, a person of integrity. The gospel is intended, however, to do more than make us good. The gospel is the power of God unto salvation (Rom. 1:16), the power to transform good people into Christlike people, noble souls into holy souls. The church is the custodian of the gospel—the divine authority and the truths of salvation—and so Latter-day Saints do not believe that one can come unto Christ independent of (or in opposition to) the Church of Jesus Christ. They believe there is "one Lord, one faith, one baptism" (Eph. 4:5), and that the sacraments or ordinances of salvation, administered by the priesthood held in the Church, are prerequisite to entrance into the kingdom of God.

After the death of Joseph Smith, Jr., there was a question in the minds of many as to who should lead the Church. One branch of the Saints felt that Joseph had given strict instructions to the effect that at his death the First Presidency would be dissolved, and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, then under Brigham Young's direction, would be responsible for leading the people. Another group believed that Joseph the Prophet had ordained his eldest son to succeed him. The former group were led by Brigham Young from Nauvoo, Illinois in 1846 and traveled across the plains to Salt Lake City, Utah. This group, sometimes called the "Utah Mormons," was The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In 1860 the second group formally organized themselves with Joseph Smith III as their leader. Their headquarters moved from Plano, Illinois, to Lamoni, Iowa, and finally to Independence, Missouri. This was the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS). The first major division, therefore, between the two churches was over the question of succession—apostolic or patriarchal. Since 1860 the LDS and RLDS churches have divided over several matters of doctrine and practice.

The Latter-day Saints believe in Jesus of Nazareth, the same who came into the world during the years that such leaders as Herod and Pontius Pilate and Caiaphas were in power. They believe in the testimonies of the New Testament writers concerning our Lord's divine Sonship and his miraculous doings. It is true that they accept additional books of scripture that reveal additional things about the life and ministry of Jesus, but it could hardly be said that they worship a different Savior.

Latter-day Saints believe the Atonement of Jesus Christ to be the central act of all history, just as Christians around the world do. According to LDS teachings, Jesus' suffering in the garden was not just the awful anticipation of the cross. Instead, the atoning sacrifice was performed in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross. That is, the suffering that began in Gethsemane was completed on Golgotha the next day. Thus for LDS people the acceptance of the Atonement is not symbolized by the cross, whether on or in buildings, on religious vestments, or on church literature. In addition, Gordon B. Hinckley, fourteenth president of the Church, observed that "the cross is the symbol of the dying Christ, while our message is a declaration of the living Christ." He noted further that "the lives of our people must become the only meaningful expression of our faith and in fact, therefore, the symbol of our worship."<#>1

Entrance into God's kingdom comes through covenant—a two-way promise between God and man. The follower of Christ promises to do what he can do—have faith, repent, be baptized, receive the Holy Ghost, endure faithfully to the end, and undertake deeds of Christian service. God on his part agrees to do for us what we could not do for ourselves—forgive our sins, transform our souls and purify our hearts, resurrect us from the dead, and save us hereafter in a kingdom of glory. LDS scriptures are very clear and consistent in stating that salvation or eternal life is a gift, in fact, the greatest of all the gifts of God. (D&C 6:13; 14:7.) Salvation is not something that can be purchased, bartered for, or, in the strictest sense, earned. Over and over again, the Book of Mormon, for example, affirms that men and women are saved by the grace of Jesus Christ and that there is no other way whereby salvation can be acquired. (2 Ne. 10:24; 25:23; Alma 22:14.) On the other hand, good works are expected of those who claim to have taken upon them the name of Christ. In fact, it is only as they strive to do their best to keep their part of the Christian covenant that the grace or divine enabling power can be extended and received as the free gift that it is. (Moroni 10:32.) In short, good works are necessary but not sufficient for salvation. The theological issue is thus not whether people are saved by grace or by works. Instead, the greater questions are: In whom do I trust? Upon whom do I rely? The Book of Mormon prophets attest that the people of God must always rely wholly (alone) upon the merits and mercy of the Holy Messiah. (1 Ne. 10:6; 2 Ne. 31:19; Moro. 6:4.)

Joseph Smith did in fact teach that God is a Man of Holiness, an exalted and glorified man. Latter-day Saints really do not claim to know much beyond that, except that over a long period of time our Heavenly Father gained the knowledge, power, and divine attributes he now possesses; there is no knowledge of which he is ignorant and no power he does not possess. Because he has held his exalted status for a longer period than any of us can conceive, he is able to speak in terms of eternity and can state that he is from everlasting to everlasting. One Church leader, Joseph Fielding Smith, explained, "From eternity to eternity means from the spirit existence through the probation which we are in, and then back again to the eternal existence which will follow. Surely this is everlasting, for when we receive the resurrection, we will never die. We all existed in the first eternity. I think I can say of myself and others, we are from eternity; and we will be to eternity everlasting, if we receive the exaltation."<#>2

For the Latter-day Saints, God is not just a force in the universe, a spirit essence. He is a person, a glorified person-age, a being with body, parts, and passions. He is the Father of our spirits and thus has tender regard for all of his children. He is approachable, knowable, and, like Jesus, can be touched by the feeling of our infirmities. (Heb. 4:15.) In his corporeal or physical nature, he can be in only one place at a time. His divine nature is such, however, that his glory, his power, and his influence, meaning his Holy Spirit, fills the immensity of space and is the means by which he is omnipresent and by which law and light and life exist. (D&C 88:6-13.)

Joseph Smith stated that the Book of Mormon is the keystone of the religion of the Latter-day Saints.<#>3 It teaches the gospel or doctrine of Christ as repetitively and clearly as any other scriptural work—that salvation is in Christ, and that men and women may come unto Christ through faith, repentance, baptism, and the receipt of the Holy Ghost. (2 Ne. 31; 3 Ne. 27.) These principles weave their way through the narrative for most of the 531 pages. As a fundamental scriptural record, the Book of Mormon sets forth the fundamental doctrines of salvation, namely, what people must do to be saved. Its writers do not concern themselves with many other doctrinal matters that are taught, for example, in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Book of Mormon does not treat directly such items as degrees of glory in the hereafter, eternal marriage, or the corporeal nature of God. The Book of Mormon contains the fullness of the gospel—the glad tidings concerning Jesus Christ—not the fullness of gospel doctrine. In a similar vein, most Christians are not troubled by the fact that the epistles of Paul contain many doctrinal matters that are not even mentioned by Jesus and the apostles in the four Gospels.

Though the Book of Mormon prophet writers did speak of both the Father and the Son and of Jesus as the Son of God (see, for example, 1 Ne. 10:4, 17; 11:7, 24; 2 Ne. 25:16; Jacob 4:5, 11; Mosiah 3:8; Alma 5:50; Hel. 14:2; 3 Ne. 11:7; Morm. 5:14; Ether 12:18), there is no question but that Jesus Christ is the central character of the book. He is the Eternal God, the Lord Omnipotent, the Holy One of Israel. As far as salvation is concerned, there is only one God, and that being is Jesus Christ. That is to say, Jesus is both God and Son of God. (2 Ne. 11:7; Alma 11:26-33.) God is called a spirit in the Book of Mormon (Alma 18:18-30) because almost always the God being referred to is Jehovah, the spirit being who would come to earth and take a body as Jesus of Nazareth. There is no contradiction here, only a supreme emphasis upon Christ in the Book of Mormon.

Latter-day Saints are concerned with salvation, with salvation from sin and death and hell, just like all other believing Christians. In scripture, especially LDS scripture, with but few exceptions (for example, in D&C 76:88; 132:17), when the word salvation or saved is used, eternal life or exaltation is meant. That is, almost always salvation is the same thing as exaltation, which is the same thing as eternal life, the highest of eternal rewards hereafter.

Latter-day Saints do believe that men and women must be born again to be saved. That is, "in addition to the physical ordinance of baptism and the laying on of hands, one must be spiritually born again to gain exaltation and eternal life."<#>4 In the words of another Church leader, "Mere compliance with the formality of the ordinance of baptism does not mean that a person has been born again. . . . The new birth takes place only for those who actually enjoy the gift or companionship of the Holy Ghost, only for those who are fully converted, who have given themselves without restraint to the Lord."<#>5

Joseph Smith claims to have first learned of the principle of the plurality of wives while translating the Bible in 1831. He had asked the Lord why such notable ancients as Abraham and Jacob had been permitted more than one wife and yet had seemingly maintained their righteous standing before God. With the answer to Joseph's query came the understanding that eventually the Latter-day Saints would be required to live this ancient law as a part of the "restoration of all things." (D&C 27:6; 86:10.)

This was not something the Prophet and others of the Church leadership wanted to do; there is sufficient historical evidence that Joseph procrastinated the teaching of the principle to the generality of the Church for many years, until, according to several sources, he was instructed that if he did not do so he would be punished by God. Plural marriage must be viewed as a theological principle the Latter-day Saints kept until almost the beginning of the twentieth century; neither the persistence nor the zeal of the Latter-day Saints in maintaining its practice can be grasped if it is seen as a social experiment or even as a sexual aberration. When the government of the United States officially declared the practice of polygamy to be unlawful, the leadership of the Church, in harmony with the Saints' belief in sustaining and upholding the law of the land (Pearl of Great Price, A of F 1:12), and acting under what they believed to be divine authority, announced the cessation of the practice in 1890.

The Doctrine and Covenants speaks of the Church as both true and living. (D&C 1:30.) It is not, as someone has suggested, a fossilized faith but rather a kinetic kingdom. The Latter-day Saints believe that change is a part of growth and development, a vital sign that God continues to reveal his mind and will to his people. Joseph Smith taught, "This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed."<#>6

The derisive label of cult frightens people and basically turns them off. It conjures up images of the bizarre, the unnatural, and even the demonic. The fact is, the first three definitions of cult in Webster's Third International Dictionary make no distinction between religion and cult. The fourth definition is the one, I suppose, most anti-Mormons have in mind: an unorthodox or spurious sect. One Evangelical scholar described cults as follows: (1) they are started by strong and dynamic leaders; (2) they believe in additional scripture; (3) they have rigid standards for membership; (4) they proselyte new converts; (5) the leaders or officials of the cult are not professional clergymen; (6) they believe in ongoing and continual communication from God; and (7) they claim some truth not available to other individuals or groups. By these standards of measure, the Latter-day Saints would certainly qualify as a cult. The problem, of course, is that the New Testament Christian Church would qualify also!

The ordinances of the temple are sacred, not secret. There are prerequisites to receiving them: faith, repentance, baptism, confirmation, and good standing in the Church. Any person who desires to go into the temple may prepare himself or herself to do so. The temple is open to all who are willing to comply with the prerequisites. A perusal of the New Testament is all that is necessary to see that Jesus believed in the system of gospel prerequisites, that some things were to precede others. Many of his parables were delivered in order to veil meaning, to present messages of truth only to those who were prepared to receive them. (Matt. 13:10-13.) He taught that some sacred things are not to be casually distributed to the masses. (Matt. 7:6.) Of some matters the apostles were strictly warned, "Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead." (Matt. 17:9.) The Latter-day Saints do not speak openly of the things taught in temples, but not to make the experience more mysterious or to heighten people's curiosity. Nor are temple ceremonies something the Latter-day Saints try to limit to a certain number of people; they urge every soul to qualify and prepare for the temple experience.

As was pointed out in chapters 7 and 8, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims to be the custodians of that priesthood power that binds and seals husbands and wives, parents and children, together for eternity. The Latter-day Saints believe that their Church administers the gospel of Jesus Christ, and that the gospel is everlasting in the sense that it was had in its fullness at various times by the ancients. They believe, for example, that eternal marriage was entered into by Adam and Eve, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Moses and Zipporah, and other men and women among the patriarchs, prophets, and worthy Former-day Saints. The power that Jesus gave to Peter, James, and John was the power to bind on earth and have those ordinances, including marriage, sealed everlastingly in the heavens. (Matt. 16:19; 18:18.)

Thus the incident that appears in Matt. 22 and Luke 20 in which Jesus states that "in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage" would be explained by the Latter-day Saints as follows. To properly understand the scriptural text, we need only ask the standard question in interpretation: To whom is the message directed? The answer is the Sadducees, a Jewish religious sect that rejected Christ, his gospel, his priesthood, and even the doctrine of resurrection. In broader terms, the text applies to all others who reject the gospel of Jesus Christ or his saving and sealing powers. None such have any claim upon a sealing bond between marriage partners or in the family unit. The modern equivalent would be for a woman who does not believe in Christ, in his redemptive mission, or in resurrection, to ask a modern prophet which of the seven men to whom she had been married will be her husband in the world to come. The answer, obviously, is none of them. Because one unbeliever has been told that she has no claim on spouse or family in the world to come certainly is not to say that those who prove worthy of the full blessings of the Lord, including the blessings of eternal marriage, have no such promise. Thus the Doctrine and Covenants specifies that those who neither marry nor are given in marriage in the hereafter are those whose marriages are not performed by the sealing authority of the priesthood. (D&C 132:15-18.)

Latter-day Saints believe that we come to the earth to take a physical body, to be schooled and trained and gain experiences here that we could not have in the premortal life, and then to seek to grow in faith and spiritual graces until we can qualify to go where God and Christ are. But they believe that eternal life consists in more than being with God; it entails being like God. A study of the Christian church reveals that the doctrine of the deification of man was taught at least into the fifth century by such notables as Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Justin Martyr, Athanasius, and Augustine. Latter-day Saints would probably not agree with most of what was taught about deification by the early Christian church leaders, because they believe that many of the plain and precious truths concerning God and man had been lost by then. But I mention this to illustrate that the idea was not foreign to the people of the early church; the names mentioned were not pagan or Gnostic spokesmen but Christian.

The Latter-day Saint belief in man becoming as God is not dependent upon the early Christian concept, or upon such popular modern Christian thinkers as C. S. Lewis, who taught this notion.<#>7 In the vision of the hereafter given to Joseph Smith, described in chapter 5, is found this description of those who attain the highest or celestial glory: "Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God." (D&C 76:58.) Godhood comes through the receipt of eternal life. Eternal life consists of two things: (1) the continuation of the family unit in eternity; and (2) inheriting, receiving, and being endowed with the fullness of the spirit and power of the Father. (D&C 132:19-20.) Latter-day Saints do not believe they will ever, worlds without end, unseat or oust God the Father or Jesus Christ. Those holy beings are and forever will be the Gods men and women worship. Men and women, like Christ, are made in the image and likeness of God; it is not robbery to be equal with God (Philip. 2:6), and like any father, our Heavenly Father wants his children to become and be all that he is. Spiritual growth to this lofty plain is not something that comes merely through hard work, though men and women are expected to do their best to keep their covenantal obligations. Deification is accomplished finally through the grace and goodness of Jesus Christ, who seeks that all of us might become joint heirs, co-inheritors with him, to all the Father has. (Rom. 8:14-18.)

The Latter-day Saints, who believe in the Godhead, are no more polytheistic than are Christians who believe in the Trinity. God and Christ are the objects of our worship. Even though Mormons believe in the ultimate deification of man, I am unaware of any reference in LDS literature that speaks of worshiping any being other than the ones within the Godhead. Latter-day Saints believe in "one God" in the sense that they love and serve one Godhead, one divine presidency, each of whom possesses all of the attributes of Godhood.

Acting under what he and his people believed to be divine direction, some time late in the 1830s the Prophet Joseph Smith established a position that the blessings of the priesthood should be withheld from black members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This practice continued in the Church through Joseph Smith's successors until the announcement of a revelation received by Spencer W. Kimball, twelfth president of the Church, in June of 1978. There is no statement directly from Joseph Smith himself offering commentary or doctrinal explanation for such an action, though the scriptural basis for a lineage-based granting or denial of priesthood may be found in the Pearl of Great Price. (Moses 7:8, 22; Abr. 1:21-27; see also Gen. 4:1-15; Moses 5:18-41.) Leaders of the Church have repeatedly affirmed that the position of the Church in regard to who does and does not bear the priesthood is a matter of revelation from heaven and not simply social or political expediency.

As to the fact that certain individuals or groups of people have not always had access to the full blessings of the gospel or the priesthood, there is also scriptural precedent. From the days of Moses to the coming of Jesus Christ, the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood was conferred only upon worthy descendants of the tribe of Levi. In the first Christian century, the message of salvation was presented first to the Jews (the "lost sheep of the house of Israel," Matt. 10:5-6; 15:24) and then later, primarily through the labors of the Apostle Paul, to the Gentile nations. Ultimately the blessings of the Lord are for all people, "black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile." (Book of Mormon, 2 Ne. 26:33.) At the same time, God has a plan, a divine timetable by which his purposes are brought to pass in and through his children on earth. He knows the end from the beginning and the times before appointed for specific doings and eventualities. (See Acts 17:26.) That timetable may not be ignored, slighted, or altered by finite man. The faithful seek to live in harmony with God's will and go forward in life with all patience and faith.

Women in the LDS Church are not ordained to the priesthood. The leaders of the Church have instructed that men and women have roles in life that are equally important but different. Some roles are best suited to the masculine nature, while women have natural and innate capacities to do some things that are more difficult for men. Because of the sanctity of the family and the home and because of the vital nature of the family in the preservation of society, Latter-day Saints teach that motherhood is the highest and holiest calling a woman can assume. The Mormons believe that women should search, study, learn, prepare, and develop in every way possible—socially, intellectually, and spiritually—but that no role in society will bring as much fulfillment or contribute more to the good of humankind than motherhood.

There is nothing in LDS doctrine to suggest that to be a man is preferred in the sight of God, or that the Almighty loves males more than females. Latter-day Saint theology condemns unrighteous dominion in any form, as well as any type of discrimination because of race, color, or gender. God is no respecter of persons. Women are the daughters of God, are entitled to every spiritual gift, every virtue, and every fruit of the Spirit. Priesthood is not maleness, nor should it be equated with male administration. A man who holds the priesthood does not have any advantage over a woman in qualifying for salvation in the highest heaven. Priesthood is divine authority given to worthy men, as a part of God's great plan of happiness. Why it is bestowed upon men and not women is not known. The highest ordinance of the priesthood, received in the temple, is given only to a man and a woman together.

A Latter-day Saint apostle, James E. Talmage, stated, "In the restored Church of Jesus Christ, the Holy Priesthood is conferred, as an individual bestowal, upon men only, and this in accordance with Divine requirement. It is not given to woman to exercise the authority of the Priesthood independently; nevertheless, in the sacred endowments associated with the ordinances pertaining to the House of the Lord, woman shares with man the blessings of the Priesthood. When the frailties and imperfections of mortality are left behind, in the glorified state of the blessed hereafter, husband and wife will administer in their respective stations, seeing and understanding alike, and co-operating to the full in the government of their family kingdom. Then shall woman be recompensed in rich measure for all the injustice that womanhood has endured in mortality. Then shall woman reign by Divine right, a queen in the resplendent realm of her glorified state, even as exalted man shall stand, priest and king unto the Most High God. Mortal eye cannot see nor mind comprehend the beauty, glory, and majesty of a righteous woman made perfect in the celestial kingdom of God."<#>8

As pointed out in the last chapter, the LDS Church is growing. The number of members increases dramatically by the decade. Chapels, church buildings, and temples are under construction throughout the earth. It is true that the Church has substantial assets that accompany a growing organization. These assets are almost exclusively in its buildings—chapels, temples, seminary and institute of religion buildings, colleges and universities, welfare projects, mission homes, mission training centers, and family history (genealogy) facilities. All of these are money-consuming rather than money-producing assets. They do much to promote the work of the Church but are very expensive to maintain. There are a few income-producing business holdings, but these could not sustain the Church for very long. The Church is kept afloat through the tithes and generous offerings of the members throughout the earth. Tithing is the Church's system of finance.

I will answer this one in a rather personal way. I have been a Latter-day Saint all my life. I was raised as a Latter-day Saint in Louisiana, and most of my friends were Roman Catholic or Protestant (Southern Baptist or Methodist). I spent my first eighteen years in Louisiana. I have since lived in New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Idaho, Florida, Georgia, and Utah, and I have been intimately involved in the work of the Church through the years. Since 1973 I have been employed by the LDS Church as a marriage and family counselor, seminary and institute of religion instructor, and dean of Religious Education and professor of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University. I have seen the Church from all sides—from right to left, and from top to bottom. I have worked closely with rank-and-file members and with Church leaders at all levels of administration. In all that time I have never encountered but one brand of Mormonism—the public version. I'm not sure where the secret brand—the one advertised by our critics as scheming, mischievous, power hungry, occultish, and dark—is to be found, but I haven't come across it. The reader would do well to be discerning and discriminating when it comes to some of the rather exotic assaults upon the LDS Church by its critics.

Before The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was even organized, a spirit of enthusiasm and zeal was evident among those who encountered the message of Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, and the idea that God had chosen to restore truths and authorities to earth. That spirit intensified after the formal organization of the Church. Many of the revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants instruct the Latter-day Saints to travel, to preach, and to proselyte. The Saints are told to proclaim the message of the Restoration before individuals and congregations, in churches and in synagogues. Because they believe what they have to share with others represents a fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and that the fullness is not found elsewhere, they feel a responsibility to make the message available to all who will hear. The commission given to the apostles when Jesus ascended into heaven, a commission to make disciples of all nations (Matt. 28:19-20; Mark 16:15-18), has been repeated and renewed to the Latter-day Saints: "Go ye into all the world, preach the gospel to every creature, acting in the authority which I have given you, baptizing in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. (D&C 68:8.)

One president of the Church expressed himself to those not of the LDS faith: "We have come not to take away from you the truth and virtue you possess. We have come not to find fault with you nor criticize you. We have not come here to berate you because of things you have not done; but we have come here as your brethren . . . and to say to you: `Keep all the good that you have, and let us bring to you more good, in order that you may be happier and in order that you may be prepared to enter into the presence of our Heavenly Father.'"<#>9

Those who are content with what they have are perfectly free to express the same to LDS missionaries. Those who are curious, unsatisfied with their present faith or way of life, or those who may be seeking for answers to some of life's puzzling questions, may find an encounter with the Latter-day Saints worth their time and attention.

Because the Latter-day Saints are Christian, because they believe that peace and happiness here and hereafter are to be found only in and through the person and powers of Jesus Christ, they also believe that the only hope for the world is to come unto Christ. The answer to the world's problems—to the vexing troubles of starvation, famine, disease, crime, inhumanity, and the dissolution of the nuclear family—is ultimately not to be found in more extravagant social programs or stronger legislation. The Latter-day Saints acknowledge and value the good that is done by so many to bring the message of Jesus from the New Testament to a world that desperately needs it. At the same time, they feel to say to a drifting world that there is more truth to be known, more power to be exercised, and more profound fulfillment to be had. As one Church leader pointed out, "We seek to bring all truth together. We seek to enlarge the circle of love and understanding among all the people of the earth. Thus we strive to establish peace and happiness, not only within Christianity but among all mankind."<#>10

The capsule summary of the message of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that there is a God; Jesus Christ is his divine Son; the Father and the Son have appeared and spoken again in these times; and the Father's plan of salvation has been restored to earth for the ultimate blessing of humankind. In short, the Latter-day Saints believe that God loves his children in this age and generation as much as he loved those to whom he sent his Son in earlier days. God the Father's perfect love is manifest not only through the preservation of the biblical record but also through modern revelation, modern scripture, and modern apostles and prophets.

The Latter-day Saints offer hope to a world strangled with hopelessness. At a time in which there is a waning of belonging, the Latter-day Saints invite all people to come home, to return to the family of God. If some of those who wander or have lost their way can be retrieved and oriented toward their eternal possibilities, then the LDS Church will have had a lasting impact on the world. The First Presidency of the Church in 1907 made the following declaration: "Our motives are not selfish; our purposes not petty and earth-bound; we contemplate the human race, past, present and yet to come, as immortal beings, for whose salvation it is our mission to labor; and to this work, broad as eternity and deep as the love of God, we devote ourselves, now, and forever."<#>11

1 Be Thou an Example (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), pp. 85-86.

2 Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:12; see also Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. 166.

3 Teachings, p. 194.

4 Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), p. 62.

5 Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 101.

6 Teachings, p. 256.

7 See The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses (New York: Macmillan-Collier, 1960), p. 18; Mere Christianity, pp. 153-54, 174-75.

8 James E. Talmage, "The Eternity of Sex," Young Woman's Journal 25 (October 1914), 602-3.

9 George Albert Smith, Sharing the Gospel with Others, compiled by Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948), pp. 12-13.

10 Howard W. Hunter, That We Might Have Joy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994), p. 59.

11 Conference Report, April 1907, appendix, 16; cited in Hunter, That We Might Have Joy, p. 59.
