Robert L. Millet, Mormon Faith: Understanding Restored Christianity ( 1998)

APPENDIX 2 DISTINCTIVE LDS DOCTRINES

Although the Latter-day Saints love the Bible and are encouraged by their prophet leaders to become serious students of the Bible, they also look for direction to the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and living prophets. Thus the Latter-day Saints are not dependent upon the Bible alone for doctrine, church organization, or standards of living. In addition, because they are not linked historically to the Christian tradition, either Roman Catholic or Protestant, they are not tied to doctrinal developments, church councils, or creedal statements that grew out of the Christian church's efforts through the centuries to interpret and thereafter explicate its theology. Thus the Latter-day Saints feel no need to "prove" their positions from the Bible or from past or present Christian beliefs or practices.

At the same time, the Latter-day Saints do believe that remnants of some of their more distinctive doctrines and practices can be found in Christian history. In this appendix we will consider very briefly three specific areas: God and his relationship with man; the premortal existence of man; and the practice of baptism for the dead.

As mentioned in the body of this work, Latter-day Saints believe that the Godhead consists of three separate and distinct personages—God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. On the whole, believing Christians throughout the world accept the proposition that the Holy Ghost is a spirit, and that Jesus did in fact rise from the tomb with a physical, resurrected body. Latter-day Saints believe that God the Father is an exalted man, a Man of Holiness who possesses a physical (corporeal) body. This, of course, is soundly rejected by other Christian denominations. Once again, Latter-day Saints believe this not just because it is taught in the Bible but also because modern prophets have so declared it. The idea that God has a corporeal body was also taught rather extensively in the early Christian church.<#>1 Adolph Harnack, in his seven-volume work, The History of Dogma, has written that during the first two centuries "God was naturally conceived and represented as corporeal," and that it was a rather "popular idea that God had a form and a kind of corporeal existence."<#>2

Latter-day Saints reject the doctrine of the Trinity because of the teachings of Joseph Smith concerning the separateness of the three Gods. In addition, the Latter-day Saints feel that the doctrine of the Trinity is unscriptural, that it represents a superimposition of Hellenistic philosophy on the Bible, a creedal concept that came predominantly through the church councils at Nicaea and Chalcedon, and that the simplest and clearest reading of the four Gospels sets forth a Godhead of three distinct beings—not three coequal persons in one substance or essence. Indeed, it is not difficult to find non-LDS biblical scholars who agree that the Trinity is unbiblical. One scholar observed, "There is no formal doctrine of the Trinity in the New Testament writers, if this means an explicit teaching that in one God there are three co-equal divine persons."<#>3 Latter-day Saints concur that "the word [Trinity] itself does not occur in the Bible. It is generally acknowledged that the church father Tertullian (ca. A.D. 145-220) either coined the term or was the first to use it with reference to God. . . . The formal doctrine of the Trinity as it was defined by the great church councils of the fourth and fifth centuries is not to be found in the New Testament."<#>4

The ideas that follow (and biblical references) were prepared by my colleague Thomas Sherry. They represent a fairly typical LDS view of biblical passages regarding the members of the Godhead.<#>5

Latter-day Saints believe that taken together, New Testament references to the Godhead bear witness of a Trinity of oneness in purpose, not oneness of essence, and of a Godhead composed of three physically separate beings. The material for this study was developed by cataloging every verse in the King James Version of the New Testament in which more than one member of the Godhead is mentioned. From these references, sixty-five scriptural incidents or doctrinal statements representative of the Godhead relationship were chosen. These references were then categorized according to questions they raised about orthodox creeds of the Trinity. Six major categories were needed to cover the questions. Each scripture was also compared to the seven other English translations of the Bible found in Tyndale's Eight-Translation New Testament (New English Bible, Jerusalem Bible, Living Bible, Today's English Version, New International Version, Philips Modern English, and Revised Standard Version). Interestingly, only two of the sixty-five scriptures (Matt. 19:16-17 and Philippines 2:5-9) were translated so differently as to render them invalid as examples of the category under which they were placed. In both cases the Living Bible rendition was the translation that invalidated their use.

In the first category were placed scriptures that express the will of the Son as being different from or in subjection to the will of the Father: Matt. 26:39; Mark 14:36; Luke 22:42; and John 4:34; 5:30; 6:38 The question raised by these scriptures is, If Jesus Christ and God the Father are the same beings in whom continually dwells the fullness of perfection, how could the will of the Son be at variance with or in subjection to the will of the Father?

In a second category are placed scriptures that suggest that the Father has power, knowledge, glory, and dominion (including the right and powers to direct that dominion) that the Son does not have and to which the Son is in subjection. The scriptures and the questions they raise are numerous. They include Mark 13:32 (cf. Matt. 24:36) Luke 18:18-19 (cf. Matt. 19:16-17; 23:7; Mark 10:17-18) Luke 22:29; 23:34; John 5:19-27, 37 (cf. John 8:26-29; 12:49) John 8:42; 10:17; 11:41; 14:28; 15:9, 15; Acts 10:38, 40; 1 Cor. 11:3; 15:28; Philip. 2:5-9; Heb. 1:1-4 (cf. Matt. 21:38; John 3:35; Rom. 8:17 [How can Christ be an heir to that which he already possesses? What does the word inheritance mean if Jesus already owns, or possesses, everything?]); Heb. 1:5 (cf. 2 Cor. 11:31; 1 Pet. 1:3 [These scriptures talk about Jesus' having a Father who is also his God. How can this be if there is only one God and the Trinity is one being?]); and Heb. 5:1-10 (How can these differences exist if the Father and the Son are the same being? Even if that same being is performing in different roles, how can he have more or less actual power or knowledge in one role than in another? Why did Jesus need counsel from the Father if they are the same being?).

The entire seventeenth chapter of the Gospel of John—Christ's great intercessory prayer—loses its impact and meaning if the Father is the same being as the Son. Why plead for unity if the kind of unity expressed in verse 11 is, according to the creeds, not possible? Can all believers become the same being as Jesus and God ("that they may be one, as we are" [John 17:11] It seems most plausible that the unity spoken of here is one of witness and purpose rather than of essence.

The third category contains scriptures that indicate that Jesus needed help and a sustaining power from the Father to perform his mission on earth. The scriptures in this category are Matt. 26:37-44 (cf. Mark 14:33-39; Luke 22:41-45) Matt. 14:23; 27:46 (cf. Mark 15:34) and Luke 6:12. Some questions raised by these verses are, If God the Father and Jesus are the same being, why would the Son need help from himself? Why would he pray to himself?

The fourth category contains scriptures that suggest that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost were simultaneously in different locations: Matt. 3:13-17 (cf. Mark 1:10-11; Luke 3:21-22) Matt. 17:5 (cf. Mark 9:7; Luke 9:28-36) John 12:28-30; 15:26; 20:17; Acts 7:55-56. The question here is not whether God could conceivably be simultaneously in different locations, but rather, why would he want to give a confusing and apparently deceptive impression?

The fifth category is composed of scriptures expressing the mediation of Christ. These are Matt. 11:25-27 (cf. Luke 10:21-22) John 14:6; 1 Tim. 2:5; Heb. 7:25; and 1 Jn. 2:1. The question raised by these scriptures is, Why is there a need for Christ to act as a mediator between man and the Father if Christ is the Father?

The sixth category is made up of miscellaneous scriptures that indicate the distinct natures of the Father and the Son:

Matt. 16:15-17. If Jesus, who at this time was "flesh and blood," did not reveal his own Messiahship to Peter, who did?

Luke 2:52. How could Jesus grow in favor with himself? How could he gain wisdom if he possessed all wisdom before?

Luke 23:46. Why would Christ commend his spirit to himself?

John 7:16-17. How could his doctrine not be his if he is the same being as the Father?

John 16:27-30 (see all of chapter 16). When viewed in light of John 8:42, this scripture also answers the apostles' query about the relationship of Jesus to God the Father. What sense would this scripture make if one substituted the word Jesus for each use of the words, I, me, and Father? Why does Paul consistently open each of his letters with a statement emphasizing the separateness of God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ—particularly since all of these letters were written after the Resurrection? (See Rom. 1:1-3; 1 Cor. 1:3; 2 Cor. 1:2-3; Gal. 1:1-4; Eph. 1:2-3; Philip. 1:1-2; Col. 1:2-3; 1 Thes. 1:1; 2 Thes. 1:1-2; 1 Tim. 1:2; 2 Tim. 1:2; Titus 1:4; Philem. 1:3; and Heb. 1:1-2, 5.)

That the Holy Ghost is a being physically separate from the Father and Son is evidenced in these references: Matt. 12:31-32 (here it seems that a certain type of sin against Christ is forgivable, but against the Holy Ghost it is not); John 14:26 (cf. Luke 11:13; John 16:7) and Acts 10:38 (if they are the same being, how can God anoint himself with himself?).

In short, Latter-day Saints believe that the simplest reading of the New Testament text produces the simplest conclusion—that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are separate and distinct personages, that they are one in purpose, one in mind, one in glory, but separate in person. The sheer preponderance of references in the Bible would lead an uninformed reader—one unaffected by either the conclusions of the creeds (Protestant and Catholic positions) or insights from latter-day revelation (LDS position)—to the understanding that God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost are separate beings. That is, one must look to the third- and fourth-century Christian church, not to the New Testament itself, to make a strong case for the Trinity.

Finally, Joseph Smith taught (and Latter-day Saints believe) that men and women have the capacity to eventually become as God is. This doctrine is particularly distasteful to some Christians who feel it in some way robs Deity of his omnipotence. To be sure, we will forevermore worship and adore God the Father and Jesus Christ the Savior, no matter how much we may grow and develop spiritually in time or in eternity. They nevertheless believe that the plan of salvation was put into operation to achieve that very end—to enable God's spirit children to become as he is.

The doctrine of the deification of man—that human beings can, through the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ and through the divine transformation of human nature, become joint heirs or co-inheritors with Christ to all the Father has—was clearly taught in the early Christian church.<#>6 One major reference work explains, "Deification (Greek theosis) is for Orthodoxy the goal of every Christian. Man, according to the Bible, is `made in the image and likeness of God.' . . . It is possible for man to become like God, to become deified, to become god by grace. . . . It should be noted that deification does not mean absorption into God, since the deified creature remains itself and distinct. It is the whole human being, body and soul, who is transfigured in the Spirit into the likeness of the divine nature, and deification is the goal of every Christian."<#>7

Note the following from early Christian thinkers:

Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons (ca. A.D. 130-200): "Do we cast blame on [God] because we were not made gods from the beginning, but were at first created merely as men, and then later as gods?" Also: "But man receives progression and increase towards God. For as God is always the same, so also man, when found in God, shall always progress toward God."<#>8

Clement of Alexandria (ca. A.D. 150-215): "If one knows himself, he will know God and knowing God will become like God."<#>9

Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria (ca. A.D. 296-373): "The word was made flesh in order that we might be enabled to be made gods. . . . Just as the Lord, putting on the body, became a man, so also we men are both deified through his flesh, and henceforth inherit everlasting life."<#>10

Augustine of Hippo (ca. A.D. 354-430): "He himself that justifies also deifies, for by justifying he makes sons of God. `For he has given them power to become the sons of God' (John 1:12). If then we have been made sons of God, we have also been made gods."<#>11

All men and women, like Christ, are made in the image and likeness of God (Gen. 1:27; Pearl of Great Price, Moses 2:27), and so it is neither robbery nor heresy for the children of God to aspire to be like God (Matt. 5:48; Philip. 2:6) like any parent, our Heavenly Father would want his children to become and be all that he is. Godhood comes through overcoming the world through the Atonement of Christ (1 Jn. 5:4-5; Rev. 2:7, 11; D&C 76:51-60), becoming heirs of God and joint-heirs with the Savior, who is the natural Heir (Rom. 8:17; Gal. 4:7), and thus inheriting all things, just as Christ inherits all things (1 Cor. 3:21-23; Rev. 21:7; D&C 76:55, 95; 84:38; 88:107). The faithful are received into the "church of the Firstborn" (Heb. 12:23; D&C 76:54, 67, 94; 93:22), meaning they inherit as though they were the firstborn. In that glorified state we will be conformed to the image of the Lord (Rom. 8:29; 1 Cor. 15:49; 2 Cor. 3:18; 1 Jn. 3:2; Book of Mormon, Alma 5:14), receive his glory, and be one with him and with the Father (John 17:21-23; Philip. 3:21).

As indicated in chapter 5, Latter-day Saints believe that God revealed to Joseph Smith, as a part of the restoration of all things, the knowledge that men and women have always lived—more specifically, that we lived before we were born on this earth in a mortal condition.<#>12 They teach that this life is but Act Two of a three-act play, and that life here makes sense only as viewed in that overall theological context.

The doctrine of the preexistence of man appears to have been taught in the Christian Church until at least the sixth century A.D. Some of these early Christian thinkers suggested, as do the Latter-day Saints today, that mortality can be understood only in terms of labors and assignments and agreements in the premortal world. Papias, bishop of Hierapolis in Asia Minor (ca. A.D. 130-140), in speaking of the leaders of the early Christian church, wrote, "To some of them, that is, those angels [spirits] who had been faithful to God in former times, [God] gave supervision over the governments of the earth, trusting or commissioning them to rule well. . . . And nothing has occurred [since] to put an end to their order."<#>13 In referring to Jer. 1:5 in regard to Jeremiah's being known by God before Jeremiah was born, Clement of Alexandria wrote, "It is possible that in speaking these things the prophet is referring to us, as being known to God as faithful before the foundation of the world."<#>14

Origen of Alexandria (ca. A.D. 185-254) discoursed at length about the premortal existence of souls. He spoke of the soul "as being `akin' to God, but obliged to live in a material world which is not its true home." Further, "The material world is for Origen temporary and provisional, and life in it is a short period in a much longer life of the soul, which exists before being united to the body and will continue hereafter."<#>15 Origen postulated that "the individual soul preexists its embodiment as a human being." Thus "it is the soul, `the inner person,' and not . . . the body, that is the seat of that which corresponds to the image of God." Origen thus regarded the soul "as the real human person."<#>16

"It was [Origen's] belief that the many differences seen among men on earth could be traced back to the differences in rank and glory of the premortal angels. Without such a belief in a premortal existence, he maintained, it would not be possible to view God as `no respecter of persons,' but rather God would seem arbitrary, cruel, and unjust. Origen believed that the differences between men on earth, as with the `angels,' were based on merit. Just as there would be a judgment at the end of man's earth life, Origen believed that some sort of judgment had already taken place before we came here which was based on work done in a premortal state. In applying this principle to Jacob's being preferred over Esau, Origen wrote, `We believe that he was even then chosen by God because of merits acquired before this life.'"<#>17 Origen's teachings were eventually rejected by the Roman emperor Justinian in A.D. 543 as speculative and too interwoven with Greek thought. "Yet Christianity's debt to Origen is immense," W. H. C. Frend has written. "No christian writer had attempted so thorough and complete a statement of this [Christian] religion. No one before him had defended it so thoroughly against its opponents, and with such success."<#>18

Again, the LDS belief in preexistence is founded on modern revelation, what Joseph Smith and his successors have taught. But it is clear that this doctrine is found not only in Christian history but also in such varied sources as the teachings of the Essene community,<#>19 the pseudepigraphic Book of Enoch,<#>20 the First Apocalypse of James,<#>21 and the Syriac Hymn of the Pearl.<#>22

Biblical passages that refer to the premortal existence include:

Latter-day Saints believe that baptism for the dead was indeed a practice of the Church of Jesus Christ in the meridian of time, a practice that was restored in the last days through Joseph Smith. The Apostle Paul refers to baptism for the dead in 1 Corinthians. Chapter 15, perhaps the most potent chapter doctrinally in the epistle, testifies of the resurrection of the Lord. In it Paul presented the core of that message known to us as the gospel, or the "glad tidings" that Christ atoned for our sins, died, rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven. Joseph Smith called these events "the fundamental principles of our religion," to which all other doctrines are but appendages.<#>23 Paul showed the necessity for the Savior's rising from the tomb and explained that the physical evidence of the divine Sonship of Christ is the resurrection. If Christ had not risen from the dead, Paul asserted, the preaching of the apostles and the faith of the Saints would be in vain. "If in this life only we have hope in Christ," he said, "we are of all men most miserable." (1 Cor. 15:19.)

After establishing that the Lord has conquered all enemies, including death, Paul added, "And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him [the Father] that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor. 15:28-29; emphasis added.) Verse 29 has spawned a host of interpretations by biblical scholars of various faiths. Many consider the original meaning of the passage to be at best "difficult" or "unclear." One commentator stated that Paul "alludes to a practice of the Corinthian community as evidence for Christian faith in the resurrection of the dead. It seems that in Corinth some Christians would undergo baptism in the name of their deceased non-Christian relatives and friends, hoping that this vicarious baptism might assure them a share in the redemption of Christ."<#>24 Some recent translations of the Bible have attempted to clarify this passage. The New King James Version has it: "Otherwise, what will they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead do not rise at all? Why then are they baptized for the dead?" The Revised English Bible translates 1 Cor. 15:29 in this way: "Again, there are those who receive baptism on behalf of the dead. What do you suppose they are doing? If the dead are not raised to life at all, what do they mean by being baptized on their behalf?"

Some non-Latter-day Saints believe that in 1 Corinthians Paul was denouncing or condemning the practice of baptism for the dead as heretical. This is a strange conclusion, since Paul used the practice of baptism for the dead to support the doctrine of the resurrection. In essence, he says, "Why are we performing baptism in behalf of our dead, if, as some propose, there will be no resurrection of the dead? If there is to be no resurrection, would not such baptisms be a waste of time?" On the subject of baptism for the dead, one Latter-day Saint writer observed, "Paul was most sensitive to blasphemy and false ceremonialism—of all people he would not have argued for the foundation truth of the resurrection with a questionable example. He obviously did not feel that the principle was disharmonious with the gospel."<#>25

A surprising amount of evidence suggests that the doctrine of salvation for the dead was known and understood by ancient Christian communities. Early commentary on the statement in Hebrews that "they without us should not be made perfect" (Heb. 11:40) holds that the passage referred to the Old Testament Saints who were trapped in Hades awaiting the help of their New Testament counterparts, and that Christ held the keys that would "open the doors of the Underworld to the faithful souls there."<#>26 It is significant that in his work Dialogue with Trypho, Justin Martyr, the early Christian apologist (ca. A.D. 100-165), cites an apocryphon that he charges had been deleted from the book of Jeremiah but was still to be found in some synagogue copies of the text: "The Lord God remembered His dead people of Israel who lay in the graves; and He descended to preach to them His own salvation."<#>27 Irenaeus also taught, "The Lord descended to the parts under the earth, announcing to them also the good news of his coming, there being remission of sins for such as believe on him."<#>28

One of the early Christian documents linking the writings of Peter on Christ's ministry in the spirit world (see 1 Pet. 3:18-20; 4:6) with those of Paul on baptism for the dead is the "Shepherd of Hermas," which states that "these apostles and teachers who preached the name of the Son of God, having fallen asleep in the power and faith of the Son of God, preached also to those who had fallen asleep before them, and themselves gave to them the seal of the preaching. They went down therefore with them into the water and came up again, but the latter went down alive and came up alive, while the former, who had fallen asleep before, went down dead but came up alive. Through them, therefore, they were made alive, and received the knowledge of the name of the Son of God."<#>29

It is of much interest to me that this question of the range and depth and extent of Christ's saving gospel—including the possibility of the gospel being taught to and received by those who have died—has begun to receive a surprising amount of attention by modern Christian thinkers as well. One writer asks, "What is the fate of those who die never hearing the gospel of Christ? Are all the `heathen' lost? Is there an opportunity for those who have never heard of Jesus to be saved?

"These questions raise one of the most perplexing, provocative and perennial issues facing Christians. It has been considered by philosophers and farmers, Christians and non-Christians. In societies where Christianity has had strong influence, just about everyone has either asked or been asked about the final destiny of those dying without knowledge of the only Savior, Jesus Christ. Far and away, this is the most-asked apologetic question on U.S. college campuses." The author then proceeds, with other contributors, to discuss this rather difficult issue.<#>30

1 See David L. Paulsen, "Early Christian Belief in a Corporeal Deity: Origen and Augustine as Reluctant Witnesses," Harvard Theological Review 83:2, 1990, pp. 105-16.

2 The History of Dogma, 7 vols. (New York: Dover, 1961), 1:180, note 1; 2:255, note 5.

3 Edward J. Fortman, The Triune God: A Historical Study of the Doctrine of the Trinity (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1972), p. 32.

4 Harper's Bible Dictionary, edited by Paul J. Achtemeier (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1985), pp. 1,098-99.

5 Adapted from "Scripturally Questioning the Traditional Sectarian View of the Trinity," in The Eighth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1984), pp. 147-49.

6 I am indebted to the work of my colleague Stephen E. Robinson in Are Mormons Christian? (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991), pp. 60-65, for much of what follows.

7 Symeon Lash, "Deification," in The Westminster Dictionary of Christian Theology, edited by Alan Richardson and John Bowden (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1983), pp. 147-48.

8 Against Heresies 4.38; 4.11.

9 The Instructor 3.1; see also Stromateis, 23.

10 Against the Arians 1.39; 3:34.

11 On the Psalms 50.2.

12 I am indebted to my friend and colleague Brent L. Top for his book The Life Before (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), an important work that sets forth at some length an LDS perspective on this doctrine. I have relied heavily upon the material in chapter 2.

13 Patrologogiae Cursus Completus . . . Series Graeca 5:1260.

14 Patrologiae . . . Graeca 8:321.

15 Henry Chadwick, The Early Church, rev. ed. (New York: Penguin, 1993), pp. 101, 105.

16 Encyclopedia of Early Christianity, edited by Everett Ferguson (New York: Garland Publishing Co., 1990), p. 863.

17 Top, The Life Before, p. 18.

18 The Rise of Christianity (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984), p. 382.

19 Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 15:371; The Jewish Wars 2:154-56.

20 See comments from R. H. Charles in The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament 2:444.

21 See William Schneemelcher, ed., New Testament Apocrypha, 2 vols., rev. ed. (Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1991), 1:323.

22 See ibid., 3:380-85.

23 Teachings, p. 121.

24 Richard Kugelman, "The First Letter to the Corinthians," in The Jerome Biblical Commentary, 2 vols., ed. Raymond E. Brown, Joseph A. Fitzmyer, and Roland E. Murphy (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1968), 2:273.

25 Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), p. 405.

26 J. A. MacCulloch, The Harrowing of Hell (Edinburgh, Scotland: T. & T. Clark, 1930), pp. 48-49.

27 Ibid., pp. 84-85; also in The Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1951), 1:235.

28 Irenaeus, Against Heresies 4.27.1, in J. B. Lightfoot, The Apostolic Fathers (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1962), pp. 277-78.

29 The Shepherd of Hermas, similitude 9.16.2-4 (Loeb Classical Library, translated by Kirsopp Lake); cited in Anderson, Understanding Paul, pp. 407-8; emphasis added

30 John Sanders, ed., What About Those Who Never Heard? Three Views on the Destiny of the Unevangelized (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1995), p. 7; see also John Sanders, No Other Name: An Investigation into the Destiny of the Unevangelized (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1992); Dennis L. Okholm and Timothy R. Phillips, eds., Four Views on Salvation in a Pluralistic World (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan Publishing House, 1995); see also a critique of the position that suggests the possibility of salvation beyond the grave in Millard J. Erickson, How Shall They Be Saved? The Destiny of Those Who Do Not Hear of Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Books, 1996). Oddly enough, the LDS position on the redemption of the dead is not mentioned by any of the authors.
