Joseph Smith, Alma P. Burton, Discourses of the Prophet Joseph Smith ( 1977)

Appendix B

"A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief"

A poor wayfaring man of grief Had often crossed me on my way Who sued so humbly for relief That I could never answer, Nay. I had not power to ask his name; Whither he went or whence he came; Yet there was something in his eye That won my love, I know not why. Once, when my scanty meal was spread, He entered—not a word he spake! Just perishing for want of bread; I gave him all; he blessed it, brake, And ate, but gave me part again; Mine was an angel's portion then, For while I fed with eager haste, The crust was manna to my taste. I spied him where a fountain burst, Clear from the rock—his strength was gone, The heedless water mock'd his thirst, He heard it, saw it hurrying on. I ran and raised the suff'rer up; Thrice from the stream he drain'd my cup, Dipp'd, and returned it running o'er; I drank and never thirsted more. 'Twas night, the floods were out, it blew A winter hurricane aloof; I heard his voice, abroad, and flew To bid him welcome to my roof. I warmed, I clothed, I cheered my guest, I laid him on my couch to rest; Then made the earth my bed, and seem'd In Eden's garden while I dream'd. Stripp'd, wounded, beaten nigh to death, I found him by the highway side; I rous'd his pulse, brought back his breath, Revived his spirit, and supplied Wine, oil, refreshment—he was heal'd; I had myself a wound conceal'd; But from that hour forgot the smart, And peace bound up my broken heart. In pris'n I saw him next—condemned To meet a traitor's doom at morn; The tide of lying tongues I stemmed. And honored trim 'mid shame and scorn. My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked if I for him would die; The flesh was weak, my blood ran chill, But the free spirit cried, "I will!" Then in a moment to my view, The stranger started from disguise: The tokens in his hands I knew, The Savior stood before mine eyes. He spake—and my poor name he named— "Of me thou hast not been asham'd; These deeds shall thy memorial be; Fear not thou didst them unto me." (HC 6:614-15.)
