“Truth is stranger than fiction.”

When the artist would paint a picture, whether it is to be ideal or a scene from nature, he collects material, draws an outline sketch, coloring it as he proceeds with his work, touching it here and there, viewing it in all lights, shading or softening according to his fancy, making it a study and an art. He has positive material to work with, and also his own delicate sense of the beautiful to aid him in his pleasant task. It is the exquisite taste and skill with which he combines and links together substances with thoughts, that give beauty and tone to the picture.

The author has no such actual helps in beautifying and embellishing his work; it is simply all thoughts, intermingled with fancies or remembrances, perhaps faint as shadows. These blended with realities form the pen-picture, but the design is only in the mind, and all the solid work must be done by his own brain. Ideas emanating largely from fancy wrought into pictures of real life, but all in a very imperceptible form, until they are, by the delicate and diligent aid of the author, caught in their airy flight and placed on paper by the helpful aid of pen and ink.

It is a picture of this kind the writer now undertakes to sketch. The planning, designing, and embellishing, all has to be done in the mind’s eye ere it is engraven on paper. The materials are only fragments culled from memory’s worn and defaced tablets, woven together with the fine spun thread of imagination in the golden loom of fancy.

If the picture be true to life, there will be some heavy dark shading, yet here and there a ray of sunlight with mellow tinges; occasionally a storm will sweep over the scene and from its very intensity will be almost perceptible; then, too, there will be singing birds, and babbling brooks, and murmuring seas with tides coming in, and many things odd and strange, yet withal some touches of pathetic sweetness; the holy calm of summer twilight, moonlight scenes, and stars peeping out in the distance, like bright harbingers of future hope.

Whatever of a study the story may be, it will be more real than ideal, more American than foreign, more modern than antique, and the readers interest may thus be somewhat intensified.

A village nestled down among the hills,

With quaint old fashion’d houses low and brown;

And picture-like some old neglected mills,

In days gone by, the pride of all the town.

In one of the inland towns of the Old Bay State, half a century ago, there was situated an exceedingly romantic little village. A rural picture, nestled down among the rocky hills in a hollow, that had once been a thickly wooded dell. Around it on the south and west rose gentle undulating fields where sleek cattle grazed, sheep nibbled, and young calves and lambs frisked and gamboled in innocent glee, for very joy of living. Wild flowers bloomed in shady nooks and by the winding brooks; northward it was sheltered by a heavy timbered woodland, that rose steep and high; and trees the growth of centuries stood in their proud magnificence, the monarchs of the forest. Hard maple, oak, birch, and pine, grew there in great abundance, and from these leafy woods the sawmills further up among the hills were well supplied.

Eastward stretched out in the distance, long lines and broad plains of rich meadow and pasture lands; and afar off one might discern the church spires and peaked roofs of the houses in another sleepy old town. It was not a noisy bustling village, but staid and restful. One could well fancy that old, old echoes still lingered in the hills, and the people were too “proper” to waken them; there was such method and precision in everything, and the women always spoke low and gently, in soft, modulated tones.

There were a few unpretentious houses, most of them low and old and brown; an old furnace and forge, the delight of the village boys; but the principal feature of the place was an old woolen mill, situated in the centre of the little cluster of dwellings, on a clear placid stream of water that bounds over its rocky bed, on through the town. Twenty years before, the mill was running “full time” and paid well, employing three score of hands. The old furnace, too, was bright and glowing then, a brawny arm uplifted, and the sound of the hammer at the forge, the sparks flying hither and yon, gave life and activity to the scene.

The times had changed. The old settlers whose industry and thrift had turned the wilderness into fields and gardens, had grown careworn and tired, or were sleeping in quiet resting places in the churchyard near by. Many of the young, ambitious sons in the pride of manhood had gone fortune-hunting into new localities, where there were other lands to subdue and make fertile; or, weary of the quiet atmosphere that brooded over their native village, had grown restless and sought the bustle of the great, busy world, in some large city or enterprising town, and so the old mill stood still.

The children wondered why the great building was empty and forsaken, and thought how splendid it would be to see the large, old-fashioned wheels that seemed so lazy, turn over and over in the deep, still water, sending it dashing and foaming over their ponderous sides. It was not strange that the children queried and asked numberless questions, for it was a curious old place, and rumors were afloat—no one knew from whence they came—that the old mill was haunted, that at night witches met there to hold high revelry. But somehow the children did not seem to be afraid, and were never forbidden to play there.

Adjoining the mill was a carding machine which still did regular duty, turning out in great abundance the soft, white rolls that were spun on the great wheels in all the country houses, by the domesticated pretty girls. Young ladies then were quite as proud of their skill in spinning, knitting, and household employments, as our modern mesdemoiselles are of their music and drawing. Tripping back and forth, to and from the spinning wheel, drawing out the soft, fleecy rolls through the pretty taper fingers, shows of one’s hands as well and figure, more than sitting at the piano.

The handsome, little wheels for spinning tow and linen were really beautiful, and the ideal picture of a lady spinning flax, twirling her pretty distaff between her slender fingers, her dainty foot upon the treadle, has been the theme of poetry and of song. Some writers tell us our Puritan grandmothers were very “plain folk,” but methinks they were also very proud.

The mill had been built at an early period in the settlement of the village, and in fact had been the origin of the country itself; for one by one, the people had gathered there, to get employment in the factory. Now the owner and proprietor had retired from the busy pursuits of active life, and the mill was allowed to stand idle. The master was weary with many years and in the “paternal mansion” he sat and rested from his arduous labors.

Long after he had withdrawn from the daily vocations once so diligently pursued, he still entertained his friends and neighbors in the most hospitable fashion at the old farmhouse. He never wearied of reciting over and over again to his guests, stories of his life—how his father came there a boy, when the country was new and wild. His family had been large landowners in the city of Boston, but as the town was enlarged, and the population increased, they sold their land, piece by piece, and came into the backwoods to settle, where there was more room and less temptation for a large family of boys, and subsequently they had built the mill. He delighted in recounting the hardships and privations of pioneer life, and dwelt upon his father’s hatred of the British and the Roman Catholics.

No wonder he was proud of liberty, for he had fought bravely for it in perilous places, and had endured much privation and fatigue. To him freedom was dearer than life; to obtain that precious boon he had faced death at the point of the bayonet. His favorite phrase, which he very frequently repeated to his children and friends, was one familiar to all American citizens: “Taxation without representation is tyranny.”

The honors conferred upon him he considered fairly earned, and was proud of his handsome uniform and heavy, clumsy sword, which he always exhibited on training days. His military air on such occasions quite awed the children, and they looked upon him with a degree of reverence mingled with enthusiasm, for what heart does not beat a little faster when the drums beat and the soldiers parade, that has the blood of the patriots in its veins.

But the most interesting of all the old major’s stories, especially to the young folks, was how his father fell in love with the daughter of a general in the British army. As he expressed it, his magnificent figure, his manliness and courage, made him master of the situation, and he won his sweetheart in spite of the high sense of filial duty she entertained and her aristocratic father’s remonstrances. Differences were cast aside and distinctions leveled by the magical charm of true love, and when the war was over, and the armies of the king had been vanquished, the haughty general returned to his native shore, leaving his only daughter—the heir to his wealth and the pride of his ancestral home—with her unsophisticated “Yankee” husband.

The officer’s daughter had received superior educational advantages, and her accomplishments were far beyond those of the country girls among whom her lot had been cast; but she never manifested the least consciousness of the fact. She had married the man of her choice, and gracefully adapted herself to the habits and customs of the people who were from henceforth to be her people. A genuine lady born and bred, she assumed no rights or privileges more than her neighbor, but bore herself modestly as wife and mother, honoring the position she had gladly accepted.

She played the harp and sung like a bird. Her costly silks and creamy laces, which she wore with such an air of refinement, were the admiration of the ladies all the country round. It is needless to recount her good deeds; her heart was generous, and her lord was rich, and their bounties were liberally dispensed.

It was during their young married life that the old factory was built and the village grew, “in a manner speaking,” and prosperity and success, domestic and financial, attended the happy couple. He was tall and strong, and she was so petite that she could stand without stooping under his outstretched arm.

His love was like that of the knights of olden time, who were ever ready to break a lance in love’s defense; and often, when beside the hearthstone of the wide, old fireplace on a wintry night, he would sit by her as she dallied with her knitting, for women’s hands are scarce ever quiet, and as he would recount over and again the chapter of incidents upon the battlefield—how he had suffered with his comrades in arms, and how many had died of the wounds received from the enemy—his blood would rise to fever heat, as he seemed to see the dreadful tragedies enacted over again, and starting to his feet with clenched hands and eyes of fire, he would vow eternal enmity to the foe.

But, his eye chancing to rest upon his fair, young wife, and remembering the sacrifices she had made for him, all the anger would die out of his face, and a change such as an angel’s presence might bring where discord reigned, would be swift as transition. Dropping low his eyes, suffused with tears, his passionate voice changed to low and tremulous tones, he would exclaim entreatingly, “Forgive me, darling—for your dear sake I will refrain from recrimination. Your father was a brave and valiant soldier, though he fought on the wrong side; but he was the soul of honor, and though it wounded his pride to see you marry one he considered inferior, one of the rebels he had been sent across the sea to subdue, yet he loved his child too well to wreck her happiness, and recognized that love conquers when the sword has failed.”

This was nearly a hundred years ago now, and both are lying in the old churchyard under the mossy sods, with broken tombstones overgrown with tangled rose vines in the sleepy town, whose church steeples can yet be seen from the village, where their wedded life was spent. The lady died in the full bloom of motherhood, many years before her “lord,” and left him lonely and sorrowful, in the prime of his life at the old manor house.

Long years after, a change had been wrought in all that pertained to the village and its inhabitants. The home of the major and his once young and beautiful wife, had grown old and gray, and well befitted its owner; ’twas a rambling country dwelling, gambrel-roofed, the eaves projecting wide, and the swallows had built their nests year after year in the same nooks and corners, until they seemed as much at home as the inmates of the house.

Outside ’twas quaint in design of no particular architecture, rather rudely built, but withal substantial, and like its master had seen much service—the storms of many winters had beaten upon its walls and it was weather-worn; inside it was roomy, home-like and commodious; the large wide open fireplace bespoke warmth and comfort, especially when great logs of wood were piled on the heavy fire-dogs and blazed up fitfully, and the tall, thin, tallow candles burned with a flickering light, and shadows flitted hither and thither in the long, low rooms with their sombre walls—then the house had almost a legendary appearance, and one susceptible of illusions might readily have been induced to believe the frightful stories of ghosts and witches that were the regular winter pastime on a festive evening in the country houses.

The furniture of the place was in harmony with its other appointments, oaken and dark and heavy-made—tall chests of drawers with awkward brass knobs reached from the floor to the ceiling, filled with the family linen that had once been the pride of the fair young mistress; tables we should call clumsy now; and chairs and sofas straightbacked and uncomfortable, corresponded well with the other articles of furniture.

In the long dining room, the principal living room in the days of the first master and mistress, when the children were around them, was a tall majestic clock, inside which one might have stood upright with perfect ease; the large brass pendulum swung to and fro as leisurely as when it counted the merry hours for the happy family that dwelt within these now almost deserted rooms. The great broad face looked knowing and wise, as much as to say, “I keep the family chronology. I have marked the time of births, of marriages and deaths faithfully for four-score years. I guard the honor of the house and know its history.” Many times in years after when the long, low room was deserted, and a neighbor would drop in, the old clock was like a familiar friend, and its tick, tick in the quiet of the old house seemed to break the deep silence that rested upon it.
