Deserted halls where all was once so bright,

Now so neglected, shadowy and gray;

For she who made the home so full of light

Can come no more, to chase the gloom away.

After six and twenty years of uninterrupted domestic felicity, the master was left alone with his five boys. No daughter had been born to them to bear the semblance of the beautiful wife and mother, though the father had ardently longed for one, to be the light and comfort of his home. Many were the plans the happy couple laid, in that past which was gone forever now—to train and educate a little girl, should the fates be so propitious as to grant them this desire.

The husband thus bereft of his treasure yearned more than ever for womanly companionship. His mother had been dead many years, he had never known what it was to have a sister, and now his wife, the beloved of his heart, the companion of his youth, and the pride of his home, was gone forever. He could not be reconciled to his loss, and he gave himself up to sad and gloomy reveries that made him old before his time, and totally unfitted him for the duties devolving upon him as the father and only parent to his family of boys.

The boys grew to manhood and entered upon the busy, practical pursuits of life; and one by one left the paternal roof to which the father clung so tenaciously. The orchard and fields were neglected, the garden grew to weeds, and the fine old cherry trees were the sport of the birds and the unruly urchins of the neighborhood. The beehives demanded some little attention once or twice a year, but the master never gave any orders to his servants, so the fine estate was left to ruin.

The old gentleman sat in his chimney corner in her room, the one she whom he so loved had occupied, and drank his tea and ate his tasteless meals (scarce realizing what he did) on the same round table with snowy linen where so many times in the olden days they two had sat and chatted over the romantic past and sketched out the golden future. There was the queer cupboard filled with quaint old china, a few pieces of silverware seldom ever washed, a chest of drawers packed with linen that was never aired.

For years the master lived on and on in the same dull, stupid, monotonous way until he was nearly a hundred years old. Once or twice a year the eldest son and heir, long ago tired of the factory which had fallen into a ruin, the namesake of his father and father’s father, Elisha, would come up from Boston to look after the property and see that no one carried away the valuables; and each time he anticipated renting the estate to some thrifty young farmer, who would make it pay a good interest, as well as keep it in repair. “No! No!” was invariably the answer. “Wait until I am gone.”

A younger son resided in the village, but his family was large, though he like his father had married late in life, and had not been very successful in his enterprise, had met with heavy losses, and the eldest son hated him and would not allow any interference on his part in regard to the homestead. This was the condition of affairs three score years ago and more, at the time our story opens, and the village was as described in the opening paragraph. Four score years and more had flown since the old major first saw the light of day, and those he knew in early life, one by one had gone until none remained of the loved and cherished companions of his youth, and he felt,

“Like one who treads alone, some banquet hall deserted

Whose lights are fled, whose garlands dead,

And all but he departed.”

He was much alone; occasionally his grandchildren who lived near the homestead would come in and listen to his strange stories, but his heart seemed cold and dead, and he never kissed or caressed them—in fact, they worried him, so the old woman used to say who waited on him. The little things wondered at his indifference and often asked, “What ails Grandpa?” And Mamma would explain how he mourned for her he had so tenderly loved, his wife; and that no daughter had come into the home to fill the vacancy.

And it may be strange to state that none of his son’s wives suited him—he thought them all too commonplace. They could not enter into his feelings and views; and had no patience with his whims. He talked much to himself and often fancied that his darling, the light of his life, sat by him as in days gone by.

One wintry day when the snow was deep upon the ground, he was sitting by the little corner fireplace toying with his silver snuff box and musing as though holding sweet communion with her he loved, and a little child beautiful and bright came running in and roused him from his dreamy reverie, exclaiming, “News! Grandpa! Good news!”

The poor old man, half dreaming, said, “No, my son, she has not come back, she cannot come. I have called her often, but all in vain.”

“But Grandpa,” reasoned the child, “Papa sent me to tell you to come over—you must come, it’s to see the new baby. It came at sunrise this morning, and Papa wants you to drink to its good health and long life, for it is a girl, and you are to name it.”

Hearing this and beginning to understand the situation, the aged man took his hat and cane, and off he strode with the little one to the house of his son, a short distance away—only a few minutes’ walk—and with the impatience of a child he entered.

The son welcomed his father warmly, and after seating him comfortably by the fire, explained why he had sent for him on such a cold, raw day.

“Father,” said he, “we have had sons and daughters, six in number; this is the seventh and perchance may be the last in your lifetime, and I want you to name it,” and filling the glass with purple wine, he handed it to his venerable father, who taking it drank to “Hephzibah,” and said, “I shall not live long, and she who was born today shall bear the name of her I loved so well and mourn so sincerely. The wee little creature shall be called for her grandmother, who was ‘the pride of the village.’”

And then he uttered, possibly unknown to himself, a prophecy that she should become learned and wise, and that in all the village none should excel her in the road to fame. But of all this no one thought much at the time, but years afterwards the saying came back to their remembrance with increased significance.

Dinner was served, and the old major grew talkative. A tender chord had been touched by repeating the name he loved so well, for how dear the plainest names become when associated with those precious to our hearts, we all know. The children inquired what Grandpa named the baby sister, and when they were told ’twas Hephzibah, they thought it “dreadful, horrid,” and even cried to think so sweet a little baby should have such a terrible name given to it. But Grandpa was inexorable, and tears and entreaties were of no avail, and as if to make peace, he said she should have all the fine embroidered laces her grandmother had wrought with her own dainty fingers, the chests of linen, the elegant, old china, the silverware and spoons, and all the silks and ribbons so long packed away out of sight, that no woman was permitted to handle, much less to wear. All this and more he promised on the day of her birth to the unconscious little one.

He grew quite enthusiastic on the subject and by and by said to his son, “It may be she will marry her cousin Elisha and have the homestead, and we shall see the village prosper again, for Elisha will have money.”

This was too much for the father, who, though poor compared to his eldest brother, was proud, and replied bitterly, “No! He would scorn a village girl, and my brother’s son shall not look down upon my child.”

“Ah, well, well, how foolish to differ about her marriage on the day of her birth, strange indeed; I cannot understand why we should thus drift off into the future of one scarce yet initiated into life; it may be all owing to her name. It may be,” said Grandpa quietly, “but it is many a long day since I have been so aroused as to dwell upon the future of anyone, not even my own sons, and to be thus exercised is ‘passing strange.’”

And so the two—father and son—talked on; a channel of communication opened between them that had been closed for years. From that very day the old major seemed to have taken a new lease of life. The advent of the little stranger had indeed created a change, and he watched her from day to day, fancying he could see some resemblance to that other Hephzibah for whom she was christened.

As soon as she was old enough to run about he insisted that she should remain with him at the old homestead. Much as the parents esteemed him, they could not consent to such an arrangement, but allowed little Hephzibah to visit at the old home regularly with one of her elder sisters.

His love for the little one was so strong he could not endure to be separated from her, but kept her near him in the musty, old, deserted house, until she was about as antique in her manners as the aged veteran himself. When other little girls were sewing “over and over” or hemming by a thread, she would sit and tell them long stories, and amuse them by the hour together, and when they asked her where she learned so many pretty tales, she would answer, “In the old manor house,” talking to herself.

Poetry unwritten was in her heart and soul, and the realities of life were a perfect blank to her ideal nature. Her practical New England mother wondered what could be done to bring the child down from the airy heights, where she soared unconsciously, to the level of the earth, and make her understand the need of actual labor in the work-a-day world.

Her hair, which was a mass of bright brown waves, was never smooth, and her white dimity aprons, made so neat and nice, were soon crumpled and soiled; “generally untidy” was her mother’s idea of the child’s appearance.

At school, however, she progressed rapidly, and was a favorite with her playmates; but at night, she kept the household wide awake with her memorizing ballads and improvising meaningless rhymes.

Thus time passed on; the semiannual visits of the eldest son from Boston continued as regular as ever, and it came to his ears that little Hephzibah was to be the heiress of the treasures and jewels of his dead mother. It nettled him sorely, for he had pleaded in vain to obtain them for his wife. His father would never consent that anyone should ever possess them save those of his own blood, and so he had thought his daughter would some day inherit them. “Why not?” he said to himself. “It is the proper thing and in the direct line.” He could not bear the thought that the youngest son’s daughter should ever wear his mother’s jewels. He was too haughty to do more than barely recognize his brother, and as for the wife and children, he never deigned to notice them.

One summer when he came as usual he brought with him his son Elisha, who, not knowing his aristocratic father’s aversion to the villagers, romped and played with his country cousins. The grandfather was delighted and inadvertently said to his son one day when he happened to see him with little Hephzibah, “That boy had better marry his cousin Hephzibah and take possession here when he’s of age.”

“My son marry that country cousin of his? Never! I would disown him. Let her marry one of her own class.”

This quite enraged the old major, who knew full well that her father was much more honorable and generous than his city brother; and not only so, but that the younger son’s wife was of a much better family than the other daughter-in-law, and his hot temper rose, and he replied, “She is too good for your son, for now I remember who his mother was.”

Angry words followed between the two, and they were never afterwards reconciled to each other. Little Elisha did not comprehend why his father was not willing he should play with Hephzibah, and persisted in being in her company, and begged his father to leave him in the country, because he should be unhappy if he must go back to Boston without his favorite cousin.

His girl cousin, however, was not nearly so fond of him. In fact, she loved to play by herself and ransack old closets and garrets, or wherever there were old things, for which she seemed to have an unbounded passion. She would sit for hours together among the rubbish and dress her dolls and talk to them as if they were conscious of all she said. She dwelt as much in a world of her own, as did her aged grandfather, and they suited each other admirably. Out of doors as well as in, she enjoyed every nook and corner. The orchard resounded with her sweet voice in merry song and laughter, and there was not a tree she had not climbed.

Her mother would sometimes say, speaking of the fanciful child, “Hephzibah has no more idea of eating and drinking regularly, than the fairies and wood nymphs of which she is always talking and dreaming. Her ways are shiftless,” she would invariably add, “and that is what the world will never overlook.”

But the matter rested there, and the child grew more unlike other girls every day. She could not appreciate her mother’s fears and apprehensions about the future, and while she was left to her fine-spun fancies and Grandpa’s curious stories, with the old house and grounds to ramble through at will, she cared not; an unsophisticated child of nature, with a mind so rich in imagery that all the earth wore radiant robes of glory for her, and the star-bespangled heavens were mysteries she never cared to have explained, but only to gaze on and worship from a distance. Little she dreamed that in a few short years, life would reveal itself in a thousand glowing transports, and alas! in all its cold and hard realities as well; but so it proved.

Ere long an event transpired that changed all the current of Hephzibah’s life. Her father died suddenly, without a settlement of any sort for his large family. The widowed mother with three younger children, and not one old enough to render much assistance in the way of help or support, was more than ever engrossed with the cares of life. Alas! how heavy fall such burdens on women.

The widow left so utterly dependent, with ten children looking to her maintenance, took up her burden heroically and never faltered. Some said, “The children’s rich uncle will provide for them,” but Mrs. H. always answered, “No! We do not want his money; but if I were a man with power to act, I would see they had their own, of which he has robbed them.”

And this was true, for the eldest brother taking advantage of the old major’s idiosyncrasies, had managed to obtain possession of all his ready means, and used it in his own business and then represented that he supported his father, and consequently all there was worth claiming belonged to him alone.

One of the sons had died while quite young; another gone they knew not whither, for he never wrote nor sent one word to comfort his aged father; and the third lived a gay bachelor life in the city of Boston. Neither of these cared for the paternal estate, nor the heirlooms of the family; therefore the eldest son had full sway after his youngest brother’s death.

He had always been annoyed about his large family, and living so near the old home, he feared his influence, but now he breathed freely again, for he was gone where he could no more trouble him about worldly affairs. Inwardly he congratulated himself that the “coast was clear,” although he made some pretensions to a desire to help the widow and lighten her load of care.

The widow really thought that in consideration of the circumstances, the uncle would take Hephzibah to Boston and educate her, but no such offer was made, nor hint of such a thing given. The very next morning after his brother’s funeral, the rich merchant bade them all goodbye ceremoniously, and, without a word of consolation, left for his own luxurious home, knowing too that they were entitled to a support at least, from the estate he had charge of.
