She wandered fancy free, o’er hill and dale,

Or lingered lovingly beside the brook,

This little wood-nymph of the lowly vale,

Culling wild flowers from ev’ry sheltered nook.

Mrs. Hathaway was a woman of strong characteristics, tall and dignified in figure, though gentle and womanly in manner and bearing. Her mind decidedly practical in the full sense of the term, she proved equal to the emergency that had overtaken her so unexpectedly. She took into consideration just what was necessary to be done to economize and live within her means, and lost no time in carrying her plans into execution. Her close attention to the business of her husband, for the purpose of helping him, had given her an experience that but few women in that day had the opportunity of acquiring.

From the time of her husband’s death she was so engrossed with cares and responsibilities that the younger children were left to themselves, and Hephzibah had ample opportunity to pursue her idle ways, or only to visit the old home and wait on Grandpa to hat and cane, and enjoy the freedom of the orchard, garden, meadows and woods she loved so well. She was far enough advanced in her studies to read everything that came in her way and was passionately fond of books and stories—she really believed in fairies and elves and wondered why she could not be visited by them.

Her grandpa gave her the most perfect liberty to rummage over the musty old letters and manuscript stowed away as useless in the garret. Tied up in bundles carefully, though faded, soiled, and covered in dust, were the writings and correspondence of her grandmother for whom she was named, and she would feast upon these with childish delight, gleaning here and there, out of the way and romantic ideas that accorded with her own peculiar notions.

The neighbors looked on in utter amazement and wondered what would become of this precocious child who was subject to no control, and who had withal such seemingly exalted notions, that it totally unfitted her for the companionship of children of her own age. Mrs. Hathaway would sometimes say to the old major, “What shall we do with Hephzibah, she holds herself so above our country ways?”

“Strange child very, not at all like other children. Time will develop her more fully—she will make her way in the world.” But he stubbornly refused to make the sacrifice of her company, or listen to any plan suggested to induce her to conform to the usual manner or condition of little girls. “I cannot part with her,” he would repeat over and over.

In spite of her oddity and her quaint notions she was more sought after than any of all the village children. She could repeat more verses and tell more wonderful stories, and knew where all the birds’ nests were and when they were ready to fly, and she never tired of talking in her own way, to old and young, and with all her lack of conformity to other people’s ways she was a general favorite in the village.

Even her mother became convinced at last that Hephzibah was of a different temperament and organization and unlike the rest of the family, and she said to her older daughters who were solicitous about the child, “She cannot conform to our habits of discipline, she must not be forced to submit; Grandpa would say, ‘She is like her grandmother’s family; she has the Hastings blood in her veins. We shall see what the future will unfold.’” What a puzzle the child was to them all!

“What can Hephzibah do with all these fine aristocratic notions without money?” said her rich uncle to the mother on one occasion when paying his regular visit to the homestead. He found her installed there as though she were actually the mistress of ceremonies, positively receiving her uncle on his arrival with the air of a little duchess bred and born.

He undertook to remonstrate with his father, telling him how absurd it was to have “that child assuming so much authority, where she had no rights,” but all to no purpose; the old man’s affection for her was almost an adoration.

So the selfish uncle appealed to the mother; he knew her to be wise and discriminating and he carefully inquired what course she intended to take in regard to Hephzibah’s future. “She cannot go on long in the way she is doing now,” he said, “for she will soon be developing into womanhood and you have too many boys and girls to give her any special advantages; by and by you will not be able to control her at all—if indeed you are now, which appears doubtful—and the child is far too delicate and sensitive as well as too proud to push her own way in the world. You are certainly doing her a great injustice; she must go away from here to school, where she will be properly controlled. Once gone from his sight, Father will forget all about it, just like a child, and she will familiarize herself with other scenes, and it will change everything for the better.”

The uncle seemed to think his sister-in-law coincided with his views, and acquiesced in the scheme of sending Hephzibah away, but she did not—far from it, nor did she intend to follow his advice in the least. When he had gone, she soliloquized thus: “It would never do to send the child away while her grandpa lives—it would break her heart, and the old gentleman would refuse to be comforted and mourn himself to death. She must remain until time brings some change about.”

Friends of the family one after another came to offer advice, until Mrs. Hathaway grew weary of their solicitations, and her replies were such as to convince them she knew best herself what to do with her own. And though some of the persistent ones felt self-condemned, yet they tried to make amends for seeming interference by praising the child’s ability, and would say, “We are all interested in her future, for we can see she has more than ordinary talent and it should be developed in other ways than hiding herself away in nooks and corners and talking to the brooks and birds and trees.”

Mrs. Hathaway was perfectly well aware of the situation of affairs, and anxious to have her little daughter receive an education in the best schools. And she knew, better than any one else could, as mothers almost invariably do, that Hephzibah could not submit to be sent away from Grandpa among strangers, and at the same time conform to the rigid discipline of the schoolroom. She loved her little girl with all the warmth of her generous motherly heart, and her interest in the child grew more intense still when she learned how others felt concerning the child’s future, and that she was such a general favorite in the village. However, she would not yield in the least and pursued the even tenor of her way, regardless alike of their admiration of the child or advice concerning her welfare.

And what of Hephzibah? She was totally unaware of it all and still indulged her childish peculiarities; she never played as other children did, or much with them at all, though she had likes and dislikes, strong ones too, among her playmates as well as older people; the boys of her own age were rather fond of annoying and frightening her when they found her alone in the fields, but even the mischievous boys held her somehow in a sort of adoration, and would bring her the earliest wild violets and longest-stemmed water lilies she loved so well, and thus even the most bashful ones manifested their boyish appreciation of her love of the beautiful in nature.

Descended from the staunch old Puritan stock, with all their severity of character, it seemed strange that without any predilection on the part of her parents, she should possess such enthusiasm on subjects so foreign to the habits and customs, as well as the disposition, of the people with whom she associated and among whom she dwelt.

But with all her weird fancies and rose-colored aspirations, she had inherited from the Pilgrim forefathers and foremothers those traits and attributes that must ever lie at the foundation of whatever is lofty in motive or purpose—honesty, integrity, and a conscientiousness in all her thoughts and feelings, that gave a moral tone and balance to the ideal and spiritualistic and kept her within the bounds of reason even when, as she grew in years, impulse uncontrolled would have led her into a labyrinth of difficulties.
