Weird fancies do possess us now and then,

And even child-life has its histories

Which older grown we fain recall again,

Remembering how sweet its mysteries.

Alas, another change awaited Hephzibah. Following close upon her father’s death, the aged veteran of the village, once “the young master” at the mill, and for so many years almost the sole occupant of the old farmhouse where our little heroine had roamed at will, the dear old grandpa whom she loved so fondly, passed quietly to his rest as though falling asleep.

The villagers who had known him all their lives, could scarcely mourn for one who had outlived his usefulness, though they honored his memory with many encomiums of praise, for his good deeds, his uprightness, his sterling integrity, and for his patriotism and military title nobly earned in his country’s defense.

And little Hepsie, as she was now almost invariably called by the children her playmates, was disconsolate and refused to be comforted—in fact, so wild and uncontrollable was her grief that her philosophical mother was puzzled. There was so much in the child’s nature that seemed “from the world apart,” that it was difficult to tell what one ought to do under the circumstances. This the mother knew, for she had studied Hepsie as she would a problem in algebra and found her a much more subtle thing to deal with, because she was constantly revealing new phases of character. It was more like a game of chess between mother and daughter, and Hepsie always managed to keep her mother in a state of perplexity, of which the child was totally unconscious.

“I cannot live without my grandpa,” she sobbed between her screams. “He cannot be without me—let me be buried in the same grave! He will never be happy without me. He loved me best of all the world.”

Such random expressions and then the crying was pitiful. In vain her mother and brothers and sisters reasoned and explained. She wept floods of tears, and when at last she could weep no more, she fell asleep only to awaken in a maze, as it were, thinking she was in the old house and Grandpa there with her as before this terrible shock had come upon her. Mrs. Hathaway tried to make her understand how happy would be the reunion of Grandpa and his wife, whose name she bore and whom he had so tenderly loved, and cherished her memory so faithfully. The child gave herself up to paroxysms of grief, piteous to those who loved her, and her mother now more than ever fully realized that some change must be made in Hepsie’s life.

Meantime the oldest son arrived from Boston to attend the funeral and look after the property. He paid little attention to the widow of his brother whom he had defrauded, though keeping up some appearance of respect to preserve the dignity of his father’s family, perhaps; but when all was over, and the family tomb re-opened to receive the remains and sealed up again, and such ceremonies performed as were absolutely necessary, and affairs settled, then he sent adrift the two old people who had lived so many years at the farm and were devoted to the old major, with a bare pittance, not caring if they went to “the poor house” or not. They had done faithful service and were at least entitled to their living.

His sister-in-law courageously spoke in their defense but he cruelly resented it by saying, “The very roof that shelters you and yours rightfully belongs to me.”

“You shall not have it,” she retorted, “not if there is law in the land to protect the rights of the widow and the fatherless.”

He felt he had gone too far, but he was not proud to recall his words, and walked away saying he did not care ever to set foot in the village again. Before leaving, however, he barred the widows of the old home and put heavy locks upon the doors and told the neighbors it would soon be taken down.

Hephzibah had looked upon the old house as her own—her grandpa had often told her she should have the homestead and all the beautiful old laces, linen, etc.—and now ’twas shut against her, and uncle Elisha had carried away everything valuable. The child rebelled and called him cruel and hardhearted, and protested against being robbed, but all to no purpose.

A new era now began in Hepsie’s history. She was just commencing to merge from childlife into the realm of girlhood. Her mother was keenly conscious of the change and seriously resolved to break the spell that clung around her and the associations so closely intertwined with her affections, and sent her away to school, where new scenes and surroundings would break the spell and give activity to her dormant energies.

Mrs. Hathaway had a friend in whom she reposed great confidence, living in a town about thirty miles away, the wife of clergyman, who had no daughter of her own, and whose superior education and accomplishments would be a great advantage to Hepsie in developing her unformed character.

And so ’twas settled at home with the family, and preparations were rapidly made for the journey. Letters were interchanged between Mrs. Hathaway and Mrs. Grosvenor, and the latter was given instructions in regard to disciplining the mind and character of the eccentric child whose guidance she was about to undertake.

The new dresses and other wearing apparel awakened but little interest in this unsophisticated child, but the thought of leaving the dear old places, the familiar scenes where she had spent her happy childhood, almost overcame her and she wept bitterly when she was reminded that she was going among strangers. However, she was just beginning to learn that life was not all made up of fancies, and indeed the death of her grandfather had worked a radical change in the tenor of her thoughts. She was more serious and contemplative and earth was not quite so rosy-hued nor the future so unreal as heretofore.

One delightful May morning when the lilacs were in bloom, and the fragrance of the apple blossoms sweet upon the air, she dressed herself with more than usual care, for this was to be her advent out into the great world, albeit only to an adjoining town, whither she had never been. She tripped lightly down the stairs though her heart was sad, and out into the grove at the back to say adieu to the trees and rocks and brook, for she had loved them all with a childish simplicity.

She gathered a bunch of violets and pinning them daintily on her black dress, she went in to say goodbye to the brothers and sisters, weeping bitterly all the time.

Her breakfast was untasted, though the choicest morsels had been prepared for her, and a nice lunch for the journey. Gloomy forebodings were in her mind at the thoughts of leaving her dear ones and going forth alone. She had never seen Mrs. Grosvenor, and the idea she formed of her was not at all prepossessing.

Finally the moment came—the sound of the carriage wheels—and the lumbering old coach drove up. Hepsie kissed them all goodbye and climbed into the stage, her eyes full of tears and her throat with sobs. The driver cracked his whip with a great flourish and the four fine horses darted forward down the road.

Looking out back of the coach window, she saw her stately undemonstrative mother going up the lilac walk slowly and wiping her eyes with her apron. Hepsie was rather glad her mother wept, for she thought grown women never cried, except when someone was dead. Her own tears were falling fast, but childish grief is not of long duration, and she soon forgot her trouble in the excitement of the journey, the lovely scenery through which they were passing, and the strange faces around her.

There were two or three other passengers and one old lady in green spectacles, who asked Hepsie inquisitively where her mother was; then, seeing the black crape on her dress, she said, “Oh, your mother’s dead, poor thing! And I s’pose your going to your rich relations.”

“My mother isn’t dead, and I’m going to school, and I haven’t any relatives except my uncle and cousins in Boston, and they are too proud to care for us! I hate my uncle anyway, for he has locked up my grandpa’s house, and says he’ll have it pulled down; and that’s the reason I’m sent away, because I cried so much for Grandpa and the old house.”

“Well, well, to be sure, what a chatterbox. And,” added the old lady, “you’ll soon forget all about it.”

“No, I shan’t,” said Hepsie. “He was the grandest man you ever saw.”

“I never saw him,” said the lady.

“Well, if you ever had seen him, you would think so, and everybody at the ‘Old Furnace’ thought so.”

“Well, I never,” said the green spectacled lady again. “What are you talking about, the Old Furnace? Was Major Hathaway your grandfather, the man who owned the old factory at B—? Well, I do declare—no wonder you thought him grand. Why, everybody in these parts knew him. And as for his wife, though she died long ago, when I was a little girl I almost worshiped her. She was a rare beauty, but what an ugly name she had—Hephzibah.”

“That’s my name,” said the child quickly, “but they call me Hepsie nowadays?”

“Well? Well! I never did,” the old lady repeated again and again, under her breath. “Why, he was very old—ninety-six or seven he must have been.”

Hepsie had wakened early that morning and she had become so exhausted with crying that after answering many more of the lady’s interrogations, she fell fast asleep in the coach and forgot her great sorrow.

It was late in the afternoon ere they reached the place of destination, and the old lady in the green spectacles had been put down at one of the towns on the way. The stage driver had been directed where to leave Hepsie, and arriving at the parsonage just outside the centre of the town of M—, he stopped and lifted the little girl out.

Mrs. Grosvenor was in waiting and came out to meet her. The driver lifted down the little hair trunk that contained Hepsie’s wardrobe and carried it up the steps.

She had never been away from home alone before and was so timid that she trembled with fright. Besides, she had been forewarned that she could not “put on airs” with Mrs. Grosvenor.

The lady inquired kindly if she were tired, and asked concerning her mother’s health, and then ushered her into a large, square sitting room, so antique and curious in style as to cause her to compare it with Grandpa’s dining room in the old, old house, from which she was now as she believed shut out forever. Everything was bewilderingly strange.

After partaking some refreshment, as it was not time for “tea,” Hepsie walked out into the garden, and there again she was reminded of the farm. The shrubbery was charming and the apple blossoms’ dainty perfume scented all the air. The ground was covered with pretty pink and white leaves, and the garden seemed like a fairy bower.

The house itself—viewing it from the outside—was quite as romantic as the one she loved so well, and Hepsie found herself wondering if the long dark passages under the sloping sides of the gambrel roof, contained as many old papers as there were at her grandfather’s, and if so, whether Mrs. Grosvenor would let her rummage them over, and sit and read all day in the garret as she used to do sometimes in the past.

When night came, the house seemed gloomy and Hepsie wondered and was awed by the stillness, for at home the children made merry music with their chatter and laughter.

The minister for the husband of Mrs. Grosvenor was the Rev. Erasmus Grosvenor. He looked very solemn and spoke only to “Deborah,” for so he designated his wife, and Hepsie queried whether he loved her, he spoke so coldly; for the child had heard her grandpa talk a great deal about love, and of his undying love for her grandmother; and though she could not know exactly what love meant, still it embodied her childish idea of true happiness.

Mrs. Grosvenor was occupied with some plain needlework, and Hepsie scarcely knew what to do with her hands and was very restless. Besides, she wanted to ask a lot of questions, but she dare not for the silence to her was something painful. Finally prayer was offered in such a stately way, and not the least impressive to the child, and Hepsie was informed it was time for her to retire.

Mrs. Grosvenor showed her to a little low chamber, a long way from the sitting room, and the hall and stairways were so dark that she shivered with fear, for she was in some respects a coward, and the stories of ghosts and giants were vivid in her mind. The woman took no notice of the child; she had been requested to discipline her and considered this was the proper course to take. It required firmness and she was just the one to undertake such a task.

The little room was still as the grave, and the bed looked as though no one had ever slept in it. Mrs. Grosvenor put the candle down and said, “Goodnight,” and in a moment Hepsie fell to soliloquizing as usual. “I’m sure I can’t sleep—what a dismal place this is, how quiet and gloomy. So this is the beginning of the discipline Mother said Mrs. Grosvenor would give me.” And by this time she had burst into tears, childish relief, and ofttimes a blessed relief to older children too, when the heart is full to overflowing. Poor Hepsie imagined herself cruelly treated, and at once conceived the idea of writing her life and making this the first chapter. She repeated over and over the multiplication table and then all the verses she knew, and while thus engaged fell fast asleep.
