Childhood, how passing sweet its radiant hours;

The loves and friendships of our early youth;

Enchantment dwelt within its fairy bowers;

Adorned with germs of purity and truth.

Morning came, a lovely morn, and Hepsie unpacked her little trunk and made ready for the Sabbath, for this was Saturday. After that, she wanted to take a walk, and as her mother had told her to ask Mrs. Grosvenor’s consent to everything, she asked the lady’s permission.

She spent most of the day in the garden, and Mrs. Grosvenor in addition to her domestic duties, assisted the Rev. Erasmus in preparing his sermon. Hephzibah was keen in her perceptions, and she discovered on her first day at the parsonage, that Mrs. Grosvenor wrote much of the sermon herself. If she left “the study” for a minute or two to attend to domestic affairs, the Rev. Erasmus, in dressing gown and slippers, would open the door of his study, and in his blandest tone, call “Deborah.”

The next morning was the Sabbath, and in a minister’s house, especially in New England, there was always a peculiarly subdued atmosphere on Sunday. Mrs. Grosvenor had considerable worry in fixing her husband off to meeting in time, and she was too busy to go herself as minister’s wives very often are; and after all the sermon was left, over which so much time had been spent.

Mrs. Grosvenor found it out when she went to dust her husband’s study and arrange his papers, for this was part of her work after all he had gone, and she hastily arrayed herself as became the minister’s wife, in her very best silk dress and lace bonnet, and hurried up the street towards the church. At the door she met the deacon, and slipping the package into his hands, she hastened home again, that her husband’s dinner might be ready for him when he returned.

Poor little Hepsie wondered as one naturally would what the minister could do without his wife. She wrote a letter to her mother that day according to promise; it was her first letter, and she was very precise in making it both neat and correct, and after telling her mother how unhappy she was to be so far from home, she told her as a great secret, that Mrs. Grosvenor she was sure wrote the sermons for her husband to preach in the pulpit on Sundays.

When the little letter was finished, she signed her name with a flourish of her pen underneath as she had seen her brother do, and folded it neatly; there were no envelopes in those days, and so she sealed it with a pretty pink wafer, and carried it to the post office herself, as though it was a great treasure.

Monday was another eventful day for the child. The principal of the girls department at the high school was apprised of Hepsie Hathaway’s coming, and Mrs. Grosvenor had told Hepsie that Miss Elliott was “a most amiable person.” Hepsie went through the ordeal of questioning as to her age, residence, studies, and former teachers, and was finally ushered into a large hall filled with girls older and larger than herself.

It did not take her long to get initiated into the ways of the school, and she was so quick and diligent that she excelled in all her classes and became a general favorite. The girls depended upon her for help in mathematics and composition, and she was so fond of astronomy or the geography of the heavens, that the young men quite admired her, and looked upon her as superior to other girls.

Though Hepsie was very small for her age, she was now constantly associated with older girls, and was sought after by them as companion and friend, and yet they were a very different type from herself; full of fun and nonsense and fond of having a good time—sometimes perpetrating practical jokes, which were very annoying to Hepsie’s unsophisticated nature.

They were mostly girls with “lots of pin money;” while little Hepsie had none to spend except as Mrs. Grosvenor suggested. Therefore their little friend could not “chub” with them in buying sweetmeats and dainties; in fact, she cared very little about that sort of thing, and would rather ramble over the beautiful hills, and along the pebbly streams, and linger in the grand, old woods, among the rocks and moss; listening to the sighing pines, musing, soliloquizing, and imagining the unrivaled future, than partake the most tempting meal they could offer her.

The child had strange presentiments concerning her destiny, which haunted her unmistakably, and which she would fain have unraveled, if possible, but as yet it was intangible, only a myth. The cultivated people with whom she was being brought in daily contact at the minister’s house, and her constant associations with Mrs. Grosvenor herself, could not fail to develop her rapidly—she was such an impressionable, thoughtful child.

These conditions were good for Hephzibah and modified her idea of life very much; though, child as she was, she saw much that seemed little in accord with the minister’s teachings from the pulpit on the Sabbath Day and much also that her sensitive conscience disapproved. How keen the perceptions of children to judge right from wrong, is not always remembered or recognized—one cannot be too careful in the example set before children.

Hepsie saw much during her sojourn at the minister’s home that was never forgotten. The young, newly fledged preachers who “exchanged pulpits” occasionally with Mr. Grosvenor were anxious to convert Hepsie and wanted her to get a newehart. Poor thing! She could not comprehend it, and one day she told Mrs. Grosvenor that it was quite a puzzle to her about this “new heart,” and why did she need it. Grandpa had thought her good enough, and that she was tired of being told she was a sinner, and so on.

Mrs. Grosvenor asked the child how and when she had been worried on this subject, and she replied, “Whenever you leave the room for anything, the moment I am alone with one of the young ministers, I grow cold all over, because I know he will inquire if I have had a change of heart yet.”

Mrs. Grosvenor was troubled; her eyes were opened, and from that day Hepsie was never left alone with any strange minister.

About this time, a few of the most popular girls in the school entered into a sort of compact together, and they included Hepsie in the number. They only wanted seven, and no more were to be admitted. This society had some restrictions and a great many privileges and, schoolgirl like, they were full of enthusiasm.

Marriage was the principle aim of the Association, because one of the stipulations was, that as soon as one of them married, she should be excused from the obligations previously incumbent upon her, and Hepsie fancied they would all leave her, unless they should decide to remain single; but this was not a part of the programme; they decided not only to marry, but that each one should marry a man with a title of eminence—Rev., Prof., D.D., M.D. or A.M.

Poor little Hepsie heard this and shuddered. She thought of the Rev. Erasmus, his selfishness, and the many petty foibles so apparent in his character, and as she was devotedly attached to the seven, she felt bound in honor to speak out. “Would you love a man that was cross, and disagreeable, and never satisfied? Wait upon him, work for him, plan for his pleasure, though he never thought you were tired, or sick, or wanted rest or peace? Who always sat in the parlor when company came, and talked while his wife cooked the supper and made all ready for the comfort of his distinguished guests as he calls them?”

All this and much more came like a crash from the little one, whom they had never dreamed could assert herself like that. The girls were amazed, and so was Hepsie, at her own courage. She broke down then and began to cry as children do when overwrought—as we all do when the very fountains of our hearts are stirred.

She felt like a culprit, too. What right had she to betray family secrets? She loved Mrs. Grosvenor, for tho’ she had been strict, yet she had been diligent and true to her trust, and Hepsie only knew what her perception told her. She was quite vexed with herself for her freedom.

“Don’t cry,” said sweet-tempered tenderhearted Jane. “What do you know about love or things of that kind? Why, you’re still in short dresses and pantalettes. Your opinion indeed, fie child. My brother will be a Rev. someday. He’s at Yale now, such a fine fellow—all the girls admire him, and anyone might thank her lucky stars to get him and his title.”

This was Miss Fay. Her father was an esquire and she was as haughty as though he had been a baron. It amounts to almost the same thing—a ’squire in a country village is held in as high esteem almost as titled aristocrats in the old world.

Nevertheless, Miss Fay was not a great favorite, but she was kind of a leader and she could ill book the interposition of a little opinionated child like Hepsie Hathaway. After all she felt in her heart the child was more than a match for her. Hepsie did know something about love, albeit it was only an intuition, and she herself could not have defined her own delicate sense of the divine sentiment.

Unwittingly she had touched a chord in the heart of each of these young and blooming maidens, so much older and wiser in the ways of the world. It was the very outburst of spontaneity.
