The sobbing, moaning, murmuring sea

Brought to her heart a sadness, a distress;

That seem’d prophetic of her destiny,

O’ershadowing her future happiness.

After Hepsie had spoken so much like an oracle, the girls seemed to pay greater deference to her opinion on all matters under discussion in their private “club,” and the child was more than ever surprised.

Jane, who had been so sympathetic at the first announcement of Hepsie’s description of the life of “ministers’ wives,” took her under her especial protection as it were, and as the other girls held Miss Jane in high esteem, it gave “the little one” some prestige.

Miss Jane W. was the youngest daughter of a very wealthy man, who in addition to the title of colonel was a squire too in his native town and a representative to the legislature in the city of Boston; and these imaginative schoolgirls fancied Boston the nearest place to heaven. So Miss Jane, who was very unpretentious in her way and never had an opinion to give, was nevertheless an influential friend.

It afterwards transpired that in matters pertaining to their beaux, the girls always consulted Hepsie, and Miss Ray with all her arrogance was quite confidential with “the girl in pantalettes,” telling her much of her preferences and roguerries and always binding her to secrecy. All the girls came confidentially to Hepsie, perhaps because she was so childish, and they felt they must tell someone, as girls do when they begin “to fall in love,” and even women are not so much better in this respect. Hepsie was rather shy of giving opinions after her first outbreak, but she was intrusted with many secrets, and as she had none of her own to give or to keep, they were not at all burdensome. It was another chapter of experience for her; she learned to be wise, for had she not been very cautious, serious trouble might have arisen between these romantic schoolgirls, who kept up such flirtations for pastime. The girls trusted her implicitly and, hearing from all sides, she was able to make such suggestions as seemed wonderful to them, not knowing how well “the little one” was posted.

Everything went on about the same for some time at the school, and at the parsonage. As Hepsie advanced in her studies and developed in other ways correspondingly, Mrs. Grosvenor opened her heart more and more to her, and confided to her keeping many things that to one quick to discern and intuitive by nature were like new revelations day by day. Hepsie began to think any condition preferable to being the wife of a village clergyman, with constant burdens laid upon her to bear thanklessly, though this position had already been proposed as the most appropriate for one like her. The husband always to be considered, the wife seldom if ever.

In her heart she resolved never to marry a minister. Still, nothing could have been better for a child so peculiarly organized, than the mental and moral strength given to her highest and best aspirations through the intimate association with this cultivated, refined, and accomplished woman, who had also the time to devote to her training. It counterbalanced in a great degree the excessive indulgence of the old major, and in later years, long after Mrs. Grosvenor had been laid in the silent tomb, Hepsie had cause to remember with gratitude her wise teachings and instructions. And had it not been for the balance of character thus attained, she might have grown morbidly disconsolate under the accumulation of sorrows that for a time hung over her devoted head.

Hepsie studied so hard and was withal so delicate that Mrs. Hathaway decided to give her the benefit of the sea air at vacation. Indeed, some change was “absolutely necessary,” as Mrs. Grosvenor had informed her mother, and to take her home would only have been to call up old memories that it was really thought had died out, so engrossed did the child appear to be in the present.

Once having made up her mind, Mrs. Hathaway—though she could ill afford to spare the means—was yet firmly determined upon making the journey. Mrs. Grosvenor gave Hepsie special instruction as to her “manners,” feeling anxious that Mrs. Hathaway should be pleased with her discipline, as well as having an ambition that the little girl should be perfect in her deportment on her own account, for she loved the child, and had already predicted a bright career for her little favorite.

Mrs. Grosvenor undertook all preparations in the way of dress, which was very little, however; yet to Hepsie it was quite an exciting affair, as she had never before been to a dressmaker’s establishment, and it was about as trying as her first day at the high school. She went through it all like one in a dream, and when she came home was so bewildered, she could not have told whether the dresses she had been measured for, were green, purple, red, or blue.

The summer vacation came and Mrs. Hathaway did not keep Hepsie waiting long, but a day or two after school closed she made her appearance at the parsonage ready for the journey.

Poor little Hepsie, her pent-up emotions were too much for her, and instead of kissing and embracing her mother in the regular way, she fainted in her arms. It was quite a scene, but both the ladies were undemonstrative, and so the affair was passed over with but little comment.

Hepsie went to bed early after the excitement, as they were to start in good time the following morning; and indeed in the Rev. Erasmus Grosvenor’s house, every one kept good hours. Hepsie was told daily that “early to bed and early to rise” was a habit that must be cultivated, and she knew well it was a regular custom in New England homes; but some way it did not suit her. She was erratic in her habits and tastes and was very unwilling to submit to the severe rules of life laid down for her guidance. It would scarcely do to tell how she passed the hours before retiring after being sent up to bed, during the time she was under the careful scrutiny of Mrs. Grosvenor, but suffice to say, she seldom went to bed without an hour or two of rehearsal either in reading or reciting. She was also given to scribbling, and child as she was, she had already written “verses,” though they were securely hidden away in her trunk and she felt too sensitive to submit them to the eye of anyone, not even Mrs. Grosvenor, and as for her own mother, she stood too much in awe of her even to think of doing such a thing.

The two friends so long separated had much to say to each other that night, for many events had transpired since they last met. But the conversation soon turned upon Hepsie and everything else was waived. The child’s future was as it were analyzed beforehand, but with all their farsightedness, they did not discern the realities that fairly crowded upon her within a very few years.

The morning was a fair one, and when the lumbering old stage drove up, Hepsie felt a great sob rise in her throat, almost choking her. She could not speak to her dear friend; a presentiment that she was parting from her forever came over her, and she went out of the quaint, old house silent as death. The goodbyes were hurried, for the coachman was impatient and they were soon on their way.

They passed through some charming scenery and village after village, each one prettier than the other, and as Mrs. Hathaway was familiar with the places, she gave Hepsie interesting descriptions, so the time passed swiftly away.

Night was coming on and Mrs. Hathaway told Hepsie they would stay at a friend’s house in B—, as she did not like “putting up at a tavern.”

It happened that the house where they spent the night was another of those old-fashioned ones, just to Hepsie’s liking; and tired as she was, she took notice of the quaint, odd furniture and crockery ware, and it was all engraven upon her memory. It was her first “out,” for the other journey had been to school and she was in too much sorrow then at the loss of her grandpa, to appreciate either scenery or architecture. Hepsie was elated at the idea of traveling and seeing fresh sights; there had been so much sameness in her school life, and she had such passionate longings for “the far away or the far off.”

The next day they arrived at their destination and found all in readiness for their coming. It was not a bit like what Hepsie had anticipated, and she was sorely disappointed over it, but when she had rested a little, and her mother took her to the seashore, she was enchanted. Her joy knew no bounds; her spirits were so exuberant that she was scarcely able to control her emotions; and when she saw the ladies and gentlemen day after day promenading leisurely along the beach, she wondered how they could keep so quiet and self-contained.

The ocean had a peculiar effect upon her; she could not have described it, but it was like a fascination or a spell, and awakened poetic emotions that had never been called forth in her regular school life; in fact it had been the special aim of her tutors and friends, to keep her under control; here was an expression or a sympathy with her emotional nature. The murmur of the sobbing sea answered to some tender chord that quivered in her soul, and the vibration was electrical in its effect. Sauntering on the beach in the twilight, she often felt that in the uncertain future the ocean would, in some way she could not comprehend now, be associated with her life history; and so indeed it proved. Not from any acquaintance formed there, however, for she was still too young for “affairs of the heart,” if indeed her mother had not been her daily escort. But there was little danger of young men wishing to show the slightest preference while the girls’ mothers were on the alert. However, the seashore is said to be the very place for lovemaking, and it does indeed seem fraught with all the sublimely tender and sympathetic in the nature and heart of humanity.

Hepsie however had love affairs—serious ones, too—at a very tender age; and therefore the patient reader, who perchance thinks this very tame and prosy, will find ere long “a genuine love story,” decidedly pathetic, and by no means uninteresting.
