Once more goodbye, to loving friends and dear,

A fond adieu to meadows, groves and brook;

Now other scenes, the lonely heart must cheer,

Nor backward turn with one regretful look.

The preparations for Hepsie’s departure were completed, and with a sorrowful countenance, she heard the announcement that all was ready for her journey.

“I must go over all the dear places once more, mother, and say goodbye, perhaps forever. There are hills to climb and goldenrod to gather—I’ll wear a bunch of it; and in the meadows there are daisies still—I’ll have a handful of them. Tomorrow morning I must go to the grove and hear the birds sing again. And then the brook I love so much—there are fine ferns there, I’ll take a few of those, and then you know, mother, I have so many friends to part with, old and young, I’m going so far, and it will be years, perhaps, before I come back, didn’t you say so?”

“Yes, I said you had better stay three or four years there, but we shall come to see you sometimes.”

“But you can’t bring all the lovely places with you. Oh, I must go over them once more!”

Her mother listened in astonishment. “Why, Hepsie, you’ve been at home for weeks, and going here and there through the village, saying your tender things to young and old, and roaming in the hills, filling the house with autumn leaves and brown and yellow vines and twining them about the rooms in your own queer way. You cannot take such rubbish with you—besides, the hills there are full of them. And you will be very near the river, the beautiful Connecticut.”

“Yes,” interposed Marion, an older sister, “but Hepsie loves our little brook here at home more than she will ever love the grandest river. That’s where she gets her inspiration from!”

“What, to make verses?” chimed in one of the boys. “Oh, yes, I know, she talks to herself down there. I’ve often heard her, and she told me that she believed that if there ever were true fairies, they were in the hemlock grove, down by that brook.”

“Jamie, you said you wouldn’t tell,” cried Hepsie, and then she burst into tears. These were her childish secrets, and she did not like them told, not even in her own home.

The mother heard the children talk on among themselves, but she made no comment, wise woman indeed. Yet deep down in her heart half-consciously a thought, a hope was lurking, that some day Hepsie might be all her grandpa had promised on the day of her birth.

The evening was passed in talking over the affair uppermost in the minds of all the family: Hepsie’s going away again to another school. Each one had something to say before parting for the night or some advice to give, and many plans were laid for the morrow.

Early in the morning Hepsie and her brothers were off to the grove to hear the birds sing and gather the ferns, and all day long she was going hither and thither taking leave of all she held so dear, outdoors and in. One might set out for Egypt and the Nile in our day, and not feel the breaking up and leave taking so much as little Hepsie did, going away fifty miles to school. Albeit Hepsie loved school, and wanted to go, for she had “great expectations” in her own way.

We will not linger over the day, the last day at home for a time, but simply state that there was little eating or sleeping among the children, and Mrs. Hathaway was profoundly quiet.

Morning came and the house was soon astir. It was an autumn morning and the trees were many colored, the scarlet maples flashed in the mellow sunlight, and the hills were fairly regal in their gorgeous coloring.

The parting was soon over, though many tears were shed, and long after the coach was out of sight, the children hung about the gateway, to try and catch one more glimpse of the fine horses.

Mrs. Hathaway had entrusted Hepsie to the care of a friend who was going to the county town whither Hepsie was bound, and so she had no misgivings concerning her safety. The ride was simply delightful, and once she ceased weeping, she enjoyed every moment. The many colored hills and woods, the sumac, mountain ash, and maple, and other bright tints of shrubbery were a perfect picture as they drove rapidly over the road. Bridges were crossed and hills climbed, pretty villages were passed, and at noon the stage drove into a town where there were a goodly number of church steeples and many large and handsome buildings.

On and on the stage rattled until the tavern was reached; there the passengers alighted and horses were put up. Dinner at the tavern, for those who wished it, then fresh horses and another start. Hepsie had a delicate lunch with her, and she could not even swallow a little of that. A great sob was in her throat, notwithstanding all her mental resolves and the beautiful scenes on every side. Her mother’s friend did not say much to the child, and she was glad, for her own thoughts were company.

Late in the evening they arrived and found the sister and husband waiting when the stage drove into town. Hannah took the child in her arms, embracing her too fondly, almost, for Hepsie was not accustomed to such caresses from grown people. She scarcely knew if she liked it, so “proper” had been her training.

Everything was new and strange, but this time instead of an old romantic house and furnishings, it was altogether modern and stylish. The sister plied the child with questions about home and the village folks, talking on of home affairs until the tired girl was half asleep in bed; then, kissing her softly, she left the room, thinking to herself what a sweet girl her little sister had grown and how she had improved since she had seen her last.

When Hepsie woke, she was thinking of the ordeal she must soon go through of entering school again. Her timidity was painful, and she suffered much in her feelings that no one knew or would have guessed, she seemed so composed outwardly. Hannah (or Mrs. Severance it was now) had promised to go with her to see Miss Andrews, the principal teacher, and make all necessary arrangements.

“Oh, what a beautiful woman! So sweet-mannered, and dignified—I’m sure I shall love her quite as well as Miss Elliott, though she was a ‘a most amiable person’ (quoting Mrs. Grosvenor’s words), but then I shall miss the club,” said Hepsie to her sister, after her first day at the new school.

“And who is Miss Elliott, pray tell? You know, Hepsie, you’ve been away from home so long that you must explain who these people are you talk so much about—it’s all Greek to me. Here you’ve been telling me about Miss Fay, who boasted of her brother at Yale and called you ‘opinionated, the girl in pantalettes,’ etc. I should like to know something more about your ‘club’—what was it? All those girls are to marry ministers, doctors, lawyers, or professors of some sort. You too, I suppose, entered into a compact, did you?”

“Well, yes, we did, but then I’ll be too far away now to know what they do. Of course they’ll write to me sometimes—Jane and Lucy will, I know—and as for Miss Fay, why, she can’t write even an essay by herself.”

“You don’t answer my questions, little sister. Now please tell me first, who is Miss Elliott?”

“I’ll begin at the beginning. Miss Elliott was the Preceptress at the high school at M— and a perfect lady, very wise, you know, but she couldn’t see everything that was going on there, with all her learning. She didn’t dream that the girls were carrying on flirtations under her very eyes. Besides, how could she understand it? She was an old maid!”

“Oh, then old maids are not supposed to be wise in love matters? How is that?”

“Mrs. Grosvenor said single women had no experience compared to one who married and had a family. I don’t think Miss Elliott had even been in love. She was always so quiet and self-possessed and never betrayed any emotion whatever happened in the schoolroom.”

“Little sister, I’m afraid your ideas are very fallacious, especially about love. These giddy schoolgirls have filled your head with nonsense.”

“It wasn’t the girls who gave me my impressions, you know. Hannah, I read all my grandmother’s love letters in the old garret when I was a very little girl. She knew what real love was. And then besides, Mrs. Grosvenor, a minister’s wife and a minister’s daughter too, she used to talk to me by the hour together.”

“Not about love, I should think?” said Hannah. “Minister’s wives generally are very religious and serious, and they have work to do that demands their time and energies. They haven’t much left for lectures on love.”

“Mrs. Grosvenor used to talk to me, Hannah, in the long evenings when the Rev. Erasmus was asleep taking his rest and snoring, and she was busy sewing, mending, or darning always.”

“And pray what were you doing all the time? Were you idle and she so industrious?”

“Oh, no, I was making lace, or knitting, or doing some little thing. Mrs. Grosvenor thought it a sin to be idle, but sometimes when she was talking, I used to let my work fall out of my hands to listen. Besides, wasn’t I learning all the time? She used to say, ‘Hepsie, these are life lessons for you out of my own experience.’”

“You are well posted about love, perhaps from reading love letters written ages ago, but I must say I don’t quite agree with you about old maids, notwithstanding your authority on the subject. I might differ with even a minister’s wife or daughter—their opportunities are often very limited for observation. Our family have lived within a stone’s throw of the parsonage all our lives, and since my remembrance there have been half a dozen different ministers engaged to preach in the village church. I don’t think either of their wives knew much about love. But never mind—discussing these opinions now, tell me about Miss Fay. She seems to have antagonized you.”

“Miss Fay is as proud as a peacock and wears handsome dresses and elegant hats and all that—but she was very glad to get ‘the girl in pantalettes’ to help her get her lessons.”

“But Hepsie, that isn’t telling me who she is.”

“Maybe not, but at school we didn’t know much about that. We judged the girls by their deportment and what they could do. However, I know all about Miss Fay—she’s ’Squire Fay’s daughter. They live at M— and have a fine house. She is not pretty, and I don’t believe they’re very great people; Mrs. Grosvenor didn’t care for them at all. She said Mrs. Fay was not a lady, though the ’squire is a very influential man in the town.”

“It appears to me you’re always quoting Mrs. Grosvenor, but tell me, hasn’t Miss Fay another name? You always speak of the other girls of the Club as Jane, Lucy, Sarah, and so on, how is it?”

“It was always Miss Fay at school. She’s an only daughter, and her name is a very odd one—Mehitable. Her father calls her Hettie.”

“Mehitable? That’s as ugly a name as yours!”

“Hephzibah is a very grand name, Hannah, and just think of the lady I’m named for—what a superior woman she was, and everyone loved her. Hephzibah Hastings, afterwards Hathaway—a curious combination of names, three grand ones together.”

“I am very glad you like your name, little sister. It doesn’t make much difference, but I remember how we all cried when Grandpa named you, such a sweet baby you were.”

“And now I’ve grown out of the sweetness, I suppose, and am full of all sorts of outre ideas, and not a bit like other girls—that’s what I often hear. The Club girls said that was the reason they invited me to join them. Not very flattering, either.”

This conversation and other similar ones from time to time gave Mrs. Severance an insight into Hepsie’s character, though the child was very careful never to talk when Mr. Severance was present—she did not like him, though she had no good reason to give, and somehow she never liked to mention him to her sister. She could not understand how it was her sister had chosen him, and yet they seemed perfectly satisfied with each other.

Hepsie was fast developing now, and her originality made her a most agreeable companion and her progress in her studies was very remarkable. Occasionally she received letters from the “club girls” as she called them but they were full of their beaux, and Hepsie was too far off to have the same interest in their affairs as formerly. Her sister’s husband was a musician, and Mrs. Severance a fine singer, and in the winter evenings a few friends, musical ones, were in the habit of meeting there for recreation. No parties, no theatres, no public gatherings for the girls were allowed.

Miss Andrew’s girls were entirely under her control in this respect, as much as if they lived under one roof. She was their escort over the hills, through the woods or river paths. She too was musical in her tastes and a magnificent singer, so she sometimes allowed herself an evening at Mrs. Severance’s, much to Hepsie’s delight, for then she felt she had her teacher all to herself, selfish love, and Miss Andrew’s partiality for the child was readily seen on these occasions. In fact, she scarcely talked of anything else. She was very, very fond of Hepsie as well as very proud of her as a student.

And it was at this school that Hepsie’s compositions and essays, and the comments made upon them by the teachers, created quite a sensation and awoke considerable envy among the less fortunate girls. But we must not linger too long over details, for we are reaching the important period, the turning point in the future life of this romantic schoolgirl.
