How beautiful in youth the golden dreams,

That love and fancy to our vision bring,

With what bright radiance all the future gleams

While we just taste at the Pierian Spring.

To Hepsie her school days were full of joyous anticipation as well as happiness in the present, for she loved her studies and pored over her books when others of the class were totally absorbed in frivolity and fashion, and in discussing social matters, for they were more anxious to appear well and gain popularity than to obtain knowledge to prepare them for lives of future usefulness.

Hepsie was a long way from home and did not often see any of her own family except the sister with whom she was staying; and this good sister was much troubled in her mind over her, because of her inclination to wander in the fields and woods and give her time so much to solitude instead of actual life, of which she very well knew there would be great need in the girl’s future. She was practical herself, content to “settle down” and leave all matters of great moment to her husband, which Hepsie noticed and with her individuality could not altogether countenance.

On one occasion, when her sister had reproved her mildly for not giving more attention to her wardrobe, which she sadly neglected for her books and also to take long walks in the beech woods not far away, she instead of replying to her sister’s questioning of how she spent her time, very impertinently for one so much younger, began catechizing Mrs. Severance.

“Why do you spend all your time waiting upon a man who is not as ‘smart’ as you are, and who never allows you to have any say at all when he is talking, even about things you know so much better than he does? You’ll settle down here, I suppose all your life, and never know nor realize what is going on in the great world outside, while your husband will attain a name and distinction among men, possibly, and his wife, far more capable, shine only in his light.”

“How very wise you think yourself, little one,” replied the sister. “Having chosen my husband out of all the world, I am quite content he should shine as my bright particular star, at least.”

“But he is not willing you should shine—that is the point! Equality of husband and wife is the standard for me.

“What about St. Paul—does he not say wives should be submissive, and also that they should learn of their husbands at home?” said Mrs. Severance in reply. “Mrs. Grosvenor used to teach her husband—how does that agree with St. Paul’s ideas?”

“In fact, she told me a great deal about women helping their husbands, minister’s wives, and others, and she believed that women could teach the scriptures publicly, and that the Savior thought more of women than ministers do in our day, and that He paid them more respect.”

“Hepsie, you are hardly old enough to expound the scriptures tho’ you were under the tutelage of an authority on such matters like Mrs. Deborah Grosvenor.”

“I am not exactly an oracle, perhaps, but my ideas about women are very exalted ones, and I’m quite sure girls ought to have greater advantages than they do nowadays.”

“Oh, what would you like then, pray tell? You for instance expect to be a teacher, and from what you have just been saying possibly you intend to teach the scriptures as well?”

“I may. At any rate, I believe in it, and I’m sure Mother can quote more scripture from memory than any minister I have heard. They have it written down in their sermons, but Mother knows the Bible by heart, and more than that, she is not very well satisfied with our minister at home. She says his sermons are dry and cold. She often speaks of the prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah and believes many of them are yet to be fulfilled, and wonders that the great divines of the day don’t see these things as she does.”

“Hepsie, you astonish me. The other day you wanted to convince me you knew all about love, and now you are discussing religion and the scriptures—what next, I wonder?”

“Next, I suppose I must darn stockings, and mend gloves and so forth to get back into your good graces, for I can see you think me very conceited, though you are too clever to say so. It is a good thing you don’t know all I think—you would want to send me away to someone who could modify me, no doubt.”

“Never mind, Hepsie. You will grow older and wiser in time. And although you can’t go to college, you can in another year, at any rate go to a Ladies’ Seminary and finish.”

And so from time to time the two sisters talked of the advantages and pursuits of men and women. Hannah was conservative and thought her sister a born radical, and she tried in her quiet way to make her understand how impossible of fulfillment many of her theories were. But a great change was coming, of which either of the sisters had no foreshadowing or premonition.

And Hepsie, when she had heard her mother talk of the scriptures in a half-prophetic way, little knew how her mother’s mind was being wrought upon to examine the Bible herself, and how by careful investigation and prayer she had arrived at the conclusion that the ministers of the day were in error.

Here for the present we will leave the sisters and go back to the quiet village nestled among the hills described in our opening chapter.

* * * *

There came to the good old town of B— on a gray November day in the year 1841, two strangers, evidently travelers as their appearance betokened. They inquired at the post office where they would be likely to get a hall to preach in, or if it would be possible to get an opportunity to preach in the village church—the postmaster, who by the by was the leader of the choir, the singing master of the little village, began to wonder, as neither their manner nor their grammar so to speak savored of college-bred ministers, and he began plying them, Yankee-like, with questions.

“What denomination do you belong to? Methodists, I presume, as you do not have the appearance to me of either Baptists, Presbyterians or Congregationalists.”

Before they had time to answer him, he informed them that the church was occupied by a Congregationalist and he did not believe any Methodist would be allowed to preach in it.

“Well,” said one of the strangers, “we are not Methodists, and we would like to see your minister and ask permission to preach in the pulpit. We have something to tell the people—good tidings for them.”

“What good tidings?” said Uncle Rufus, as he was called throughout the village. “New doctrine? Where did you come from and what is this you want to tell the people?”

The strangers hesitated a little, but finally replied, “The doctrines we preach are the same as taught in the New Testament by the Savior and his apostles, and we have come without purse or scrip more than a thousand miles to preach to the people, and we want a place to speak in. We hope to have an audience tonight here in this village.”

“I’ll go with you to the Reverend Edward M—,” replied Uncle Rufus, “but it’s not much use, I’m afraid, he’s awful strict regular orthodox, wouldn’t let a Methodist come inside his pulpit. For my part I don’t care much for religion, and I’m not afraid to hear Universalists, even.” This with an emphasis as though Universalists were the most heterodox of all the denominations.

A few steps brought them to the minister’s door, and as Uncle Rufus was with the strange men, they were invited into the parlor. And then he remembered that he had never asked their names nor ascertained where they were from. However, he was not in the least disconcerted and said to the minister, “Here are two strangers come to ask permission to preach in the church tonight.” The Rev. E. M. turned upon them and without ceremony said, “Who are you that you come without even sending me your names and ask such a privilege?”

“We are elders sent to preach the everlasting gospel, and we are not ashamed of our names or our profession.”

“Elders, Baptists are you? And what new thing have you to tell?”

“We are not Baptists but missionaries called and ordained by proper authority.”

“This,” said the younger man of the two, “is Elder Farr and my name is Simmonds and we are Latter-day Saints.”

“Oh, I understand. ‘Mormons,’ from Nauvoo, I presume. You cannot preach in my church. You believe in the golden Bible and in Joe Smith who claims to be a prophet.”

The elders tried to explain about the Book of Mormon and also that Joseph Smith was a true prophet, but all to no purpose—the minister was furious.

His wife, hearing the confusion, came to learn what was the matter. She asked the strangers to be seated, and as if to atone for the rudeness of her husband, made some inquiries and appeared interested in their mission. It was all to no purpose—her husband was determined. She suggested that the schoolhouse would hold quite a number of people, and they could most likely have the privilege of holding a meeting there.

The elders thanked Mrs. M. for the suggestion and rose to go, but the minister’s anger had been aroused and he vented his ill will by saying, “I don’t want to hear your false doctrine and shall use my influence against your teachings while you remain here in town. My wife shall not go to the meeting, I will not in any way give countenance to men sent out without means to pay their way, and I can assure you the people of B— know better than to be carried away by the romance of a golden Bible.”

The elders saw how useless it was to expostulate and were anxious to go. They were convinced that Mrs. M. was anxious to hear them, from the interest she had manifested, but after his declaration that his wife should not go, they could only thank her for her courtesy and were glad to leave the house where such a furore had been raised.

Uncle Rufus too was glad to get away, and was now more determined to aid them in getting a place to preach in, for he was rather fond of variety, and in a sober staid New England village there was not much change in those days. And he had begun to think, like some others, that their minister, orthodox though he was, did not quite understand the needs of the people.

On the way as they walked along, he asked more questions and elicited considerable information, and became deeply interested in their conversation. He helped them secure the schoolhouse and managed to spread the news through the village that two “Mormon” elders all the way from Nauvoo were going to preach and there would be something worth hearing.
