Faith that alone withstands the heaving tide

Of fond emotions in the human heart,

Can sacrifice ambition, vanquish pride,

And conquer love, must be of heav’n a part.

How true it is that “man proposes but God disposes,” and we in our own hearts sometimes decide upon a course of life entirely different to that which circumstances afterwards as it were compels us to follow. Many young lovers have fondly dreamed of a blissful future but have been cut off from its fulfillment in one way or another, just when the charmed cup of happiness seemed within their grasp.

Occasionally such events are the result of the obstinacy or pride of one or the other. There are also many other causes, but more often, perhaps, it is on account of a distinctive difference in the position in society or in the religious views. It is always better and safer so far as possible to associate with those who are of the same faith. It is true that in many instances differences may spring up after marriage, and that may be unavoidable, but true happiness cannot exist where vital principles are in question and opposing views entertained. Many young people have separated as these two did and, looking at the matter seriously, have taken up the duties of life, and with the devotion that characterizes a genuine faith have been all the nobler because of the self-sacrifice.

In some instances we speak of these things as fate and also as a dispensation of Providence, but in this case, as in some others of which we have known, the woman never forgot in after years the sacrifice she made in giving up this young lover of hers, who had set her heart all aflame. But she could not and would not deceive herself into the belief that man’s love could compensate for that joy she felt in her newfound love of truth—and tho’ it was hard struggle, yet she conquered. That her cousin’s intercession made it all the harder for her, it is scarcely necessary to say.

Hettie’s badinage about young Mr. W., the one just converted, weighed nothing with Lucy. Her religion was first, and she avowed her indifference to marriage in the strongest terms.

It was true, however, that the young man referred to was looked upon even by the newly converted “Mormon” girls in the village as a most desirable and agreeable companion, and they liked to hear him in his eloquent though humble manner bear his testimony to the gospel he had embraced.

It was true that Mrs. Hathaway had sent for Hepsie and also her married daughter Mrs. Severance to come home and hear the elders preach. So sure was she that they would be impressed, that she wrote in the most positive way; and as they knew nothing of the doctrines or principles, they were almost as eager to hear, as Mrs. Hathaway was to have them. They made the journey in their own carriage instead of the stage, and only arrived in time get a warm supper (for the weather was cold), and attend the evening meeting, which was held in the district schoolhouse.

Hepsie was overjoyed to be at home for a short time, and on meeting her mother, noticed immediately the change in her appearance and, childlike, exclaimed, “Oh, Mother, how beautiful your eyes are tonight—how they sparkle! And you ever so much younger—what has happened?”

“My dear little girl, this is what has happened—I have found the true gospel, that the Savior and his apostles taught, and it has given me great joy. I have been baptized for the remission of my sins, and have had hands laid upon my head for the reception of the Holy Ghost, and I feel so happy. I want you and Hannah and all my children and friends to feel as I do and rejoice with me. Tonight you will hear the elders preach from the Bible and not spiritualize its sayings as the sectarian world do, and their priests and ministers.”

“But,” said Mrs. Severance, “I have heard that the ‘Mormons’ have another Bible, and that they believe its teachings as implicitly as we do the sacred scriptures, and that it is a golden Bible, and that Joseph Smith pretended to dig it up out of a hill in the State of New York, and to translate it himself, tho’ he was only an ignorant, uncultivated, and uncouth young man. He pretends God spoke to him and that he heard his voice.”

“Well, that is all true. It is not a pretense. But you shall hear for yourself this very night, and you will be convinced by the testimony of truth, as I have been, that this new religion is not a delusion, but the everlasting gospel, and that the elders who proclaim it are not deceivers. But every man and every woman is at liberty to judge of the truths proclaimed, whether they be of man or from God.”

At this point Mrs. Severance spoke. “Mother, you know how sure you were, years ago, that you had experienced a real change of heart? And your conversion was looked upon by our minister as quite an event because of your pronounced opinions upon all religious subjects, and especially upon the old prophets. I was only a girl then, about as old as Hepsie, perhaps, but I remember very well hearing good old M. Ridelle, who used to change pulpits with Mr. Spooner, say to Mrs. Spooner one night, ‘Mrs. Hathaway a Congregationalist? You surprise me!’”

Mrs. Hathaway replied very quietly that she had always felt sure that the scriptures admitted of no private interpretation, and now she had other authority than her own assertion.

“What other authority?” inquired Mrs. Severance.

“The authority of the elders who have been sent out to preach repentance and baptism and other points of doctrine. But I want you to hear for yourselves.”

Hepsie was half-bewildered. She was weary with the journey and annoyed with Mrs. Severance, whom she thought disrespectful to her mother. And she wanted to remain at home, but her mother would not consent to it, and so they all went on that memorable evening and heard the elders preach. This was almost weeks after the first baptisms had been performed, and there was considerable excitement over the affair in this quiet old town.

Uncle Rufus still continued to befriend the elders and was very hospitable in entertaining them, but he showed no signs of being converted. Uncle Rufus was quite a character in his way and was never afraid to speak his mind either upon religion or politics. His wife was very pious, quite the opposite, and as a natural consequence they were not one; in fact all the villagers knew that Aunt Lydia “kept to herself”—that is to say, she occupied her own apartments and Uncle Rufus did as he pleased with the rest of the house. But when it came to Mormon elders, the good wife objected, though naturally enough Rufus carried the day and as the house was a spacious one, she neither heard or saw them, as she had emphatically declared that she “could not endure the sight of men who went about sponging off hard-working people. It was against her principles—she was brought up to work for her living.”

But we must go back to the “Mormon” meeting. It opened with the hymn:

“Glorious things of thee are spoken

Zion city of our God!

He whose word cannot be broken

Chose thee for His own abode.”

Hepsie delighted with the singing. It was so lively, she thought, and so different from that she had been accustomed to hear in the churches, for in those days in the old towns in New England, the tunes were rather commonplace and the choir girls (and Hepsie was one of them) often wearied of the monotonous old psalm tunes with their long meters. And the reader must remember that at that period the usual method of “pitching a tune” was with “a tuning fork.”

After the singing prayer was offered—and that, too, was entirely different from the prayers Hepsie had heard either in the churches or at the parsonage of the Rev. Erasmus Grosvenor—the preaching was upon the first principles of the gospel, and references were made to the New Testament almost exclusively.

Hepsie was not so attentive as she ought to have been. She was excited, and nervous, and it was so new and strange. She watched the countenances of the speakers, and the effect of the discourse upon her mother who seemed so intensely exercised that it was apparent to all with whom she associated.

After the meeting closed, the people crowded around making inquiries and some applying for baptism. Mrs. Hathaway was greatly disappointed when Mr. Severance and wife both protested that they were not in the least impressed and did not intend to spend their time to hear such foolishness. In vain, Mrs. Hathaway entreated them to stay and talk to the elders, or even listen to her. No amount of persuasion would induce him ever to sit and hear such talk again, said Mr. Severance, and what he said, his dutiful wife Hannah acquiesced in.

Mrs. Hathaway saw it was useless to persuade, though she could not help manifesting her disappointment. But she thought then, for hope was buoyant in her breast, that in time they would be convinced that she was right. She had been such a wise mother and her children looked up to her with great reverence—indeed, she had actually supplied the father’s place so far as that is possible.

“My boys will believe as I do, I am sure they will,” she said with a great degree of confidence, after they had returned from the meeting and were talking with each other around the fire.

The room where they were seated was long and low, with oak paneling and very little that was bright in it, except as the fitful blaze of the pine knots in the wide fireplace reflected on the walls and old-fashioned furniture. There were tall brass and irons and they shone brightly, and the hearthstone was a brilliant red. There was no carpet, but a painted floor and rugs laid down for warmth, as it was wintertime.

Hepsie glanced around as if she expected to see a change in the room, but she only observed the shadows and glimmers from the firelight. She remarked to her mother, “How weird everything looks in this room. Or is it because I have just come home, and it is strange after being away so long?”

“It is only your childish fancy. We thought you would like the fire of pine knots and so we piled it up high tonight to gratify you, and would not light either lamps or candles, knowing your love of shadows.”

The great clock that stood in the corner struck the midnight hour before Hepsie had retired or would confess to weariness, so much did she enjoy the play of the firelight and the pictures she saw in the burning coals.

Her mother, too, was a fair picture to gaze upon, for Hepsie was beginning to comprehend true womanliness. She remembered years after the very dress she wore, and how she admired for almost the first time in her life, her magnificent figure and bearing. She began to see now how it was that Mrs. Hathaway had been disliked by her husband’s family—it was envy. She thought that night she had never looked upon her like before. Her forehead was high and her wavy hair clustered round it gracefully. Her mouth was perfect in shape and outline, lips cherry, and her eyes were heaven’s own blue; around her neck, which was well-proportioned, she wore a string of amber beads, and over her shoulders a heavily embroidered crape shawl. Her dress was a soft grey pongee.

As Hepsie looked intently into her mother’s wonderfully expressive eyes, she thought, as she many times thought afterwards, “Would I could paint her portrait, and write her life history.”

Such women were those who knew the sound of the gospel when it was first preached in their hearing: they needed no testimony beyond their own conscience and convictions. But time would fail to tell the lives of women like this one. Their record is laid up in the archives of the angels, and the world knows them not.
