How buoyant are the hopes that youth inspires!

Yea, rich in faith, this land of fairy dreams,

Wherein one cherishes, such fond desires,

That all the future bright with promise seems.

Hepsie Hathaway went back to school without being especially impressed with anything she had heard from the elders. In fact, the girl was too much absorbed in her studies and her thirst for book knowledge to realize the importance of the gospel. While at home, she had been in a sort of bewilderment—it was all so strange and sudden—astonished to find her mother so changed, and her former schoolmate Lucy Reynolds, a convert to the new faith; and surprised when she learned from the girl’s own lips that her engagement was broken off. She was scarcely able to grasp the situation, and really, things had not been clearly presented to her.

“How strangely things do happen in this world, Lucy,” said Hepsie to her friend, who had come in to say goodbye and to confide in Hepsie, whom she was sure would feel some sympathy for her in the struggle she was making. “I never could have believed you could give up Henry’s love for the sake of a difference in religion.”

“I gave him up for the truth,” replied Lucy quickly, “and I trust I shall be faithful to the cause I have espoused. It is something higher and better than our ministers preach, Hepsie, and cannot be compared with the favor of men, or the riches of the world.”

“And yet you could not convince Henry, with all your eloquence, and your own heart pleading for him, too, and such devotion as you have always shown him? I do not see how he could give you up. I cannot understand him—nor you, either, Lucy, for that matter. I thought love overcame all obstacles, all differences in rank, in sentiment, and in religion.”

“You see now how mistaken you were, my little friend—and I hope you will be a true friend to me in this, for you can do me a great favor if you will?”

“What is it, pray?” the girl responded quickly.

“Never mind now, dear, you will be coming home again soon, and then I will tell you all.” And so they parted.

During the journey back to her sister’s, Hepsie was silent and thoughtful, as she had heard so much in a few hours, and it had all been so unexpected. Mr. Severance kept up an incessant talking about the “Mormons,” his wife seemingly acquiescing in what he said, though in a very different spirit from his. Hepsie inwardly resented the way in which he alluded to the elders, knowing her mother looked up to them with such reverence and had entertained them at her own house. She thought her sister altogether too passive, but she kept her own counsel until after they reached their destination.

Then she broke out abruptly, after the fashion of young girls, “Hannah, why didn’t you speak up for Mother’s friends when Samuel abused them so? What right had he to call them hypocrites and deceivers? What does he know about the Bible compared to—”

Before she could finish the sentence, her amiable sister, always self-possessed and equal to the occasion, said in the mildest tone, “How old are you, Hephzibah Hathaway?”

“Oh, I suppose you think I am too young to express myself as I do sometimes. But really, Hannah, how do you know that these men are not called to preach the everlasting gospel? Mother says they are, and although I don’t know for myself, I believe her testimony.”

Mrs. Severance was confounded. She had always taught Hepsie obedience, and now she was puzzled how to answer the girl.

At that moment Mr. Severance entered the room and instantly guessed there was some unpleasantness, judging by the silence and the peculiar expression on the countenances of his wife and her sister. “What’s the matter? Are you two discussing ‘Mormon’ doctrine?”

“Not exactly,” replied Mrs. Severance, “but Hepsie thinks Mother is right.”

“Oh, she does, and so I suppose these ‘Mormon’ elders will be ducking her under the water some of these cold days. I would rather see her dead.”

“Oh, husband,” remonstrated Mrs. Severance, “how dreadful you talk. Hepsie has opinions of her own, child as she is, and the best way is to let the subject alone—she will forget it all the sooner.”

Hepsie relapsed into silence. She would not argue with this man whom she so thoroughly disliked. She wondered how Hannah could respect him, much less love him, for to her, his very presence was hateful.

The conversation was not renewed for several days, and things took their usual course. Hepsie became more absorbed in her studies and no message came from home about the work, which was all this time spreading rapidly in the town, only such a short distance away.

It was near the close of the term, and Hepsie had been very diligent and was making every preparation for the last day, expecting to pass a successful examination. She had even spoken to her sister about her dress, and manifested considerable interest in the matter of her appearance, as visitors were expected from other towns. It would be quite an event in the quiet life of a country schoolgirl. Hepsie was fully aware that Miss Andrews expected her to carry off the honors and the prize.

All the enthusiasm of her ambitious nature was aroused. She could not sleep. She was restless and excited, though she was also confident of success. It was almost the first time in her life when she had been over-anxious about her wearing apparel, and she hunted up the finest old lace and the prettiest ribbons, to complete her toilet.

Meantime, a letter came from her mother requesting her to come home, as an elder who had been baptizing a great number in Boston, Salem, and Lynne was expected and Hepsie must hear him. This was rather trying, but she kept the matter secret from her sister and went on with her preparations. Somehow she was not as lighthearted as before, and her mother’s urgent plea for her to come home kept ringing in her ears.

At last the morning came for the examination. The hall was beautifully decorated and Miss Andrews, in the gayest of spirits and the grandest of dresses, Hepsie thought, welcomed little Hepsie with a kiss as she came forward with her usual good morning to the teacher she so dearly loved. As she saw her hesitation, she assured her how confident she was that she would not fail.

Hepsie was like one in a dream all that day; she did not see the sea of faces around her, and the voices seemed afar off, for all the time she fancied that she could hear her mother calling to her to come home, and in imagination she could see a little group gathered for “the baptism,” in the brook close to the dear old place—the brook upon the mossy banks of which she had sat so often dreaming of the future, and where she had plucked the sweet-scented violets in springtime, and watched the speckled trout darting hither and thither. All these visions came and went as she recited the lessons she had learned so perfectly for the occasion.

Hepsie scarcely knew how she got through that day—only once was she self-conscious, and that was when Miss Andrews called upon her for the essay. She read it with all the eloquence and grace of expression possible in one so young. Her voice was clear and her tones finely modulated. It was the climax, the crowning moment of the day.

The applause was more than her delicate and overwrought nature could stand. She reeled and would have fallen had not a gentleman near, noticing her nervous condition, quickly stepped forward and supported her until a glass of water was brought.

When she revived and, arousing herself, realized the ordeal was passed, and summoning to her aid that strong willpower that proves so effectual when called into action, she was herself again.

Remarks from the visitors came next. Hepsie heard all the comments and the criticisms of these men of learning on the work of the young ladies. She felt embarrassed when her efforts were praised and she ardently wished for the exercises to close, that she might be alone in her own room and “cry it out.” The prizes were distributed and the school dismissed. Almost every one of the scholars were in tears, and the dignified teacher much affected.

After the school closed, two of three of the gentlemen with Miss Andrews came forward to congratulate Hephzibah, asking Miss Andrews numerous questions as to the plans for her future, and predicting a brilliant career for the little girl, if her health did not fail under the strain of study.

Hannah heard all and treasured it up, often telling her sister afterwards how proud she was of her on that examination day. Hepsie herself cared little for it, her heart was elsewhere.
