A winter day, and cold the wind and shrill,

The snow was falling, when a little band

Came slowly winding down a gentle hill,

And by an ice-bound brook in groups they stand.

Hepsie Hathaway needed repose after the examination, which had been very trying to one so sensitive to influences, but events were crowding fast upon her and she little dreamed what changes the next few months would bring in her life.

A day or two after the school had closed, Miss Andrews the preceptress called and bade her favorite pupil goodbye. It was a sad leave-taking for Hepsie, for although Miss Andrews assured her she would return sometime, Hepsie felt she should not see her dear teacher again, and could not refrain from telling her so in the most impulsive way. She gave the girl many parting instructions, telling what she should expect of her in the next few years, and finished by saying, “You will far surpass me in a literary way. Let me hear from you by letter,” and so they parted, never to meet again.

On the following Monday Hepsie was at home with her mother and little brothers and sisters. Mrs. Hathaway was so happy in her newfound faith, she talked of nothing else.

In fact, it was the topic of conversation throughout the whole village, old and young, and ere long forty or more had been baptized. A branch of the Church was organized and regular meetings were held. Many striking instances of the gift of healing had been manifested, and great interest aroused upon that particular point of doctrine.

The elder of whom Mrs. Hathaway had written to Hepsie had visited B— and returned to Boston but was expected again shortly, and Lucy Reynolds as well as Hepsie’s mother and others felt sure she would be converted under his teaching.

Hepsie listened to them but did not enter into their enthusiasm on the subject as her mother had anticipated. She exhorted her, wept over her, and prayed for her, and still made no perceptible impression.

Lucy Reynolds had confided in Hepsie concerning the matter of obtaining her letters from Henry, and the girl had promised to use every honorable effort to get possession of them. The opportunity came, Henry learning from his sisters that Hepsie had gone home. He paid a visit to the village to find out how Lucy was and how affairs were, for he had heard a rumor that Mr. W., just graduated, was going to marry Lucy and take her out west among the Mormons.

He called Hepsie to ascertain whether these reports were true. It was just what Hepsie wanted—to see him and talk with him and, if possible, secure the letters. During his call she inquired how he could have given Lucy up so easily.

He replied, “Hepsie, I loved Lutie” (for so he called her) “better than I ever shall love again, but I could not think of associating with a girl who had no more respect for herself than to join such a low, degraded sect as the Mormons.”

“Well, but suppose your sisters were to be converted to the new religion?” said Hepsie.

“I would disown them or my mother either!”

Hepsie felt this was the moment and she proceeded to open the budget. “Henry, as you so thoroughly despise the Mormons and all that pertains to them, you certainly do not care to keep anything of theirs?”

“I don’t understand you—I never had anything belonging to one of them, neither would I!”

“But you have, Henry, I can prove it to you. And moreover I want you to promise to give them to me!”

“Give you what I have not or ever had? Impossible!”

“It is not impossible and it is quite true—Lucy is a Mormon and you have her letters. You have broken the engagement so sacred to you two—you will not even see her, although you came to see me because you knew I would be in her confidence, and you certainly do not want the letters. Lucy has the same ideas of propriety in all things she had before her baptism and she does not think it proper for a young man who is not her friend even to have letters written when they were under promise of marriage to each other.”

Henry was silent and almost sorrowful. Tenderhearted little Hepsie nearly relented, but she summoned up courage and continued as she saw he made no attempt to speak. “Henry, do you think it right to keep a young lady’s letters—love letters, too—under such circumstances? Have the goodness to answer. And besides, do you feel that you have been manly in summarily breaking this engagement because of a difference in belief? You will never get Lucy’s equal, go where you will, and I don’t believe you will ever be happy, either.”

Slowly and evidently somewhat affected with the scene, Henry rose to go and, holding out his hand to Hepsie, said, “Lucy has a friend in you, Hepsie, and I admire your ‘grit,’ but look out the ‘Mormons’ don’t capture you too.”

“But the letters, Henry?”

“She shall have them, Hepsie. And mine,” he added, “she may burn. Goodbye, Hephzibah—don’t give up your bright future for Mormonism. Remember, I warn you.”

How was it that everyone who came to see Hepsie warned her to beware of the faith her mother had accepted? It was so contrary to all the teachings of her lifetime—children were instructed to give heed to the advice of parents, to follow their example. Now things seemed to have suddenly changed.

Today, when Henry pled with Hepsie not to yield up her bright future, her emotions were aroused and her sense of honor as she thought impeached. She felt her mother, who had stood so high in the estimation of all, must know as much or more of right and wrong, truth and error, as Henry, and in fact she almost despised him for his lack of courage in giving Lucy up.

She began to wonder what sort of men and women composed society and whether it was all false, a mere sham without honest foundations to stand upon. She recalled the days when she sat on the “old settle” by her grandfather, and his tales of daring courage and how love overcame all—and for a moment she felt as though the foundation stones upon which her theories had been built were giving way. Yet in this even her trouble was more for her friend than herself, although she could now plainly see that unless she received the faith her mother had embraced, separation was sure to come.

Sometimes fate or an unknown power decides for us peremptorily matters over which we hesitate, and so it was with Hepsie. Ever since she had returned from the school, her mother had sought to impress her with the truths of the gospel, and on the other hand messages were being continuously sent her, and friends urging her not to be baptized by a ‘Mormon.’

One Sunday morning Elder McG. walked into the meeting unexpectedly and was invited to speak. It was in the house of one of the members whose family had all been converted. The sermon was an eloquent and inspirational one, such as Hepsie had never heard, and the entire congregation were almost electrified.

Several people came forward after meeting and asked for baptism, and after some consultation it was decided the ice should be cut in Mrs. Hathaway’s brook and the ceremony performed there. The evening was spent in hearing explanations of doctrine from Elder McG., and it was late when the company of inquirers dispersed. The morning dawned at last but Hepsie had never closed her eyes, so intensely was she wrought upon by what she had listened to.

Two powers were warring her. One said, “Obey your mother, go down into the waters of baptism in the little brook that always seemed a sanctuary.” The other said, “Do not heed the sayings of your mother or the elders—a brilliant future awaits you. You must not make this sacrifice.” This and much more the tempter whispered in her ear.

When the time came, she went with the others who had gathered at Mrs. Hathaway’s down the hill to the edge of the water or ice, and as she stood there, all the time the same subtle powers were striving with her.

Two or three of the chief men of the village came and spoke to her. “Are you doing this of your own free will and choice?”

She only replied in monosyllables and heeded not the crowd. The wind blew fierce and whistled down through the hemlock grove above a sort of chant. It soothed her. She felt the sympathy it brought—it was like a strain of rare old music, and it gave her fresh courage.

Seven had already been immersed, and her name was called. Someone took hold of her arm—it was one she had known and reverenced, one who had been specially kind to her, the father of her dear friend and champion, Jane—the most influential man in the county.

“Hepsie,” he said, “come away—you are but a child. You must not make this great sacrifice—”

The sentence was unfinished. Hepsie saw the elder standing in the icy stream waiting for her. She went towards him, it was but a step. Her heart gave a great sob. The words were pronounced with great solemnity. In a moment it was over.

The crowd dispersed, and the little band of men and women had gone up one after another when the ordinance had been performed, to the house to change clothing. Hepsie was the last. Silently she returned to the house and was soon ready, seated with the others for confirmation. It had been an exciting time. Hepsie’s mother, cool and collected as she had always seemed, had been very nervous, lest at the last moment Hepsie should waver and refuse as some others had done after having come prepared to go into the water.

Hepsie did not at all comprehend the situation—she had no conception of the obstacles that would beset her path more and more from this time forward.
