The springtime came with all its loveliness,

And to the village maidens pleasures brought,

Betrothals—promises of happiness;

O love, how many changes thou hast wrought!

The first few days that followed Hepsie’s baptism were spent very quietly. She felt deeply, but said little.

Elder McG., noticing the quietude of her demeanor, divined the cause and sought an opportunity for conversation. Finding her alone, he addressed himself to her in such a way that she could not avoid answering. “Do you comprehend, Hepsie, the great importance of the obligations you have taken upon yourself in becoming a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and have you a knowledge of its doctrines?”

The girl opened wide her great blue eyes and looked him in the face innocently, yet with surprise. “Mr. —” she said, “I know nothing, except that I have been obedient to the wishes of my mother and have forsaken all else. My school-friends will not recognize me now—they are lost to me, as they are to Lucy Reynolds.”

“But you have accepted something better, higher, and purer than the wisdom and learning of the world.”

“How am I to know that the everlasting gospel will make me wiser and better and purer? Tell me that if you can.”

“By prayer and humility,” the elder answered, and he explained, in the most eloquent manner, doctrines and principles entirely new to her, but which she grasped quickly. He related circumstances concerning life at Nauvoo, and told her much of Joseph the Prophet. Like Mary of old, she pondered these things in her heart. From time to time she heard the local elders speak in the meetings of the branch, and she became better acquainted with the truths of the gospel.

Meantime other young people (though older than Hepsie) were making rapid strides in advancement, and a company of Saints were preparing to go to Nauvoo. The spring was opening and, early in April, about forty of those who had received the gospel were expecting to start. Among these were several unmarried men and maidens, and the fathers and mothers thought it would be advisable to have those who were old enough, marry. Perhaps, being New Englanders, they preferred their sons and daughters to marry there rather than in the “Great West,” of which, in those days, eastern people had many peculiar and crude ideas. So those young folks were paired off, so to speak. “Matches are made in heaven,” it is said; but of these few, it is doubtful—at least so thought Lucy Reynolds and her little friend Hepsie.

“It’s a great pity,” said the child one day to Miss Reynolds, “that you are not going to be married to young Mr. W., instead of that scheming old maid C. A. She has no education, no sentiment. And I doubt if she is sincere in religion, even. She will never make him happy, but you could and would.”

“How is it, Hepsie,” said Miss Reynolds, “that you are always interesting yourself in love affairs? One would think you an oracle, the way you deliver opinions. But how do you know Mr. W. is going to marry C.? He surely will not.”

“Oh, yes, he will—she has talked it over with Mother. And more than that, his brother S. is going marry Miss M. L., and she is far worse.”

“Well, I am surprised,” replied Lucy.

“Do you suppose love has anything to do with the affair?”

“I am sure I can’t tell, but it may be better so; they are marrying for principle, and that ought to be right.”

“We shall see, Lucy. But then, you broke your engagement for principle—and I suppose you are ready to marry for principle.”

“Hepsie, you jump at conclusions; I am not likely to marry at all. And if I do, I hope to be a truly devoted wife.”

The girls talked on in this strain until interrupted by Mrs. Hathaway, who came to tell them four or five marriages would be solemnized on Sunday next, and on Tuesday the company would start for Nauvoo. She added, “How I wish I could take my family and go with them. I long to see Nauvoo and the Prophet, and hear his voice.” But she knew that she could not go then. Yet the spirit of the gathering was upon her, and she tried to impress Hepsie with it. The child had not partaken sufficiently of the spirit of the gospel to enjoy and appreciate its blessings and privileges. At present her mind was occupied with these “ill-assorted marriages,” as she termed them, and the lack of true love she fancied there was in the unions about to be formed.

“I shall be glad when they are all gone to Nauvoo,” she said one day to Lucy. “I know you will feel much happier. You seem so downhearted now, and if Mr. W. had asked you to be his wife and taken you with him, you would not need mourn for Henry.”

“Hepsie, child, I thought you believed in love—can one overcome it so soon?”

“Yes, with a little pride. When a man slights you because of your belief, let him see you can look higher. Show him you have some spirit, if you are a Mormon.”

“We shall see in time, my dear. You see, you are not in love, and never have been, and yet think you know more than those who have had an experience. Don’t you know, child, that one must have experience in a matter before judging it?”

“You have had a kind of sad experience, Lucy. I am afraid I should not come out of the furnace of trial so good and noble as you have.”

Poor Hepsie little dreamed what the future had in store for her. The weddings were celebrated, notwithstanding Hepsie’s serious objections, which, as the parties knew nothing of, could not affect them in the least.

On the Saturday evening Lucy Reynolds called on Hepsie to inquire if she intended going to meeting to see the marriage ceremonies performed.

“No, indeed, I am not,” Hepsie replied excitedly. “Besides, I am going away to school so far that I shall be a perfect stranger and try to devote all my time to study, and let love affairs alone.”

“Where are you going, child? To Boston? It seems to me you ought not to go without advice from the elders.”

“Mother has talked it over with Elder McG., and he says it will be best, and that when Mother is ready to go to Nauvoo, I shall be qualified to teach in one of the great institutions of learning that will be built there, for the Prophet Joseph Smith believes in the most perfect education. I am to take drawing lessons and vocal music, too, at the high school at G—.”

“I am sorry you are going, Hepsie. I wish we could all go to Nauvoo now. I have no other wish at present, but Father is away in Maine and does not even know that we have been baptized, and we cannot leave Grandmother, you know. She will not listen to a ‘Mormon’ elder, and so the prospect looks dark for us.”

On Sunday, according to previous arrangement, the meeting was held at the residence of one of the local elders a little distance out from the village, and the marriages were solemnized after the close of the services. Five couples were united in the holy bonds of matrimony. The two young graduates, fresh from college, were married to the young ladies of whom Lucy and Hepsie had spoken as unsuitable companions for those refined and learned young men. It was a red-letter day in the new branch, and there was great rejoicing among those assembled on the auspicious occasion. The gifts of the gospel were manifest, and many testimonies of the truth were added to those already received for the strengthening of this little band of humble Latter-day Saints.

Mrs. Hathaway went home rejoicing in the glorious truths she had heard, and soon after her return opened up a conversation with Hepsie, who had remained away from the meeting, contrary to her mother’s wishes. She related full particulars of the marriage ceremonies, dwelling especially on the impressiveness of the service as compared with marriages witnessed elsewhere. She was full of faith, zealous in the interests of the cause she had recently espoused, and to her everything pertaining to the gospel seemed sublime and precious. The prejudices of sectarianism that are often so strong and hard to overcome, had no weight with her; she cast them aside as so many broken chains of superstition that had held her in bondage, and buckled on the new and bright armor of the gospel, without the least doubt or hesitation.

“If you had only heard, Hepsie, the powerful speaking of those very young girls, in the gift of tongues and interpretation, it would have been a convincing testimony to you, and you could never have forgotten the glow of their countenances. Indeed, it was heavenly. But better, almost, than all else that I have heard, and much as I have enjoyed the teaching and preaching of the elders from time to time, I have never heard anything that affected me so much as what Elder V. said today about baptism for the dead.”

Hepsie was thoroughly aroused now. Though she had listened listlessly before, her attitude and expression betrayed the interest she felt in the subject. Every feature of her striking face beamed with enthusiasm as she exclaimed, “What can we do for the dead? What do you mean, Mother? Can we talk to them?”

In a moment her mother saw the drift of her thoughts and hastened to explain: “You are familiar with the Bible and have read it through carefully. Do you not remember in the Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, where it says, ‘Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why then are they baptized for the dead?’ To me, this principle surpasses in grandeur any other I have heard, extending into the ages of the past and giving the living, power to redeem the dead.” Mrs. Hathaway had spoken eloquently, and Hepsie was gradually coming to a knowledge of the truth. Unconsciously, almost, her senses were being quickened. Little by little her mind was expanding to grasp the priceless treasures offered so freely, and which the pride of the world and her ambition had nearly hidden from her view.

On the Tuesday following, as had been expected, a company of about forty persons, men, women, and children, members of the Church in the village of B—, started on their journey to Nauvoo. Traveling by land in wagons, they were joined by several others from adjacent towns, so that the company numbered about eighty souls.

This was early in the spring of 1842. It was an event of much significance to those interested, and caused quite an excitement in the quiet village, where erstwhile, year after year, things had gone on so regularly. Now there had come a new departure, and naturally enough it aroused the indignation of the clergy, and provoked much animated discussion.
