’Tis early morn and thro’ the air there floats

Odors of pine woods rich and rare perfume;

The birds are pouring forth their sweetest notes

And fresh young buds are bursting into bloom.

After Hepsie’s brief conversation with the trustee, she thought it necessary, in view of her engagement to teach, to put on a more serious air and deport herself in a womanly fashion. Just turned fifteen, still in short dresses, and always among the rocks and brooks and orchards, shadowy lanes and singing birds were her chief attractions, but she took in the situation and resolved to put off childish ways and begin a new page in her history.

She examined her slender wardrobe and reported to her mother concerning her wearing apparel. “I have two or three French cambrics and muslins that will be light and dainty for summer wear, if the skirts can be lengthened a trifle, and with new ribbons, laces, and gloves I can do very well for a few weeks,” suggested Hepsie. “And I shall have my own money soon, you know, and can buy what I like.”

“That is all right, my little daughter, but I’ve been thinking over a much more serious matter, and it puzzles me somewhat, I must confess.”

“What is it, Mother? Can I help you? Is it about going to Nauvoo? Because I am in no hurry—I should like to try teaching nearer home at first.”

“It is about the certificate from the minister. You understand that although we are such near neighbors and friends, he has never spoken to me since the day you were baptized. He does not consider Mormons upright and moral, you know.”

“That is more than a year now, and living next house but one. Well, he must give me the certificate—there is no reason why he should not, and if he refuses I’ll ask the ’Squire. His word is as good.”

“He hates Mormons just as much as the minister does, and his wife is far more bitter than dear Mrs. M. In fact, I do believe she would have been a believer in our doctrines but for his forbidding her to attend the meetings,” said Mrs. Hathaway in reply.

“There is no time to lose,” said Hepsie. “I’ll go this very day—there is nothing like trying. I do not believe in failure.”

Mrs. Hathaway knew better than Hepsie how bitter the prejudice was in the little village, for she had felt it more keenly since the larger number of converts had left for Nauvoo. One obstacle after another had come in her way to prevent her selling out and going where she could be among the Saints and have congenial society.

Hepsie carried out her intention. She hastened immediately to the minister’s cottage, and Mrs. M., who was in the front yard among the lilacs, welcomed her most tenderly.

“So glad to see you, Hepsie. You are back from school—have you finished?”

Before Hepsie could answer, she asked half a dozen more questions and invited her in, but Hepsie declined, saying she had so much to do, and had come over on purpose to see the minister.

“Tell me first,” said Mrs. M. eagerly, “how is your mother? For I have the most profound respect for her and admiration of her moral courage in maintaining her position in the faith for which she has made such sacrifices.”

Hepsie realized the truth of these words and knew they came from the heart. With tears in her eyes and thanking Mrs. M. for her sympathy, she followed the good lady to her husband’s study and was ushered into the august presence of the Reverend man. “Miss Hathaway—Hepsie,” he said as he rose from his table to meet the girl pale and trembling, “have you come back repentant to ask advice?”

“Oh, no, I have come on quite a different matter. It is to ask for a certificate from you of moral character—I am engaged to teach at Beechwoods and shall need one.”

The minister was like one bewildered. “Teach?” said he. “You are only a child yourself and much in need of being taught. You astonish me—a young girl in short dresses and a Mormon asking for a certificate to teach? You will not be allowed to promulgate any of your Mormon doctrines in a New England school.”

“Oh, as to that I know so little myself that it would be quite impossible,” replied Hepsie.

“It is the more fortunate for you that you know so little, but I must consult with ’Squire W. about the certificate. I’m not sure it would be the proper thing to do. I was in hopes you would come home after a year’s absence among Christian people with a change of heart and convert your mother from the errors into which she has fallen, and become a member of the church in which you might have such a great and powerful influence, that needs the help and support of just such refined and educated young women.”

All this time poor Hepsie was trembling and shivering, not speaking out as she would have done had she not wanted the certificate. Her heart was bursting with indignation, yet she must not be in the least seemingly disrespectful, lest she should lose the little item on paper that was to be so much to her.

Finally, after more pressing interrogatories, and assurances from Mrs. M. that she would get the certificate the next day, she began to be more self-possessed and turned to leave the study, when the minister broke out anew in the most excited way, “How is it that your people have taken away more than half of my congregation? Your mother is at the bottom of all this—she is the strong pillar of Mormonism in this place, and you could influence her, perhaps, to give up this nonsense about going to Nauvoo. And the village might become more flourishing, as it was before those ranting Mormon elders came here in November two years ago.”

Hepsie appreciated fully the embarrassment of the situation. She could not retaliate, not even defend her own mother. She saw that Mrs. M. understood her difficulty and she knew her to be such a strong-minded, thoroughly good woman, that it was some relief to think she would be stoutly defended if she could once get away. She tried to say “good morning” in the midst of the minister’s harangue, but it was quite impossible.

Mrs. M. put a stop to the scene at last by saying, “Husband, you can scarcely be aware how you are wounding the feelings of this dear child. She is not answerable for any of the mistakes made by the Mormons and has had nothing to do with their leaving to go to Nauvoo. It’s all folly to talk in that way—she came for a certificate and ought to have it at once.”

By this time Hepsie was in tears. One great sob after another had welled up until she could no longer control her emotions. Mrs. M. put her arms around her tenderly and said, “Poor child, never mind, come with me. You shall have the certificate now.” And they left the study together.

Once out of the minister’s presence, Hepsie ceased sobbing and, Mrs. M. leaving her alone, returned to the study. Five minutes after, she came in with the little slip of white paper on which a few words were written and signed by Edward Morton D. D.

Mrs. M. handed the certificate to her and said, while entwining her in her arms, “You are a brave girl and deserve success. You know how to control yourself, and that is a great thing in a teacher. I shall be proud to hear you have done well and I am sure you will.”

Then followed the usual goodbyes and “remember me to your dear mother,” and Hepsie flew down the yard and out into the great wide road. She could not go home until she recovered her composure. Her mother must not know what had transpired. The fresh morning air soon cooled her heated brow, and when she came in to her mother’s room shortly after, no one would have guessed the struggle she had gone through. She held up the paper and Mrs. Hathaway inquired, “How did the minister receive you, and how is his wife and family? Did he demur at all because you were a Mormon?”

“Not exactly,” replied the girl. “He talked about seeing the ’Squire first, but Mrs. M. insisted on my not having to wait.”

“Very kind of her,” replied the mother. “She is much superior to him in nobility of character and in personal attainments. They could never live on the salary he receives if she were not always economizing and helping in various ways.”

“I’m sorry for her and for all minister’s wives that I’ve ever seen—the husband gets the honor and the wife contrives to manage the house and does half the brain work—the best half, too. I hope if I ever marry it will not be a minister,” Hepsie retorted sharply.

“I hope you’ll marry a Mormon elder and devote your life and talents to the latter-day work,” said Mrs. Hathaway enthusiastically.

“Wait until we go to Nauvoo, Mother. I shall not marry until I’m twenty-one or more—my guardian would not allow it, you know, and he’ll stop my going to Nauvoo if he can. I have never even hinted such a thing to him—have you, Mother?”

“No, Hepsie, but I shall not brook any interference in that matter.”

Here the conversation ended, either mother or daughter little realizing what lay before them in the near future. Preparations were hurriedly made for Hepsie, and on Monday morning the open carriage came to convey her to Beechwoods.

Her heart was in a great flutter, but her mother knew it not—outwardly she was cool and dignified. And away she went to pass the trying ordeal of a specific examination. She had no idea what questions would be asked nor who would be present.

The little wagon drew up in front of an old farmhouse, she recalled in a moment as the residence of the trustee. The front door opened and in a moment more she was ushered into an old-fashioned square parlor, where sat in state awaiting her Mr. Merriam himself.
