The little schoolhouse shelter’d ’neath a hill,

And troops of children playing round the door;

A morn in June serene, and calm, and still.

Sweet picture in fond mem’ry evermore.

Hephzibah Hathaway went through the examination as she always did that sort of thing, with outward composure though her heart beat wildly, and she fancied Mr. M. must hear it.

She trembled a little when he asked her to write a line or two, that he might judge of her penmanship, and he added, “Anything you like Miss Hathaway.” She recalled a copy given her at school that had made quite an impression upon her at the time, and she wrote without a moment’s hesitation, “A man may smile and smile and yet be a villain,” and handed the paper to Mr. M., who smiled shrewdly as he said, “Why did you write that?”

“It was the first thing I thought of—isn’t it correctly quoted?”

“Yes, and it’s a true saying, and one all pretty girls should remember.”

“I shall never forget that copy,” said Hepsie.

“Nor the lesson it teaches?” added the gentleman.

“For that, I don’t know.”

“I trust you will never have a practical lesson on the subject,” replied the grave and scholarly man, and forthwith proceeded without comment to write out the certificate.

All this time a tumult was going on in Hepsie’s heart and head, for the quiet demeanor of Mr. M. throughout the interview left her in doubt as to the result. He moved towards her and as she rose to meet him, he handed the official paper, and said, “My child, you are the youngest applicant for the situation of a teacher I have ever examined, but I have no hesitation in saying you are qualified for the position, and your courage is extraordinary for one of your years.”

Hepsie felt she was not so brave as Mr. M. imagined, for she dare not look at the certificate until she was out of sight of the house where she had undergone such a mental strain.

A few minutes’ drive brought her to the gate of a similar old farmhouse to the one she had just left, spacious and embowered in shrubbery, with great elm trees outside that reminded her of those at her dear old grandfather’s, and the past came back to her with vivid force. A very prim elderly lady came out to meet her, with such a sweet face and a motherly welcome which made her completely at ease.

“Poor child,” she said, “how delicate you do look to come here to teach the rough country boys and girls, many of them bigger than you, and likely older.”

Mrs. Pearce meantime led the way in through the open door and hall and showed her the great, square room with the white muslin curtains and a snowy counterpane on the comfortable-looking bed so homelike, but Hepsie paused on the threshold a moment and gazed on the sanded floor—her detestation, it always set her teeth on edge. The good lady did not observe it.

Then she saw the fireplace filled with fresh green boughs and, knowing she would be expected to say something, falteringly said, “How nice and fresh everything is. I like an east room.”

“Yes,” said the good lady, “Mr. Beamen told us you were a dainty little piece and not used to farm folks like us, and that you objected to boarding round. He wanted us to watch over you and see that no ‘Mormons’ came around here. For my part, I don’t know nothin’ about Mormons or what they’re like.”

Hepsie wondered what she ought to say but silence seemed the only way to avoid questioning, and she manifested no interest whatever, though her thoughts were busy with conjectures as to what it all meant. Was she then to be watched like a prisoner? She could not comprehend it.

She inquired the way to the schoolhouse and Mrs. Pearce offered to go with her. “I’ll go down the hill and show you the way. The children’s waitin’ for you with great bunches of roses and youngsters this long time.”

Hepsie was relieved when Mrs. Pearce “pinted out” the little red schoolhouse and left her to her own thoughts. The children flocked around their new teacher with their sweet “good mornings,” and Hepsie entered upon her new duties with a determination that whatever difficulties she might have to encounter, she would persevere.

Day after day she pursued her vocation, and weary and exhausted with her toil to which she was so unaccustomed, after returning home she would throw herself down upon the bed and weep, the only outlet she had for nervousness and pent-up emotions.

After resting a few moments she would wander away into the beautiful meadows that adjoined the grounds, a part of the “Pearce Farm.” The good old people scarcely knew what to think of her. “Such fancies,” the old lady would say. “Even wanted me to take the sand off the floor. Couldn’t stand it, and as for victuals no matter what we have she only eats like a bird.” Such were some of the comments made to the neighbors, part of which always reached Miss Hathaway.

It was a lonely place; the families were scattered; there was no society for Hepsie, and naturally enough she sauntered about in search of wild flowers, and the songs of many birds was the only music.

Even on Sunday it was five miles to the nearest meetinghouse, and Hepsie did not care to hear the orthodox minister after having heard the “Mormon elders.” It was all so tame—there was nothing edifying or elevating in it. She preferred to sit in her own room and read or write and to take long walks alone. Farmer Pearce and his wife were not sectarians, made no profession of religion, and never attended any place of worship.

It may well be imagined that a temperament like Hepsie’s could not long endure this monotony—a reaction was bound to follow. She was restless. Teaching children their ABCs or arithmetic, grammar, geography, reading, writing, history, and composition was not enough to satisfy an ambition like Hepsie’s. She longed for something more.

She had been used to the companionship of others—her equals and her superiors, her sisters, her mother. Mrs. Grosvenor and her former teachers had been an incentive to her, and now she realized how much this association of intelligent people had enriched her life.

Three months of drudgery she felt would be so long—how could she endure it? Yet she enjoyed the roses and pinks and peonies and even the southern wood in the front yard, and the children brought her fresh wild flowers every day, and the robins sang at her windows every morning early. Those were not the days of trains and daily mails, and Hepsie did not even have the opportunity of going home on Saturday. In fact, there was really no conveyance, yet she was only ten miles away.

She had never been allowed to read novels, and all her ideas of love were very crude, but for want of suitable employment for the mind, or perhaps a presentiment of the future, Hephzibah allowed her thoughts to drift away into the realms of fancy and center upon love. The girl actually needed some stimulus for a brain like hers, that she could not find in a country schoolhouse, and its being a romantic spot, and the time of roses and of love, she allowed her imagination to anticipate the coming of a lover. At any rate, he came.

It was much like a presentiment. The fields were gay with lilies and daisies. Buttercups and cowslips besprinkled the meadows. The groves were tuneful with the songs of birds all day long and in the midsummer nights, the whippoorwill and other night-birds made melody. Fate held out open arms to respond to the unconscious aspirations of the little maiden, and while the roses were yet in bloom and the hay lay fresh in the meadows, she met him, whom she recognized intuitively to be connected with her destiny. ’Twas strange, ’twas wonderful, and it was unavoidable. It came about in such a queer way that poor unsophisticated, confused Hephzibah could not tell whether to be glad or sorry, whether it was true love or only romance. No girl, it seemed to her, had ever been wooed in such a fashion.

Returning from school one hot, sultry summer’s day, Farmer Pearce introduced to her a young man “just from abroad,” he said. In shaking hands with him a peculiar emotion such as the girl had never before experienced thrilled through her like an electric shock, or a warning or presentiment, and to herself silently she said, “That man has something to do with my future destiny, my fate.”

Had she avoided him, as she felt inclined to do, much deep sorrow might have been spared her, but who knows if out of this crucible she was not tested and prepared to enter upon a higher and grander life work.

The young people just introduced found many subjects of conversation equally interesting to both, and they talked late into the night. The farmer and his wife sat and listened as if enchanted. The door was open toward the grove and the night-birds sang their clearest, highest notes, with occasionally a minor key, a mournful sound that seemed to Hephzibah like the note of sadness mingled with the deepest joy.

Harold, the stranger, who was both poetical and musical in his nature, involuntarily repeated those exquisite lines of Byron’s which so many lovers have quoted since:

“It is the hour when from the boughs

The nightingale’s high note is heard;

It is the hour when lover’s vows

Seem sweet in every whisper’d word.”

This was the first meeting of the young people, but it was most auspicious for Harold. He fell desperately in love and did not hesitate to ask when he could see Miss Hathaway again, before they parted that midsummer night.
