Misfortunes fall upon the brave and true,

We know not how to solve the mystery;

’Tis well the future’s hidden from our view,

Whereon is written our life’s history.

The Harveys had arrived in Nauvoo when great events were pending. The tranquility of the city was much disturbed, the Prophet was being threatened, and traitors were planning destruction to the work of the Lord. William Law, who had been Joseph’s counselor and intimate friend, had just been excommunicated from the Church and was the leader of a band of wicked men who had also been Latter-day Saints, but were now arrayed against the Prophet and his followers.

A newspaper was being started by apostates, to be called The Nauvoo Expositor, in which all kinds of evil reports concerning the people of Nauvoo and vicinity would be circulated throughout the state of Illinois, arousing the indignation of the people and causing mobbings, etc., which, commencing on the outskirts, soon caused the people in Nauvoo to feel that even there, with a city charter and such protection as the law afforded, they were insecure.

Mr. and Mrs. Harvey were filled with fear and dismay and would not remain in Nauvoo.

It was a time of great doubt with some of the halfhearted people. The Harveys were afraid of losing their worldly possessions, and finally decided to buy a farm at Laharpe about twenty miles out from the city.

Mrs. Harvey, senior, knew very well that Hepsie would not go with them willingly, for she had heard her express herself so strongly in her belief in the divinity of the work.

One day while making some preparations for removal, Mrs. Harvey inquired in this way: “Hepsie, are you going with us out to the farm and help Harold get a start in the world? I want to get him out of Nauvoo. He’s too much carried away now with the parading and mustering of the Nauvoo legion, standing guard at night, and sleeping in Joseph’s barn when off-duty. He shan’t have any of our means to waste in this manner, I can tell ye.”

Hepsie said nothing. She had learned like Mr. Harvey that silence was best, especially if she intended to carry her point in the end, which she certainly did.

Her silence was construed to be stubbornness. Mrs. Harvey added, “You have nothing much of your own, but what you have I shall pack up with our things, for you’ll have to go; there’s no other way.”

As usual when disagreeable subjects were broached, Hepsie rushed upstairs to give vent to her grief in tears and prayers, as she invariably did when very unhappy, and now she was full almost to bursting. She could scarcely have answered Mrs. Harvey had she tried.

While she was weeping and sobbing, she heard Harold come in. She could hear his mother in her loudest tones questioning him about going. “And so, my boy, you persist in remaining in Nauvoo whatever comes? Well, you will have to stay alone—I shall take Hepsie. She can’t be left alone at night, while you’re off on duty as you call it, and besides, she can’t do anything any more than a doll. I wish you would be reasonable and come, but I know you’ll be glad to by and by, for the worst hasn’t come yet.”

He laughed merrily and only answered her, “Well, Mother, we shall see,” and bounded upstairs, finding Hepsie in a flood of tears. “What’s the matter, little one?” said he in a voice so cheery as to make all around seem as though a flood of sunlight broke in suddenly. “What makes you fret so much?” And he added, “You are so changed.”

“Your mother says we shall go with her to Laharpe and leave this beautiful city where I expected to be so happy, but I will not go. I’ll give up everything first.”

“Everything?” Harold said.

“Yes, Harold. Everything but you and my religion.”

“You may be called upon to do that if you remain firm and steadfast. But never mind, cheer up! Mother has to scold and use a little authority now and then—it’s her nature. She means all right. We’ll get the best of her yet. Come out a little while for a walk, it will do you good and cheer your spirits wonderfully. You get so gloomy shut up here and I’m always away.”

They went out together. The day was a charming one in early June. They chose the most beautiful paths near the river and they conversed together more seriously upon the principles of truth than they had ever done before.

While Harold had been associated with members of the Nauvoo legion, some of them veterans in the cause, and all staunch Latter-day Saints, he had learned more concerning the gospel than ever before, and he spoke to his wife of these things—of the principles of eternal marriage by which husband and wife could be joined in the holy bond of matrimony not only for this life but for eternity to come, forever and forever.

They had wandered away some distance from home and were in a beautiful, shady, grassy, picturesque place near the river. Steamboats were plying up and down, and Hepsie’s thoughts turned backward to the sea, and her presentiments when a child at the seashore. But Harold could always drive away melancholy. He was so buoyant and hopeful, it was almost impossible to be even pensive in his presence. And yet he was poetical; he repeated stanza after stanza to Hepsie during that walk, which was one of the red-letter days to her. He assured her that as soon as peace prevailed in the city again and he could speak to the Prophet, they would have a marriage ceremony performed by the Prophet himself which would unite them more closely together, and hereafter nothing could ever separate them. They vowed eternal constancy then and there and yet in her heart of hearts Hepsie had those strange misgivings that had haunted her since her first acquaintance with Harold.

“Little one, why are you so pensive? I know you are not happy a moment when I’m away, but only think how noble it is ‘to be on duty,’ and you must think of my being one to protect our great leader and General as well as Prophet, seer, and revelator.”

Then they talked of Joseph, his wonderful power, his magnificent appearance mounted on his white horse, giving orders to the men.

And so they chatted until the evening shades began to gather and they were about to turn their steps homeward when Harold’s poetic nature burst forth in the song,

“We parted in silence, we parted at night,

On the banks of that lonely river,

Where the moonbeams shed their silvery light,

We met—and we parted forever!

And the cold pale moon, and the stars above,

Told many a touching story

Of friends long passed to the kingdom of rest

Where the soul wears its mantle of glory.”

“We parted in silence, our cheeks were wet

With the tears that were past controlling

We vowed we would never, no, never forget

And those vows at the time were consoling.

But the lips that echoed that vow of mine

Are as cold as that lonely river

And that sparkling eye, the spirit’s shrine,

Has shrouded its fire forever.”

“And now on the midnight sky I look,

And my heart grows full to weeping;

Each star to me is a sealed book,

Some tale of that loved one keeping.

We parted in silence, we parted in tears,

On the banks of that lonely river;

But the odor and bloom of those bygone years

Shall hang round its waters forever.”

The last words of the song died away upon his lips. The voice was scarcely audible, and the young wife was again in tears.

“Let us go home, Hepsie. I ought not to have sung that song. It always impresses me with sad forebodings, but then I never yield to superstitions of any kind. We shall never be parted, never! I pledge myself anew to you today for time and all eternity. You know I never loved before, and it was love at first sight with me. And you know, too, that I have never felt so of your love, never could quite fathom it.”

“That’s because it’s too deep, Harold! And girls are taught to hide their love, to be undemonstrative.”

“Hepsie, you are evasive. You do not say to me frankly, ‘Harold, I love you better than all else in the world!’”

“But Harold, you forget I have given up ‘all else’ as you say for you, and you are all I have.”

“Is it not enough? Does not every wife leave her home and friends for her husband?”

“Then you do not think I have made a sacrifice, Harold?”

“Well, in one sense, yes! But Hepsie, there will be other opportunities for you, and greater ones than you would have had in a little New England village. Mormonism opens a wide field for intellectual attainments, only ‘we have fallen upon troublous times’ just now. I must stand guard again to night and you will be alone upstairs, but my heart is always with you.”

This was the substance of the conversation, though much was said of their present and future life.

After their return home, and supper over, Harold bade his wife “goodnight,” and she was left alone. She ever remembered that night and in after years the memory of promises made would flash before her vivid imagination, waking thoughts of that which might have been, had fortune smiled upon her youthful days, but it was not so.

We are not giving a history, only giving some incidents in the life of Hephzibah, and at this time she was sorely troubled. Yet her faith grew stronger every day in the Prophet Joseph Smith and his divine mission, and Harold’s too seemed firmer, but his mother was now a bitter apostate, and day and night murmured against the Prophet and those who associated with him, and repeated all the evil reports and calumnies that were afloat.

Since Hepsie came to Nauvoo she had been to visit some of the company who had left the village of B— in 1842 and, among others, the young people who had married rather hastily just before coming away. She did not find them very congenial society, especially the two young college graduates and their wives. The eldest one, whom she ardently hoped would have married Lucy Reynolds, informed her that he was soon going back east with his wife and baby. And she felt that Lucy had been spared this sorrow, at least—better be single after a broken engagement, than have an apostate husband. The other brother was not much better; he thought of going back, to return again when things had quieted down.

Hepsie wrote to Lucy and told her of her visit, and that the two Mr. W.’s would return home or settle somewhere in the east and possibly use an influence against the gospel, and warned her to beware, for they would bring evil and false reports; they had become embittered and were working against the Saints.

Those who are familiar with the events that took place about that time are aware how one unpleasant occurrence followed another until the crisis came. Hepsie was near the Main Street of the city and heard much that was going on. She was unaccustomed to any excitement of this nature, away from her mother and her husband in the midst of danger, as it seemed to her—no wonder if her whole nervous system was shaken to its center. There was one good sister who sometimes comforted her with words of faith and hope, and whenever Harold could come home for a few minutes she felt reassured. Hepsie never forgot the time the Nauvoo Expositor was destroyed, and the feeling that prevailed among the people.

* * * *

The facts in this case are well-known to the Saints, and we only speak of it in its effect upon Hepsie.

The depression of spirits she suffered about this time was almost beyond endurance. She was ill in body and mind, and yet her faith increased. She could not but feel that a special providence was over her. She saw very little of Harold but realized he was in the performance of what he thought duty, and if she was not reconciled to his absence, she tried to bear it courageously.

Mrs. Harvey had things packed up to move away, but halted between going and staying, wondering in which the most danger was likely to be involved. She upbraided Hepsie daily, telling her Harold would not be so headstrong in Mormonism if it were not for her, and Hepsie, when she felt her loneliness most deeply, was rather proud of Harold’s nobility in maintaining his place among the young men, who were ready to brave any danger in case of emergency.

Joseph’s going to Carthage to deliver himself up with the others who were accused, spread dismay and consternation through the city of Nauvoo. The people were almost wild—hundreds, yes, thousands would gladly have gone in his stead. They mourned even then and when the dreadful news of the massacre came it was as if a thunderbolt had fallen in the midst of the city, and a dark cloud hung like a sable pall over all, that none seemed able to pierce. The beautiful city was deluged in tears as it were, mourning and lamentation on every hand.

Those who were there can never forget the dreadful scenes, and it is impossible to describe the occurrences so as to convey a definite idea of the tragedy, to those who view it from a distance in a pen picture.

The people were advised to be calm, to keep the peace and trust to the law to avenge their wrongs, and there was less excitement than there was agonizing sorrow. Bowed down with grief at the cruel martyrdom of their prophet and patriarch, the Saints awaited the return of the apostles, who were away from home at the time, with anxious expectancy. The only apostle there except John Taylor, who lay wounded and helpless, was Willard Richards, and the Saints listened to his advice and to that of others who had been Joseph’s staunch friends.

Shortly after the martyrdom the Harveys left Nauvoo, but Hepsie and Harold refused to go, notwithstanding threats and entreaties at the last moment from Mrs. Harvey. They were really left almost destitute, for Mrs. Harvey had carried out her intention of taking with her what Hepsie had brought from her own home, at the time of her marriage.

Poor Hepsie, however, felt relieved when they were gone and almost for the first time since leaving home breathed freely. Harold was in the gayest of spirits, he was young and strong, and his father had given him some money, unbeknown to his mother.

They commenced housekeeping on a very small scale, most of the things except furniture being lent them, by a woman Hepsie had formerly known who lived in an adjacent village, but was a member of the same branch of the Church; and when the Harveys went away, she came a friend indeed and offered them assistance, which circumstances almost compelled them to accept.

Harold put the money he had into a commission business with two other young men on Main Street, and he had every hope of success in the enterprise. Hepsie had many misgivings and presentiments. She had no idea what kind of young men they were except that Harold never mentioned them or wanted her to see them.

But she was now really ill—they lived near the river bank and Hepsie began to have the ague, which more than ever increased their troubles and embarrassments. They were obliged to have help in the house, and week after week the poor little wife seemed to grow weaker, paler, and more helpless. She scarcely knew when Harold came or went. He was affectionate, tender, and gentle. He used to lift her up in his strong arms and treat her as one would a child.

Meantime, messages came from Laharpe begging them to leave Nauvoo and come there, but even had Harold wished to go, Hepsie was too ill to be moved.

Letters came occasionally from New England—Lucy Reynolds’ engagement was announced, and finally the news of her marriage to a good young man, a member of the Church who had come up from New Haven to B— on business and fallen in love with Miss Reynolds. Hepsie’s mother wrote that she had been obliged to put off coming to Nauvoo in the fall as she had expected, on account of some technicality in the law that had been overlooked regarding the sale of the property. Hepsie grieved for her mother—it was a great disappointment—but she was patient and hopeful through all. Looking back upon it afterwards, she often marveled that she survived so many nervous shocks.

One beautiful Sabbath morning, a son was born in that lowly home. Such a wee little thing, and the child mother was too ill to think at first, but by and by she realized that the crisis was past, which she had been looking forward to. She was almost surprised to find she was still living. And Harold was there—his the only face she recognized amongst them all. Strangers were around her bed, and she knew by the pitying accents and tones of sympathy that she had been down almost into the valley of the shadow of death.

Baby had soft wavy brown hair and such lovely eyes, but he was sick, too. She worried about him and tried very hard to help a little with him, but it was very little she could do. She thought more about her mother now, but it was all of no avail. She realized in its fulness what it meant to be a stranger, and yet friends were kind. She named Baby herself, and she enjoyed having him with her. But it was not long, for on another lovely Sabbath morning five weeks from the day he was born, he passed peacefully away from earth and those who loved him so devotedly.
