Alone, and weary, among strangers too,

What consolation could a hope impart,

Only the thought that duty, stern and true,

Implanted by religion in the heart.

Young Mrs. Harvey grew gradually convalescent, though she seemed scarcely to realize her delicate condition. She mourned for her baby—it would have been company for her in the lonely hours, when she lay so weary day after day, thinking how her bright hopes had been blighted one by one, and wondering if she could ever recover.

She tried to get faith enough to be healed under the administration of the elders, who came very often, and it always comforted her for a time. One day she recalled the circumstance of Brigham Young’s coming to administer to her at a time when she was suffering great pain, and the words came fresh to her mind that he had spoken on that occasion: “Thou shalt rise up from this bed of affliction and live yet many years to do good.” It was like new life to her, and she laid hold of the promise, and began to gain strength until she was able to sit up and move about the house.

The weather was growing colder. Winter was coming on, and somehow she felt the strangest presentiments. Whenever she mentioned this to Harold, he would whistle and sing and tell her it was only because she was nervous and low-spirited, but he never quite satisfied her with regard to himself. He was attentive and affectionate always, but his manner grew more and more restless, and Hepsie was not in a condition to understand. Had she been well and strong in body and mind and able to go out, she might possibly have known more and averted the serious consequences that followed, but fate it seemed would have it so, and she was powerless under the circumstances.

One day Harold came home at dinner time and called his wife aside to say, “Hepsie, I am going away to stay two or three weeks, going to St. Louis on business for the store. Now don’t cry,” as he saw her lips quiver and the tears come to her eyes, “or I shall never have the courage to go, and it is really necessary. You must be brave and try to get better fast while I’m gone. You’ll not be so thin and pale when I come home.”

Hepsie could not speak. Harold embraced her fondly again and again as though loth to leave her. “Come with me to the riverside,” he said.

She threw a shawl around her and in a moment they stood on the bank of the great river that flowed so near their dwelling. “Once more goodbye, sweetheart, wife, darling,” as if the words choked him, and he was gone—gone with her kisses on his lips.

She watched him in the distance, his fair hair shining like burnished gold, his overcoat on his arm, while her tears and sobs were pitiful. She never forgot how he looked then, as she saw him going away, though as she believed only for a short time. Alas, how strangely things occur in this world, and we know not why ’tis so.

The three weeks went by and Hepsie watched and waited, in good faith, never for one moment doubting him, though a great pain was always in her heart.

She had striven hard to be composed, to regain strength. She could read and write a little now; during these days of waiting, she had so longed for a letter from Harold, and wondered why he did not write. In his abrupt departure, she had not thought to ask him to write, and she had no idea where to address a letter should she write one. So she had nothing to do but wait, and no letter came.

Hope began to grow less, and yet she had no one to whom she could, or would, go for comfort except the Lord. Prayers and tears were her only outlet for the grief she felt so keenly.

One day a man, who knew so little of this patient young wife, or of woman’s nature, one would think, said to her in the most careless way, “Mrs. Harvey, don’t you think your husband has given you the slip?” She heard no more—the shock was too much for her to bear.

While Hepsie lived, she never forgot those words. It was as if a knife entered her heart at first, and then she fell upon the floor in a deadly faint. When she came to herself again she tried to think what had happened. Gradually it dawned upon her and she recalled the cruel words, and she felt sure, hard as it was to bear, it must be the truth, else why had he not written to her? But we will leave the poor little wife for a few days alone with her terrible sorrow.

It is impossible to paint in words the anguish she endured in the days that followed, but she was not left long to herself. She was stricken sorely. Her heart was bruised indeed if not broken, no one to appeal to. It was hard for her to rally sufficiently to think, but she summoned all her latent powers and thought over all those who had come from her native village, but there was not one among them all to whom she could go. Ill and alone in a strange city, her pride kept her apart from those who would have helped her. Or shall we say an overruling Providence marked out her course. “If Mother would only come now, or if Lucy Reynolds were but here,” she would repeat over and over to herself.

One evening a neighbor had come in for a few minutes, thinking to offer consolation. Before scarcely anything had been said, a loud knock at the door startled her. She rushed to open it, thinking surely it was Harold, but no, it was an utter stranger.

“Mrs. Harvey,” said the stranger, addressing her by name, “I have come for you,” telling her his name.

“Oh, you are my husband’s partner. Have you brought me a letter or news of him? Is he ill? Must I go to him?”

The man was young, and was not prepared to answer these hurried questions. In fact, he was somewhat alarmed. “Calm yourself, Mrs. Harvey,” he said, after a moment’s pause. “I have come with a message from my mother—she will explain all. Come with me—it is but a short distance, only in Main Street.”

“Tonight?” said Hepsie, beginning to feel timid, “and with you alone?”

“Yes, you need have no fear,” and turning to the sister who was in the room, he said, “Mrs. J., you know my mother, don’t you?”

“Oh, yes, I know Mrs. S—y quite well. There is nothing to fear. However, as Mrs. Harvey is weak and nervous, I will go with her.”

Thus reassured, Hepsie put on her things. It was a cold night. She wore her long cloak with sleeves and all trimmed with fur which came down to her feet—it had been made new for her wedding tour, the cape nearly as large as the cloak itself, she was almost lost in her wraps. Pale as death and trembling with nervous excitement, she locked the door behind her and went out the dark street.

She did not speak a word until they reached the house which was only a very little way, and Mrs. J. left her at the door, saying, “It will be better for you to go in alone.” Hepsie felt relieved, not knowing what she was about to hear.

Mr. S. opened the door and Hepsie was ushered into a warm, light room where sat two young men and an elderly lady who came forward quickly and almost took her in her outstretched arms, saying, “Dear me, honey, so young, so sick. Sit ye down, I’ll take care of you and nurse you up.”

Hepsie could not speak—she was more puzzled than ever. “What could it mean?” she said to herself—the cold night air and the warm room had a peculiar effect upon her. Her head was dizzy. She was bewildered and completely overcome.

The old lady took off her wraps, all the time calling her “honey” and “poor little thing.”

Finally Hepsie summoned courage enough to say, “Have you no news for me? Why am I to stay here?”

The young men looked from one to the other and then at the mother, and neither spoke. Finally, in tender tones, Mrs. S. said, “You must wait until morning—you are too ill. Come with me,” and she almost carried her to the next room, undressed her, and laid her in bed, then brought hot rocks to warm her feet and gave her warm drink.

Hepsie had no idea what it was, but she felt the sympathy of this gentle motherly woman soothe her, and she soon fell asleep, but only to wake again in a tumult of fears and tremulous emotions. Mrs. S. was in bed with her and the hardwood coals were burning on the hearth. The room was full of shadows, all strange and new.

Mrs. S., finding she had wakened, rose and brought her more warm drink. Hepsie was reluctant to take it, but the good woman said, “Honey, you must take this, it’s only valerian. You’ll sleep if you take it, and let me rub you, too, you’re cold as marble.”

No mother could have been gentler or more thoughtful than was this strange woman to little Hepsie. Her heart was drawn out in pity for her lonely and helpless condition.

The next morning Mrs. S. was early astir, leaving Hepsie dozing half between sleeping and waking. She was preparing the breakfast when the boys came down and asked if she had told Hepsie anything.

“No, indeed, she can’t bear it yet—you must leave it all to me. Depend on’t she’d die if you told her now.”

The boys, as Mrs. S. called them, were glad to let their mother have her way, for they could not carry out the request Harold had made of them in a letter they had received. They had never seen a woman like Hepsie before and had no idea how to convey sad messages. It was well for Hepsie that they hesitated, or at least she thought so afterwards, else the shock would have been too great had it come all at once.

Within two or three days, little by little, Mrs. S. had carefully given Hepsie to understand that she was not dependent upon them, that Harold had provided this home for her until she would be strong enough to go away, or some other arrangement could be made. Hepsie was becoming aware by degrees, thanks to the thoughtfulness of Mrs. S., that she was left alone, and she felt utterly forsaken and helpless.

It was a heavy blow to fall upon one so feeble and childish. “Nervous prostration will certainly follow.” So said good Mrs. S. to her boys. “She is the most amiable and daintiest little woman I have ever seen. How young Harvey could go and forsake such a wife, I can’t see. I’ve no patience with such fellows.”

“Mother, he couldn’t help it,” said Hezekiah, the youngest of the three. “I’ve told you so before—he wept like a child when he left Charlie and me at the landing, and begged we would watch over his wife until she was well. But we didn’t dare to go near her until that letter came, and then I was dumb before her pale face, thinking of her great sorrow.”

Many conversations were held between mother and sons about Hepsie during the short time she was with them, of which Hepsie knew very little. She seemed more dead than alive so far as any activity was concerned. Languid and listless, she let the days slip by, and seemed almost content to let Mrs. S. wait upon her without even thinking for herself.

But another change was coming. Although Mrs. S. was careful to avoid anything objectionable to Hepsie, yet she had noticed of late that the boys spoke of going away, leaving Nauvoo, and they were fast becoming disaffected in their faith. She felt the influence was making an impression on Mrs. S., but she had no idea that she could make any change until she was able to teach, which seemed the only alternaiive, and so she kept silence.

One day after the boys had gone out and by the by Mrs. S. had been reasoning sharply with them in the next room at breakfast time, and Hepsie was praising the buckwheat cakes she was trying hard to eat, and thanking Mrs. S. for her patient care and waiting and tending upon her, Mrs. S. inquired, “How would you like to go over the river with us to live? These are troublous times here, and there will be serious trouble here by spring, and I don’t like being here without the boys, and they won’t stay.”

And as she saw Hepsie did not reply, she said, “We don’t want to leave you here. The boys love you as their own sister. Won’t you come and go with us? Only thirty miles to Farmington and I’ll take good care of you.”
