There’s One above who watches o’er us all,

Who even hears the lonely raven’s cry,

He notes each little sparrow if it fall,

And to the humble He is ever nigh.

To Mrs. S.’s question Hepsie knew not what answer to make, she was so completely taken by surprise. She felt as though she had turned to stone. The last hope seemed gone; Mrs. S. had told her she was not dependent, that provision had been made for her until spring, and it was not yet Christmas time.

She sat like a statue. Mrs. S. did not repeat the question then, and Hepsie did not even ask an explanation. She saw preparations were being made during the next few days, and finally, when nearly everything had been packed up, Mrs. S. ventured to speak again.

“I’ll pack up your things, Mrs. Harvey,” she said. “We are going very soon, and you’ll have to go too, for we can’t think of leaving you here—the city is likely to be burned by the mob.”

Slowly and deliberately, as if each word cost a great effort, Hepsie answered. “No, Mrs. S., I cannot go with you and leave Nauvoo. I shall stay here if I die in the street. I have left all that was near and dear to gather with the Saints, and I will not forsake my religion now, not for anything that could be offered me.”

“But you cannot work, you have no money, you are too proud to ask assistance. It is useless to remonstrate—you must come with us. We cannot refund the means your husband invested in the business, for it is all gone.”

Hepsie waited breathlessly until Mrs. S. finished the sentence and then in the most positive tone and manner said, “Leave my few things out—I cannot go. I prefer to die.”

Years afterwards, when the young wife recalled the scenes through which she passed at that particular time, she wondered at the courage which carried her through and felt perfectly sure that a power which she did not then comprehend, sustained her in the midst of trials and difficulties such as few so young are left to endure alone.

That night before retiring, Mrs. S. had finished packing bureaus, trunks, and boxes, leaving only the necessaries for the breakfast. She spoke to Hepsie again in the most pleading manner. “Let me put up your things, too. I feel very tenderly for you—I never have had a daughter, and you are so weak and nervous, and the boys promised your husband to take care of you until you could teach. Come with us. I’ll do all I can to make you comfortable, and you can get good wages as a teacher in Iowa as soon as you are well. Do come with us—I can’t leave you here alone.”

It was all to no purpose—Hepsie was determined. She never forgot that night; sleep she could not. She realized that Mrs. S. as well as the boys had the spirit of apostasy. She had already had an experience of that kind with Harold’s mother, and she felt that she could face anything rather than that. She prayed fervently that the way might be opened up for her to escape from this trial.

She looked out into the deserted streets. All was quiet. The stars were shining out clear in the midnight sky. “What shall I do? Where shall I go?” she exclaimed aloud.

And instantly, as it were, a feeling of peace came over her, and she became calm, though she never closed her eyes in sleep until the grey dawn of morning, when from sheer exhaustion she fell into a profound sleep.

Mrs. S. was greatly troubled and, rising early, she talked over the matter with the boys. “Mrs. Harvey will not go over the river with us, boys—she will not leave Nauvoo. She is a thorough little saint. She believes implicitly in the Prophet Joseph and in Brigham Young—such devotion I have never seen in one so young. My heart aches for her—what will become of her left here alone? Is there anything we can do, boys?”

The young men looked from one to the other, and finding no solution to the question, Ezekiel, the eldest, a lawyer of some repute, said, “Well, Mother, leave her something to eat, and I think after two or three days she’ll come to us.”

“No, she won’t,” replied Charles. “Harold said when he went away, ‘It’s no use asking my wife to go with me—she would sooner die than give up her religion.’”

“It’s enough to make any one believe that Mormonism is true,” said Hezekiah, the younger.

“And it is true,” interposed the mother.

“Well, suppose it is—we are as safe over the river as we are here until the storms are all past,” said the eldest.

When Hepsie rose in the morning, Mrs. S. repeated what had been said, thinking Hepsie might decide after all to go, but she remained firm as ever, and no amount of persuasion or entreaty could induce her to change her mind. Hepsie knew not what she could do, but she was as firm as the hills in her resolve to stay in Nauvoo, let what would come.

The day was a gloomy one. Mrs. S. was more tender to Hepsie than ever, and several times Hepsie felt great sobs in her throat that choked her utterance, but she would not allow Mrs. S. or the boys to know how she felt.

“We are going tonight, Mrs. Harvey. We shall sleep at Montrose and go on to our destination tomorrow. I do not feel that it is prudent for you to remain here alone. Will you go to Mrs. J. if you are so opposed to leaving the city? She is a fine woman, a good Mormon, and very well able to give you a home.”

Hepsie could not speak, she was too full of sorrow. Encouraged by her silence, Mrs. S. went on to say, “Mrs. J. has an unmarried son, and she is very fond of you. You’ll marry again sometime, and he’s a nice young man. My boys either of them would gladly marry you, I know that.”

Before Mrs. S. could say more, Hepsie fairly shrieked, “Oh, Mrs. S., don’t! You’ll kill me if you talk like that!”

Hepsie was now more than ever determined to break up all communication with the family—to be told almost in a breath that either of the boys who had been associated with Harold had ever had such thoughts about her was overpowering. “Why should I struggle for life when fate seems against me?” said Hepsie to herself. “If death would only come to my relief. . . But no, I must face the world alone and so totally unprepared.”

Mrs. S. felt she had said too much, and strove to soothe and pacify the poor child.

The boys were away and, towards evening, Hepsie partly regained her composure. At dusk she went out a few moments for a walk and to be alone under the shining stars and the clear cold moon. She had always loved to gaze upon these beauteous orbs of night, and on this particular night she was more than ever impressed with the glory and grandeur of the starry heavens. Many thoughts passed through her mind which we have not space to record here, but not for one moment did she lose her self-possession, young and inexperienced as she was. Remember, gentle reader, she was left entirely alone, no relative, no friend to whom she could go.

After strolling for a few moments near the house she felt more calm and peaceful in her spirits, and concluded she would go in and remain alone if the family carried out their intention to cross the river that night.

In the hall she hesitated a moment, thinking she heard familiar voices, and on coming into the dimly lighted and bare room, she saw and heard two strange ladies conversing with Mrs. S. They came towards her as she entered with greetings, but evidently much shocked to see her so changed. She recognized them as two of the sisters who had joined the company of Saints in which she traveled at Albany, N. Y., on the way up to Nauvoo. They were both from New Haven, Conn.

After making some inquiries as to her health, the married lady said, “Mrs. Harvey, we have come to offer you a home. We heard that Mrs. S. was going to leave the city, and we knew that in your delicate state, you were not equal to any great change. We are both of us anxious to have you.”

Noticing that Hepsie was rather confused, Mrs. F. explained still further. “We do not want you to feel we offer you charity. We sympathize with you because of your youth and your loneliness.”

All this time the old maid, for such she was, remained silent, and Hepsie knew not what reply to make. Mrs. S. came to her aid by saying, “Mrs. Harvey, you’d better accept this offer for the present—you’re too ill to be alone, and I’ve been telling these ladies how much you need nursing and attention.”

This was the opportunity for Miss B.; she saw the hesitancy of Hepsie and she put forward a claim. “Mrs. F.,” she said, “would take you right home and as soon as you are able you could teach the children and do light sewing, but I want someone for company. I’m all alone and I need society.”

Hepsie took in both situations momentarily. She remembered the two children of Mrs. F., a boy and girl, and how unmanageable they were on the journey, and she made up her mind that she would go with Miss B. if she went away at all. The ladies both presented their claims, and dependent as she was, they both seemed anxious to secure her.

Finally she said, as if to give them an opportunity to take in all the situation, “I want you to know beforehand that I am not able to wait upon myself at all, and ague is still troubling me—you see how thin I am, and it will take me all this winter to recover, I’m sure. Besides, I am not fit for company; I am too low-spirited and melancholy myself.”

“I’ll see to that,” said Miss B., “and wait upon you until you are well.”

“And so would I,” said Mrs. F., “and would think it only a pleasure.”

Hepsie seemed unwilling to make the choice seem selfish, so she said, “I’ll go with Miss B. She needs me for company. And I’ll come to you, Mrs. F., when I am quite well—you have both husband and children, and Miss B. has no one.”

Mrs. S. was sorry to part from her. She loved her, and she admired her spirit and the courage she had shown in remaining with the Saints. She called her “honey” over and over and told Miss B. what she must do for her and how to nurse her up. “I’ll send the boys over with your things as soon as they come in. They’ll be awfully disappointed to find you’re gone.” And Mrs. S., who was a woman of years with bachelor sons, actually cried at parting with Hepsie, though she had only been with her such a short time.

Who can picture the feelings of Hepsie as she went out that night? Though the place had not been a home to her, it had been a refuge, a shelter. The inmates had been most kind and tender, but now she was to go among strangers again.

This woman was a peculiar type—Hepsie had noticed that when on their journey to Nauvoo. She remembered how much she had talked of money, and her queer ways, and she wondered if she could endure to live with her and eat and sleep with her.

The three ladies went out together and as it was but a few steps to Miss B.’s house, they were soon at the door.

“I’ve bought these two houses, Mrs. Harvey. This one I live in; the other there is rented. I’ve plenty of means—you needn’t worry while you’re with me. I took a real fancy to you on the canal boat, when we were crossing York state—you put me in mind of my sister Elizabeth. She was just such another as you, delicate and full of romance, wrote verses and so on. But come in and rest—I know you’re tired,” and she unlocked the door.

“I’ll say good night now,” said Mrs. F. “I live on Temple Hill, you know. It’s rather a long walk, would have been too much for you tonight, Mrs. Harvey, but I’ll see you again soon. We’re both from one place, you know—Maria and I. That is, she lived in Bethany just out of New Haven, but we were in the same branch.”

Almost as soon as Hepsie had taken off her wraps, a knock at the door announced the arrival of her trunks and other odd things. Miss B. answered the door but Hezekiah and Charley insisted on seeing Hepsie. Miss B– told them she was tired and would see them in the morning, but they were persistent, and finally Hepsie came to the door and shook hands with them, wishing them prosperity and happiness, and adding, “I shall never forget your mother—she has been so good to me.”

It was rather an affecting interview, this parting, and Hepsie felt now that she had parted not only from Harold but those who were his friends, and when she closed the door after them, she felt such a keen sense of loneliness, that she shivered from her head to her feet with a nervous spasm.

Miss B. had a great deal to say that night. In fact, Hepsie thought she would never tire. she was not like dear Mrs. S. trying to nurse her up, but talked incessantly of herself and her money, what she had lent to the Prophet Joseph Smith and also to Brigham Young, and Hepsie began to think she had come from one apostate to another.

Finally, tired of hearing only repinings, she aroused herself sufficiently to say, “Well, Miss B., if you feel distressed about your money, why don’t you have it refunded?”

“Oh, as for that, I know it’s safe enough and I shall get a good interest.”

Hepsie concluded it was her disagreeable way of looking at things and there and then conjectured that the old maid had a sinister motive in taking her in. I wonder what she should want me for. Is it to keep me until Harold comes back and she can get money for boarding and waiting upon me? She knows how generous-hearted he is and that he buys the most expensive things. But no, it couldn’t be that. What can it be? Perhaps my similarity to her dead sister, as she says, and for my society. If for the latter I fear she will be disappointed.

Hepsie realized the difference between Miss B. and the kind motherly care Mrs. S. had given her from the first. She was shaking with cold and excitement, yet Miss B. made no effort to warm her or administer sedatives. She lay awake until morning thinking over her miraculous escape, for she had fully expected to be left alone in the house, which at any moment she might be compelled to leave without a shelter to go to.

Hepsie acknowledged that night the goodness of her Father in heaven in providing this temporary home, where she might have food and a refuge until some other change should come about. Ever after during her life, she felt assured that her guardian angel was near on that occasion, and kept her from yielding to the entreaties and arguments of those who professed the utmost sympathy for her lonely condition. She gave the Lord the glory, for she felt in herself that she had no power, only through Him. That night in her prayer, she acknowledged the goodness of God in her behalf, though she said nothing to Miss B. who had been the instrument in the Lord’s hands of giving her safety and repose.

The early morning found her wide awake and weak from nervous exhaustion, and Miss B. with all her self-appreciation knew not what to do. “Mrs. Harvey, will you have a doctor called to prescribe for you? You are so ill and weak.”

“Oh, no,” replied Hepsie, “I have not had a physician through all my illness, only Mrs. Billings. She has such faith. But I shall be better by and by. The ordeal of last night was too much for me in my weak state.”
