Locked in the secret chamber of her heart,

A living sorrow, nursed by silent grief;

Henceforth thro’ all her life to be apart,

Whatever else might come to bring relief.

The next few days after Hepsie was installed in the home of Miss B. as companion, were very sad and sober ones. The weather was unpleasant and Hepsie was so low-spirited that it seriously affected her health, and Miss B. grew nervous and almost irritable. It was just Christmas time too, but there were no signs of festivities in Nauvoo. No gay shop windows, not even on Main Street. Everything seemed to wear a somber and desolate appearance.

Hepsie’s grief was something new and strange to her newfound friend. She could not comprehend how she could cry day and night too, and reproached her rather severely on two or three occasions, showing very little sympathy for her forlorn condition, except to give her food and shelter. It was just as well, however, for to the young wife, no one perhaps could have said exactly the right things, and she seemed to desire most of all to be left to herself.

“How can you grieve yourself to death for a man who has treated you so cruelly? Such a helpless creature as you are, too, taking you away from everyone you loved and cared for. I should hate him. Why, it’s all I can do to endure being alone as I am, and for that matter I came of my own accord and had nobody to leave that I cared a cent for, so I’ve nothing to go back to.”

“But,” said Hepsie, “you came for your religion, didn’t you? And you can’t give that up whatever trials you may have. I know you are lonely and I’m sorry you’re disappointed in me. I am not companionable, and perhaps I never shall be again, but I mean to get well, and then I expect to teach and earn my own living.”

“You’ll not teach here in Nauvoo—there’s no prospect of future prosperity here. The people will have to move from this place, I’m pretty sure of that. Why, Joseph was making every calculation on going into the wilderness before he was killed. Don’t you know that he even crossed over the river in the night to go, and Emma and some of his friends induced him to come back again!”

“No, I did not know it. I never had an idea of the people leaving here—this is the gathering place, and the temple is to be finished and dedicated—that must be done,” said Hepsie.

“Nauvoo is full of apostates, and many are somewhat disaffected, who have not declared themselves open enemies. A fire is smoldering, just about ready to burst. The crisis may come at any time, and I’m not at all certain that the temple will be completed.”

“But Miss B., you will keep with the Saints, go or stay with them, wherever their lot may be cast?”

“Mrs. Harvey, you are very confiding, notwithstanding your having been left so utterly dependent. I should think you would be embittered beyond trusting anyone again. I positively don’t appreciate such devotion.”

“My trust and faith is in my religion, not in man. Henceforth my life and labor shall be given to the cause I have embraced.”

“You cannot do anything at present—look at your poor thin face and colorless hands, totally unfit and unprepared for work of any sort.”

“I am not discouraged, however,” replied Hepsie. “I know now that my Heavenly Father protects me, since He sent you to me on that dreadful night when I was about to be left so utterly alone.”

Christmas and the New Year came and went—not, however, without awakening intense emotions in Hepsie’s heart, and stirring its inner fountains to their utmost depths, no one to speak to except Auntie, as she called Miss B. She was full of bitter repinings that were as unpleasant as the weather was cold and disagreeable, and there was nothing to call either of them outside.

Such intense loneliness, and Hepsie waiting, longing, and praying for a letter from Harold or from home, yet dreading to receive one lest it should confirm her suspicions. She knew the dear ones in the home nest would write if they knew what to say, but her lips were sealed. She could not speak of her circumstances, lest it should seem like a complaint. Day after day she looked anxiously for news from Harold. She could not believe he had gone from her heart forever. She looked forward to his return at some future time when a full explanation would be made, and at night she often dreamed of the fulfillment of her bright hopes and ardent wishes.

The dreamy life she led, and the queer companionship of her protectress, together with the condition of her nervous system, tended to pronounced melancholy, but she struggled in prayer and the exercise of the best faculties she possessed and conquered in part.

One evening there came a letter in the familiar handwriting she knew so well. Poor child, she trembled so it was with difficulty she broke the seal. Her tears were falling in great drops like rain, and it was hours before she could finish reading it.

Harold had written to her as though he had not wounded her beyond recovery. His words were tender, but hard as it seemed to the tenderhearted wife, she felt they were hollow and meaningless. He called her “Hepsie, my darling wife.” How could he write like that, knowing as he must that he had separated her from her dear ones, and that henceforth an insurpassable chasm lay between them that could never be spanned?

Miss B. wanted to know what news from far away—she had guessed from Hepsie’s excited manner that it was from Harold. It was useless to question her, however; silence seemed to Hepsie the best safeguard. Then and forever after the contents of that letter remained locked in her own heart and were never revealed to friend or foe. Yet, looking back after the space of many years and recalling the sweet and tender words expressed therein, and remembering that sweet summertime among the New England hills when all things wore the couleur de rose, she marveled that she had not given up all for him and the promises he held out to her of fidelity and devotion. It was the spiritual nature that conquered and kept her from yielding to Harold’s entreaties to come to him in the sunny southern islands.

A few days later another letter came, and finally the third and last, for never again by word or message of any kind did Harold make known to her any personal knowledge of himself or his after life.

The words he had written met with no response from her lips or hand, though we may not know what impression they made, or what answering echo they found hidden deep down in her wounded woman’s heart. But she lived through all—cold and impenetrable, seemingly, but as the spring days grew warm and bright, a faint color came back to her pale lips and cheeks.

A final separation from Harold was inevitable. He was not coming back, and she had such an innate conviction of the divine mission of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and the truths revealed through him of the everlasting gospel, that she could not consent to leave Nauvoo and the chosen people of God, though she should henceforth be left dependent upon her own exertions.

A letter from Lucy Reynolds stating that she was about to start for Nauvoo comforted her somewhat, and another soon after from her mother saying, “We expect to come in September,” seemed to awaken new life in her dormant faculties.

She talked much to Miss B. of her mother, telling her of her wonderful faith, her knowledge of the scriptures, and of her arguments with learned men, especially ministers, who had ridiculed the idea of Joseph Smith, an uneducated youth, being a Prophet of God. She sought to inspire in Miss B. a greater degree of faith, for it was very irksome to be associated with one so unbelieving and worldly-minded, one who had no spiritual life and who was always dwelling on the dark side of things. She longed intensely for her mother, full of faith and energy, thinking no sacrifice too great to make for her religion.

During the winter she had gone out a few times, only to meetings and lecture in the Masonic Hall—it was not far, but it was almost too much for her, and Miss B. never wanted to go with her. But Hepsie kept alive a spark of living faith that enabled her to hold on to the truths of which she had become so thoroughly convinced since coming to Nauvoo. Even though there had been many stumbling blocks in her pathway, yet her faith never wavered.

Just before the news came from the east of Lucy Reynolds’ and her husband’s coming, she received a verbal message from the Harveys, Harold’s father, mother, and brother, to come to them at Laharpe. They fully believed if she would, Harold could be induced to return home once more. Harold’s father would come for her with an easy conveyance, and she should be waited upon until she was fully recovered. “If she had not been so obstinate about leaving Nauvoo,” Mrs. Harvey’s message said, repeating her very words, “Harold would not have gone away, Baby would have been living, and much sorrow averted.”

This message stung Hepsie to the very center of her soul, but with her accustomed outward serenity she answered the brother and sister who had brought her the word (they were professed Latter-day Saints). “I cannot leave Nauvoo—on that point I am still as determined as ever. If Harold comes, he will find me here if I am living at all.”

“But,” added the stranger, “the Saints will certainly be driven from here into the western wilds. You are not equal to such hardships.”

“If this people go from Nauvoo I shall go too. My home hereafter shall be with the Saints. It is useless to ask me to go backward—I cannot.”

“And you would give up your husband and all? His family are well off—you would never have to lift your finger. Mrs. Harvey says you have decided literary taste. There would be every opportunity for you as a writer to make yourself known better here in Illinois than in New England where there are so many, you understand.”

Hepsie knew these were Mrs. Harvey’s own words, but they made no impression upon her.

“Then am I to say to the Harveys who wished me to urge you to come, that you refuse to accept their proposals?”

“Say to the Harveys, I will not leave Nauvoo though I should die of starvation in the street.”

“And nothing more,” said the stranger.

“Only my love to Harold’s brother, Oney Andre.”
