Always and ever the moan of the sea,

Sobbing and sighing, she seemed to hear

A subtle foreboding of what was to be;

Sleeping or waking, it filled her with fear.

When the strangers who had brought the message had left with Hepsie’s decided answer in the negative, she felt that the associations of her married life were ended—that a new epoch for her must begin. The name was all that was left, except the terrible sorrow that hung about her like a funeral pall. She experienced some regret on account of Harold’s brother, who had shown so much real affection for her that Mrs. Harvey was accustomed to say, “One cannot tell which loves Hepsie the most, Harold or Oney.”

How hard it was for Hepsie to face the world alone, can never be told in words. One thing only was left: her faith in God. She prayed unceasingly for divine help, for sublime courage, and it was given her.

Miss B. had a cousin in Nauvoo whose children came occasionally to visit her, and they had noticed “the pale sick young lady” at Auntie’s, as they called her, and had spoken of her at home. The mother had become somewhat interested and desirous of knowing who her “old maid cousin” had taken to, as she knew her eccentricities.

She sent word by the boys that she would like to meet this young stranger, and told them to ask Auntie to come up and see her, and bring Mrs. Harvey with her.

The answer to the message was: “Tell your mother she need not waste her sympathy on Mrs. Harvey—I’ll take care of her. She never has troubled about me. It’s only because she’s young and pretty, but she can go if she likes. She’ll be sorry if she does, that’s all.”

Hepsie heard it all, and she felt keenly the bitterness of spirit that would deprive her of a little enjoyment, when she was so much in need of a change.

It was not long, however, until an opportunity came for her to meet Miss B.’s cousin. It was quite unlooked for, and no one could have been to blame in the matter but fate, and it proved fatal to Hepsie, as far as the friendship of Miss B. was concerned. After Hepsie’s introduction to Miss B.’s cousin, which was purely incidental, she became quite familiar with the family.

Miss B. became highly indignant and one day burst out in her anger, “If you like cousin Ann so well, you’d better take up your abode there—you’re no good to me, and I’m tired of your going backwards and forwards all the time. I can live without you, but it’s very ungrateful, when you know what I’ve done for you, taking you in and waiting on you.”

Hepsie could not reply; she was too deeply wounded. Her sobs and tears were her only answer, and she resolved then, whatever the consequences might be, that she would not remain longer with one who manifested such a spirit.

It was true, she had become interested in Miss B.’s cousin, for she was a woman of great faith and never wearied of explaining the principles of the gospel, and of telling Hepsie about Joseph the Prophet and the days of Kirtland, the wonderful manifestations in the temple, and the scenes of persecution through which the early converts had passed in Ohio and in Missouri. All this had a peculiar charm for Hepsie, and she felt her faith increased and her spiritual strength renewed day by day as she listened to the conversation of this good, devout woman.

Finally Mrs. W., knowing how unsuited she must be to her queer cousin, said to her one day, “You might have a little school here, a sort of governess like. You would be your own mistress in the matter, and if a better opportunity came, you would be at liberty to accept it.”

Hepsie realized the great difference in the spirit of these two cousins—one was full of zeal in the gospel, the other constantly finding fault with everything. She accepted the offer Mrs. W. made, though she never mentioned any remuneration except the privilege of a home.

She dreaded telling Miss B., but it was unavoidable. In the gentlest way possible, she explained the matter, but her motives were all misconstrued and finally, when she saw how useless words were, she burst into tears and cried until she was really unfit for anything.

Miss B. was so very much annoyed that she said many disagreeable things, and her manner was so offensive that it made Hepsie still more anxious to go where she could do something to pay her way. She was not in need of clothes, and therefore cared very little whether she earned money or not, for the present. Miss B. wound up at last by saying: “I took a fancy to you at first, and as for cousin Ann, she’s got so many of her own, big and little, she’ll not trouble about you. But it’s just like her. She came and took my sister Elizabeth away once when we were girls, wanted her to go out west to Ohio with her, tried to win her affections away from her own family, and you’ve always reminded me of my sister. Now she’ll take you away and leave me alone again.”

Little by little Hepsie was learning some of the hard lessons of life, and all the time grieving at night. Even after a peaceful day, her pillow would be wet with tears—such a sense of loneliness even in the midst of congenial companionship.

She never tired of hearing Mrs. W. talk of Mormonism, but all the time, deep down in her heart, was the longing to see her mother, though she knew she could not unbosom her feelings even to her, and the intense desire to know the fate of her absent one. She did not wish or expect him to return, yet she longed to hear of his welfare. His last letter was from the West Indies, and he had spoken of “roving on the wild sea.” She intuitively felt he was out upon the ocean; he had dwelt much in times past on his love for the music of the ocean, and in former days had written a song of the sea, and called it “Memory,” that he was very fond of singing. She also recollected her emotions as she sauntered on the beach in the twilight when a child, and the sort of presentiment she had then, that the sea would be in some way associated with her life. she dreamed of the sea and its “bounding billows,” and she fancied she could hear its sobs, the echo of her own. She longed sometimes to fly away that she might listen to the reality. It would, at least, be a sort of sympathy she need not repel. In her calmer moments she knew such a thing to be impracticable, and that henceforth labor in the great work-a-day world was to be her portion.

She taught a few children in a desultory sort of a way for a little time, and then was engaged to teach a school in the eastern part of the city, in a log schoolhouse. This time there was no other way but to board around by the week, but this was among the Latter-day Saints. Once she had refused to do this, but many things had changed since that time, and this opening seemed to her providential indeed—another new experience.

Just before Hepsie went away to teach the school, Lucy Reynolds and her husband arrived in Nauvoo, and rented rooms near Mrs. W.’s, where Hepsie was staying. Hepsie found Lucy the same dear old friend, but Lucy was terribly disappointed that she would not confide in her, and in consequence of this there was a temporary estrangement between them.

Lucy told her much of her mother’s affairs and the anxiety she had felt on her account, thinking to draw Hepsie out on the subject, but it was of no avail. In regard to her troubles she was as silent as the grave. Work, now she was better, seemed the best remedy for both body and mind.

Hepsie was greatly interested in her school. She had some large girls in whom she felt the deepest interest, knowing how soon they too would be likely to enter married life, and remembering her own experience, she sought to instill into their minds moral truths and impress them with the realities of true womanhood. Her mind was absorbed during school hours, but when her tasks were completed she resumed her accustomed methods of daydreaming, and imagined all sorts of extraordinary things, almost believing she should hear news of Harold, though she never made inquiry of anyone likely to know. In fact, she had heard nothing of the S—ys, Harold’s former partners, and she was confident, had the Harveys heard from him, they would not have communicated with her.

She was not in the habit of writing home now, for what could she say? One after another of her brothers, sisters, and schoolfriends had expressed in writing to her, indignation against Harold, and denounced his conduct, blaming Mormonism for all. She could not endure such reproaches, so she gave them all up. In September her mother would come, her term of school would close the last of August, and she would be at liberty.

Occasionally she scribbled verses, but none of them appeared in print, except on one occasion—some verses on friendship she had sent to a friend, had appeared in an English journal. Hepsie was astonished, for she had not thought herself in a condition of mind to write, but it was true—they had been accepted, and there they were with her signature attached. Had she sent them herself, she would only have given her initials or a fictitious name; however, she consoled herself by thinking no one knew her scarcely, for she was very modest about her writing, and afraid of criticism.

The weary summer months dragged along, very little like that other summer, two years before, when she had been so lighthearted and full of expectancy. There were many rumors of mobs in the outlying districts around Nauvoo, and many actual disgraceful wrongs perpetrated against the Saints, and work on the temple seemed to enrage those who had arrayed themselves in opposition to the Church. Hepsie had no fears or misgivings when she heard of mobs coming almost to Nauvoo and the threats they made of putting an end to Mormonism, destroying the temple and so on; she felt her courage rise and almost forgot her individual troubles in those of her people.

Her school had closed. She had said her farewell to the children and had gone to stay with Mrs. W. temporarily, looking forward to her mother’s coming, counting the days and the hours almost, weary of waiting, when one bright afternoon, a girl came running towards the house.

Hepsie was standing in the doorway, repeating over to herself, “When will Mother come?”

The girl almost stunned her with the news. “Your mother has arrived! She is at Brother P.’s and wants you to come immediately.”

Hepsie fairly flew over the ground in her excitement, and at sight of her mother as she crossed the threshold she fainted dead away. When she came to herself, she knew it was the tumult of recollections that crowded upon her brain at sight of her mother’s face that had overwhelmed her and overpowered her.

The meeting was an embarrassing one after all, much as Hepsie had calculated upon it, bringing up the trying ordeals through which Hepsie had passed since leaving her childhood’s home, the baby’s birth and death, the sorrow of that time and what followed. Then Mrs. Hathaway had many questions to ask relative to the situation in Nauvoo, and poor little Hepsie had to act as sort of guide and instructor to her mother. Everything was so different to New England ways, habits, and customs, and Mrs. Hathaway, though well acquainted with the theory of her religion, knew very little of the practical side, such as one learns by coming in contact with those of the faith in the daily associations of life. But Mrs. Hathaway had her religion at heart, and therefore difficulties were easier for her, than those not so firmly rooted and grounded therein.

Towards the latter part of September, Hepsie’s friend Lucy had a little daughter born, and she was so absorbed in her mother duties and housekeeping that Hepsie lost sight of her for a time. So it is the dearest friends get separated through circumstances, though the strong ties that bind them need not necessarily be dissolved.
