In all the shifting scenes and toils of life,

Where’er her fortune, or her lines were cast,

Battling for right ’mid all the storms and strife,

Buoyant and hopeful even to the last.

The fall and winter following Mrs. Hathaway’s arrival in Nauvoo were of special note in the history of the Church, and each and every event that transpired made upon her a deep and lasting impression, as also upon Lucy Reynolds and her husband, for though they were staunch Latter-day Saints, they were totally unacquainted with the spirit of mobocracy that pervaded Nauvoo and its suburbs, and one might almost say Hancock County, and the state of Illinois.

During that winter the Nauvoo Temple was so far completed as to be ready for ordinances, and this seemed to arouse the evil passions of the wicked mobs beyond all reason. Persecution raged to the very extreme, and an exodus of some of the Saints, especially the leaders of the Church and their families, was talked of early in the winter. So many occurrences took place about this time that it is impossible to do more than barely touch upon them; and that is perhaps sufficient for the story we are writing.

The Saints who were in good standing were anxious to receive their blessings in the beautiful temple that had been built at such great expense, under such trying circumstances. While many of those who worked upon it were so poor they were scantily supplied with the necessaries of life, yet they had toiled on, determined to finish the Lord’s house.

Brigham Young, who by virtue of his position as President of the Quorum of the Twelve was really the leader of the people, was desirous that as many of the Saints as could, should have the privilege of the blessings to be given in the House of the Lord, while there was still an opportunity granted them, for, prophet as he was, he foresaw the hindrances that would follow.

Day after day the temple was crowded with brethren and sisters. It was a grand and beautiful sight and one that can never be forgotten while memory lasts, not only inside the magnificent and holy edifice, but to see the Saints flocking up the broad steps and to the doors of the temple as we had read of in ancient days during the short time they were permitted to work therein.

Hephzibah had many excellent opportunities of becoming familiar with the highest and most exalted principles and truths pertaining to the gospel, as well as to the great and grand work which was being performed in the temple. It really seemed that she had been mysteriously led without her own volition into a channel of association whereby she might obtain certain great blessings and privileges not only for herself, but for her mother, who was such a devout and faithful exemplar of the first principles taught by the elders and also so intelligent concerning the prophecies of scriptures, which she had so carefully studied. Coming to Nauvoo at a time when one great event was crowding thick upon another, without being known except by a few, she (Mrs. Hathaway) would not have had the privilege of going into the temple as she so much desired, had it not been that the way had been opened for her through Hepsie’s misfortunes and sorrows, that had thrown her into the society of those who “went in and out of the temple day and night.”

Hepsie realized now it was in her power to get the privilege of temple ordinances for her dear mother who had been so zealous and earnest an adherent to the gospel ever since it was first preached in the little country village in New England, though she had not had the opportunity of gathering to Nauvoo in the lifetime of the Prophet and hearing his voice for herself, which she had so ardently desired.

It was a great comfort to Hepsie that she could assist her mother in this way spiritually, even at the time, but in years afterward she realized more fully how surely the hand of Providence had guided her in ways she knew not, and against which her spirit and her pride had woefully rebelled, though she had kept silence, and none knew except herself knew the struggles she had undergone in her heart and soul.

All this time she had heard nothing from the Harveys. She knew now that she had hoped against hope with regard to Harold. She felt confident in her own mind that he was dead, though no word or message came save the still, small whisper down in the depths of her own soul which told her plainly that she was free and at liberty to make choice of another if she so desired. She did not know whether she cared for this freedom or not—she had passed through so many trying ordeals that she seemed only to think of peace. She had been so completely subdued and remolded that she was not sure if she still possessed any of the romantic characteristics of former days. She had given up everything—all her girlfriends, all her associates. Once she had thought that would be impossible—even Lucy Reynolds seemed more her mother’s friend than hers. What did it all mean? Mrs. Hathaway quickly discerned after her arrival the great change that had taken place in Hepsie, though she rejoiced that it had increased instead of lessening her faith.

“Hepsie,” she said one day when they were alone together, “what has made such a radical change in you? It seems incredible to me (and I am your mother) that you should have lost your ambition to be a writer, or teacher, your poetical taste, your aspirations for fame, that we once thought so firmly rooted and grounded in your nature from early childhood. Can you explain what has caused it? Is it Harold’s unfaithfulness?”

Hepsie’s lip quivered. Her eyelids trembled. Her whole soul convulsed with peculiar emotions. she knew not what to answer, but feeling as she always had her mother’s superiority, and recognizing her right to question, she collected her scattered thoughts and replied hastily. “Don’t question me, Mother. I can’t bear to talk of these things now. Everything in this world has changed for me—henceforth my religion shall be my all.”

Mrs. Hathaway never questioned Hepsie again, but she saw and felt that she was absorbed as it were in something that engrossed her thoughts and occupied her mind to the exclusion of all else. She remarked to Lucy Reynolds (now Mrs. Adams) one day when they were talking, “Can you tell me, Lucy, what has come over Hepsie to work such an entire change in her?”

“No,” replied Lucy, “unless it is the temple work and the exalting nature of the principles taught by the apostles and elders concerning a spiritual exaltation through sacrifice, that she seems to think so far in advance of all the learning and wisdom of the world.”

Shortly after the conversation between Mrs. Hathaway and Lucy, Hepsie said to her mother in a sort of casual way, “The leaders of the Church and their families are preparing to leave Nauvoo and go forth into the wilderness to seek a place of refuge from their oppressors, as the Pilgrims did. Only instead of crossing the sea, they will go over the great American desert.”

Mrs. Hathaway looked up from her sewing in surprise, exclaiming, “And do you think of undertaking this journey?”

“Why, Mother, would it be such a dreadful thing to do? There are many young women going, and there is nothing to hinder my trying a new experience. There will be plenty of toil and hardship connected with it, no doubt, but to travel through an unknown country will be interesting in the extreme!”

“And do you take into consideration that you will be leaving your mother and all your own kindred?” And Mrs. Hathaway almost broke down as she said it. Hepsie had scarcely seen her mother weep in her lifetime, and it was almost too much for her. She had not thought she would take it so to heart, and it was a few minutes before she could reply, and when she did, it was with a great effort she maintained her composure, but she felt she must speak out.

Choking down her sobs and looking up at her mother’s sorrowful face, she said, “Something tells me I must go, Mother—”

And before she could finish the sentence, her mother interrupted her, saying, “And something tells me if you go we shall never meet again.”

By this time mother and daughter were both in tears. It was indeed a trying scene. Hepsie felt as she had expressed herself that she was impelled to go by some irresistible force, and she hoped to make a satisfactory explanation to her mother, though it almost broke her heart to be separated from her again so soon. Words seemed powerless to express her feelings. Her great love for her mother made it very hard for her to decide, and yet the whisperings of her own heart were all the time urging her forward.

Lucy (Mrs. Adams) coming in put a stop to the conversation for a few minutes, but ere long Lucy said, “Hepsie, is it true that you are going away to Upper California beyond the Rocky Mountains?”

Hepsie made no reply. But Mrs. Hathaway, who was specially anxious to know what had made Lucy inquire, said excitedly, “Who says Hepsie is going away?”

“Oh, Brother Kimball says so, and I’ve heard others say it too. I thought ’twas all settled. I only wish I was going, but we can’t go yet. But we’ll be sure to follow after.”

“Then you approve of this move and expect that all the Saints will go as soon as they can?” Mrs. Hathaway said, anxious to know what her opinion was.

“Most certainly. Why, Brother Kimball says it’s the grandest move the Church has ever made. There they’ll be free to worship God according to the dictates of their own consciences, with none to molest or make afraid.”

“I am very glad to hear Brother Kimball’s views. I know they must be correct, though that does not reconcile me to parting with Hepsie, and I am not prepared to go now in such haste.”

“It is not expected that widows will go with young children this winter,” said Mrs. Adams, who seemed as anxious to tell all she knew about the matter as Hepsie was to keep silence on the subject, “but the Church will send for the widows and children, the aged, and those who cannot go now, as soon as they get located. Really, Hepsie, are you going? Because if you are, I’m sure you are expecting to be married again.”

Hepsie was now fully aroused—no one had ever mentioned marriage to her in presence of her mother, and she resented such an insinuation as though it were an insult. In the bitterest tone she said, “Lucy Adams, how dare you talk to me like that! Am I not already married? And have I not suffered enough for a lifetime?”

“Oh, as to that,” replied the incorrigible Lucy, “you were never so desperately in love with Harold that it need to hinder you from marrying again. And in all probability he’s dead, anyway. I saw his brother the other day, and he declares Harold is dead, or he would have come back before now, for he wrote him a letter and said he would come back for you within a year if he lived, and the year is long past now.”

Even Mrs. Hathaway felt this was too much upon such a painful subject, and addressing Mrs. Adams, said, “You are simply torturing Hepsie beyond all endurance. She has no thought of marriage, I am positive.”

What Mrs. Adams had said about Harold’s death had its effect upon Hepsie—she could not dismiss the subject from her mind by night or by day, and she resolved to ascertain if possible whether he was living or dead.

After that day Hepsie felt she could never meet Lucy again. She was anxious to go and to get away from all those who would be likely to mention Harold’s name to her. Meantime, she made the matter a subject of constant prayer in her heart as she performed her daily duties, and she struggled with her feelings to know how to bear the separation from her mother, which she knew was inevitable if she concluded to accept the offer she had to go with the first company, who were to leave the beautiful city of Nauvoo in midwinter.

She never thought of the hardships to be encountered; the journey had no fears for her. To be with those who had the word of the Lord, with prophets and apostles, to be always gaining a knowledge of those things that pertain to eternal life and the advancement of the Latter-day work was her object.

She tried by persuasion and entreaty to reconcile her mother, believing in her heart and assuring her that she would, by going forward herself, be able to advance her interests and help her more than if she stayed behind. “I am no longer a child,” she said, “but able to think and act for myself, relying upon my Heavenly Father for guidance and protection.”
