Sad was the parting, weary was the way

The Pilgrims trod, while journeying along;

Many the trials encountered day by day;

And yet at eve the merry dance and song,

The drooping spirits cheer’d and hope grew bright;

And when they knelt upon the ground to pray,

They seem’d to see a resting place in sight,

And holy angels, guarding all their way.

Hepsie felt that parting thus from her mother, after all she had suffered alone, was indeed a test of her faith and sincerity. She prayed fervently for strength and firmness to take this final step, that seemed to her a cross—a sacrifice greater than any she had voluntarily made. And she was doing this herself. It appeared much harder since her mother had spoken her feelings on the subject—in fact prophesied of the future—and it did look cruel, yet an irresistible impulse led her on. When alone, she questioned her own heart as to the motives which induced her to take what looked to others to be “a leap in the dark.”

Was it because Harold’s unfaithfulness had killed out all affection, and made her cold and distrustful, and desirous of burying herself among those who were not akin to her and could have no claim upon her love or gratitude? Sometimes she felt afraid it was so—that she was selfish—and then there would come over her a wave of singular emotions, so exalting in their nature, that she seemed wafted into a celestial atmosphere, where all human love was swallowed up in the great river of life that flowed ever onward, connecting the seen with the unseen, the real with the ideal, the earthly with the eternal. At such times her thoughts would take the most lofty flights, that made the present appear like a shadowy myth compared to the glory to be attained by sacrifice and compliance with the will of God, which under certain influences seemed so plain to her understanding. This knowledge was so sacred in its character and its effect upon her was such that she did not dare to explain it to any one if she had been inclined, not even her mother.

To Hepsie it was above and beyond all the education the world could give, and to which in the past she had aspired with so much enthusiasm. No sacrifice looked too great if she could only endure it in view of the promises held out to her in connection with the principles she had been taught. Hepsie realized in a very small degree what sacrifice and endurance meant, but she was naturally hopeful and, having had some sharp trials that cut very keen and close into her heartstrings, she naturally enough thought these lessons had paved the way for higher ones. And so indeed it proved.

There were some discouragements thrown in her pathway, and there were those beside her mother who tried to hinder her from leaving Nauvoo with the first company. There were offers of this kind and that, and objections raised of various kinds, but these had no weight whatever—she had set her face westward and was not to be thwarted in her purpose for trifles.

One young friend and companion used every effort in her power to hinder her from undertaking the journey. When she saw how immovable Hepsie was, she accused her of never having truly loved Harold, and went so far as to say, “You dare not face his father and mother. You are going away without seeing them; they have been told that you are going, and they mean to put a stumbling block in your way, for you are still his wife whatever you may think, and they are determined you shall not go. They know very well if you do, Harold will never come back. What have you to say to them? Will you be answerable for his utter ruin?

Hepsie quickly replied, “My religion has taught me to love my enemies, and although I am far from perfect in that lesson which the Savior taught, yet I am not afraid to meet Harold’s parents; I know I have not wronged Harold or them. My conscience is clear and you can tell them so.”

“Well, Hepsie, they’ve sent for you to come out to Laharpe and see them. There’s a carriage waiting at Uncle Jo’s for you now—will you go? Have you no fears that you may be persuaded to remain? They will offer you great inducements to stay with them. You know they have lots of money.”

“Katie, their money weighs nothing with me. They would not give one cent to Harold and me when they knew how destitute we were before Baby was born, but I can forgive them even that. I will go, if you will go with me, and they shall see I am not a moral coward, and could face the whole world were it necessary to prove my sincerity in my religion. Will you go with me? You know them all, and I should even be glad to see Oney once more and leave a message with him for Harold should he ever return, tho’ my heart tells me he never will!”

“Yes, Hepsie, I’ll go and tell the folks at Uncle Joe’s that we’ll go, and mind, you must be ready early tomorrow morning—it’s a long drive.”

Hepsie had many reflections that night and such strange dreams. She had not told anyone where she was going except her mother, and she had objected, saying, “Hepsie, my dear, you overestimate your strength. You will break down, and your nerves are already shattered. Oh, that dreadful woman, why did I ever trust you with her?”

“Mother, I am going,” said Hepsie, “to show Mrs. Harvey that I am converted to a faith that more than compensates me for Harold’s absence. And perhaps, my dear mother, his lack of manhood has been my salvation; for I could never have been modified, subdued, changed as I am nor have seen the frivolity of worldly things as I do now, if I had not passed through “a fiery furnace,” if I had not been left utterly alone and friendless, as well as destitute, and only One above to look to and lean upon. I will tell this to the Harveys and who knows but it may be a testimony to warn them and save them from apostasy.”

Her mother replied, “Hepsie, I shall not object to the free exercise of your will in the matter, nor in regard to your going away. I comprehend now that you have received light and knowledge beyond most young people of your age, and I am prepared to consent to your going away with the main body of the Church. I shall make no remonstrance hereafter.” This concession on the part of Mrs. Hathaway was very consoling to Hepsie.

On the following morning Hephzibah and her friend Kate P. left the city for Laharpe; it was late in the day when they arrived at the Harvey residence, for sure enough it had been, as Kate said beforehand, a long drive. They were cold and tired, and the reception they received was also a very cool one.

Mrs. Harvey detected almost immediately that Hepsie had not come to stay, and she resented her bringing Kate with her. But Hepsie was prepared for the encounter, such as it was.

“Oh, I can see plainly that you’re not a bit humbled by your trouble. You’re just as proud as ever. Pride and poverty don’t go well together, though.”

These and similar sayings were the greetings she received, and the only comfort the visit afforded her was a word or two with Harold’s brother. He assured her of his brotherly affection and also that he still believed Mormonism was true and hoped some day his mother would be convinced of her error in persuading his father to leave Nauvoo. He told Hepsie he felt sure Harold was dead from things he had dreamed concerning him; and Hepsie, knowing his delicate spiritual temperament, felt he must be right.

It would be too much to detail items of this visit, but Hepsie and Kate went back to Nauvoo fully convinced of the apostasy of Mrs. Harvey, and she was the ruling spirit in the household. When they parted, Mrs. Harvey said to Hepsie, “I suppose if you’re not married to one of the heads of the Church you’re going to be, and you’ll never see Harold again, or have a dollar of our money.”

But her words had no effect upon the young woman except to disgust her with her oft-repeated allusions to money. On the way home Hepsie said to Kate, “Don’t tell Mother how we were treated—it will make her so indignant and unhappy. Besides, Mother and the children will be left here when we go away, and we don’t know what may transpire. You know, the Harveys spoke highly and kindly of Mother and they might do her a favor. She may need it, for if, as they say, the remainder of the Saints are likely enough to be driven after we are gone, who can tell what she may need. And it is better for her not to know. Anyway, it couldn’t do any good and it might do harm.”

Kate however didn’t see fit to promise, and as soon as she had an opportunity, told Mrs. Hathaway everything except that Mrs. Harvey accused Hepsie of being married to one of the heads of the Church. She knew that would be going a little too far, if she meant to retain Hepsie’s friendship, and she was anxious to have her favor, for she knew that Hepsie’s influence would be a blessing. She herself had questioned her about the gossip referred to on the journey home, and became convinced that whatever step Hepsie intended to take, she was terribly in earnest; and if she ever married again, the marriage would be solemnized upon a higher platform than either Mrs. Harvey the elder or Mrs. Hathaway could appreciate at present.
