INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Review this introduction before 
you begin studying it. 

Your purpose as a missionary is to help people come to Christ through the Read and Discuss 

ordinances of baptism and confirmation. As the people you teach open their 

hearts, listen to your message, and obey the Lord's commandments, they will 

feel the Spirit of the Lord. They will be converted when they feel the Spirit 

and act on the promptings they receive. 

You can help people become converted by using a process called the 
commitment pattern. To use this pattern, first, you prepare others to feel the 
Spirit. When they are feeling the Spirit, you invite them to make and keep the 
specific commitments found in the missionary discussions. After they accept 
your invitations, you follow up to help them keep the commitments they have 
made. If an investigator expresses concern or doubt during the process, you 
help him resolve the concern. Then he will be better able to make and keep the 
commitments that lead to conversion. 

Find Out 

■ What is the commitment pattern? 

Discuss 

■ What did you do to prepare for 
your mission? 

■ How were you invited to come? 

■ How did people follow up to help 
you keep your commitment to go 
on a mission? 


Your ability to help people become converted depends primarily upon what Read 
you are (your attributes) and what you do (your skills). You will need to 
develop Christlike attributes and effective proselyting skills. 

There are many Christlike attributes that you should strive to develop during 
your mission and throughout your life. No doubt you already live 
righteously. You understand the importance of gospel knowledge and 
testimony, faith and hard work, and charity. As you carefully study the 
Missionary Guide, you will further develop these attributes and your ability to 
bring others to Christ. 

There are a number of proselyting principles and skills that you should use to 
help others accept the gospel. These include building relationships of trust, 
helping others feel and recognize the Spirit, finding out what people 
understand, presenting the message, inviting people to make commitments, 
following up on those commitments, resolving concerns, and planning. The 
Missionary Guide will explain these principles and skills and give you an 
opportunity to learn and practice them. 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Missionary Guide contains the following chapters: 

1. The Purpose of Missionary Work 

8. Resolve Concerns 

2. Christlike Attributes 

9. Invite 

3. The Commitment Pattern 

10. Follow Up 

4. Build Relationships of Trust 

11. Plan 

5. Help Others Feel and Recognize 

12. Find People to Teach 

the Spirit 

13. Teach 

6. Present the Message 

14. Baptize and Fellowship 

7. Find Out 

15. Leadership 


Discuss 

■ Which chapters interest you the 
most? Why? 

Your goal is not to memorize a list of instructions to help you develop an Read 

attribute or skill. What is important is becoming Christlike and using 
proselyting skills effectively and naturally in your work. As you study, 
practice, and apply what you learn, the skills and methods described in the 
Missionary Guide will become natural and spontaneous. You will be able to 
use them with the gifts and talents that the Lord has given you. 

Making proselyting skills natural and spontaneous is like becoming a good 
athlete. When a basketball player joins a new team, he brings with him 
certain natural abilities and acquired skills. Some of these skills will have to 
be refined or adjusted. Entirely new skills may need to be developed. These 
skills must be learned as a set of steps. For instance, when the basketball 
player is learning to dribble, he must learn to keep his eyes up and his 
fingers curved and flexible. Again and again, his coach will drill him on these 
and other parts of the dribbling skill. 

During competition, however, the coach and player focus solely on 
skills — dribbling, passing, shooting, defense — rather than on the parts of 
each skill. The player combines basic finger and eye positions naturally and 
spontaneously to achieve expert dribbling. 

Discuss 

■ How does the basketball coach use 
the basic skills of the commitment 
pattern when working with the 
player — prepare, invite, follow up, 
and resolve concerns? 

Like the basketball player, you bring to your mission unique attributes and Read 

skills that will serve you well. You will be invited to develop other attributes 
and skills during your mission. You can learn these by identifying and 
analyzing their parts. Remember, though, that you will apply them naturally 
and spontaneously as you work to bring souls to Christ. 

As you evaluate your success as a missionary, you should think about how 
well you apply proselyting skills. You could ask questions like these: "Did I 
prepare others to feel the Spirit?" "Did I invite them to make specific 
commitments that will bring them closer to Christ?" "Wow well did I follow 
up to help them keep their commitments?" "How well did I help them 
resolve their concerns and overcome temptations?" 

The suggestions within the Missionary Guide are simply ways to help you 
achieve the purpose of your mission — helping people come to Christ through 
the ordinances of baptism and confirmation. 

Discuss 

■ How can study of the Missionary 
Guide help you achieve the 
purpose of your mission? 


2 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

%nd your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Evaluate your performance as a missionary by answering the following 
questions: 

1. Did I prepare people to feel the Spirit? 

2. Did I invite them to make specific commitments? 

3. Did I follow up to help them keep their commitments? 

4. Did I help them resolve their concerns? 

Invite 

■ Ask your companion to evaluate 
his performance as a missionary by 
answering the questions on the 
left. 


Follow Up 

■ Help your companion evaluate his 
performance after each proselyting 
experience by discussing how well 
he applied the commitment 
pattern. 

■ Tell your companion what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve.
