THE PURPOSE OF 
MISSIONARY WORK 


INTRODUCTION 

LEARNER 


This chapter will help you understand the purpose of missionary work. This 
purpose is to bring souls to Christ through the ordinances of baptism and 
confirmation. Before you can accomplish this purpose, you must come unto 
Christ yourself and continue in his way. You must prepare. "Purify your 
hearts before me;" said the Lord, "and then go ye into all the world, and 
preach my gospel unto every creature who has not received it" (D&C 112:28; 
italics added). 

Your preparation began long before your mission — before your birth, in fact. 
Most likely, you were "among the noble and great ones who were chosen in 
the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God. Even before [you] were 
born, [you], with many others, received [your] first lessons in the world of 
spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord to labor 
in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men" (D&C 138:55-56). 


You will probably be familiar with much of what will follow. Nevertheless, 
open your heart as you study so that you can understand the sacred and 
important message of this chapter. The words of King Benjamin may well be 
addressed to you: 

"I have not commanded you to come up hither to trifle with the words which 
I shall speak, but that you should hearken unto me, and open your ears that 
ye may hear, and your hearts that ye may understand, and your minds that 
the mysteries of God may be unfolded to your view" (Mosiah 2:9). 


The topics that you will study in this chapter are listed below. 


Our Heavenly Father's Plan 6 

The Conversion Process 9 

A Missionary's Purpose — Convert Baptisms 12 

Accomplishing the Purpose of Missionary Work 16 


TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 

Read 


Discuss 

■ How does Doctrine and Covenants 
138:55-56 apply to you? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What kind of attitude must you 
have before you can learn from the 
Lord? 

Read 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 


4 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


( ) Heavenly Father has a plan for our happiness. If we follow this plan, we can Read 

become like him and return to live in his presence. As the Lord said, "For 
behold, this is my work and my glory — to bring to pass the immortality and 
eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Immortality, or victory over physical death, 
is given to all who are born into this world. We are made immortal when we 
are resurrected. Resurrection is a free gift to all through the grace of Christ. 

Eternal life, or victory over spiritual death, is made possible through the 
atonement of Christ. Those who come unto Christ by obeying the laws and 
ordinances of the gospel may obtain eternal life. We receive eternal life when 
we are invited back into the presence of God to live the kind of life that he 
lives. 

Discuss 

■ Why is it important for you to 
understand the difference between 
eternal life and immortality? 

■ How will this understanding help 
you and the people you teach? 


Scripture Activity Read and Discuss 

Refer to the preceding paragraphs, the Topical Guide, or the Bible Dictionary 
to answer the following questions. 

Immortality Eternal Life 

What is it? 


What made it possible? 


What must we do to receive it? 


Who will receive it? 


Find Out 

■ What is God's purpose for his 
children? 


As a missionary, you are called by God to help him bring people back to his Read 

presence. Your major role is to bring souls to Christ through the ordinances 
of baptism and confirmation. Only through baptism can we enter God's 
kingdom: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter 
into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5). 

Find Out 

■ How do missionaries help to 
accomplish God's purpose for his 
children? 


5 


OUR HEAVENLY FATHER'S PLAN 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


We must be baptized before we can return to live with our Heavenly Father. 
The following material explains how baptism fits into Heavenly Father's plan. 

Before we came to earth, God called a council in heaven. There he presented 
his plan for our happiness and salvation. As part of the plan, God gave us 
free agency and commandments. He allows us to choose to obey or disobey. 
Since he knew that we would make some wrong choices, he provided a 
Savior for us. Our Savior would make it possible for us to repent and become 
clean from sin. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What did God know about his 
children? 

■ How did he prepare a way for 
them to be saved from sin? 


In accordance with God's plan, we came to earth to gain a mortal body and 
to be tested. God created Adam and Eve, giving them free agency as well as 
specific commandments. When they chose to disobey by partaking of the 
forbidden fruit, they were cast from the Garden of Eden. They became 
subject to both spiritual and physical death. As God promised, however, he 
did provide a Savior, Jesus Christ. Christ made it possible for Adam and all 
of us to repent and overcome spiritual death. Adam repented, was baptized, 
and received the Holy Ghost. In this way, he overcame spiritual death. 

In the meridian of time, the Savior was born on the earth. His mother was 
Mary and his father was God, our Heavenly Father. In Gethsemane and on 
the cross, Jesus Christ atoned for the sins of mankind. He suffered the pain 
of all of us so that we would not have to suffer if we would repent. Three 
days following his crucifixion, he rose from the grave. His resurrection 
provided the victory over death and made possible our return to our 
Heavenly Father. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Describe the Savior's role in 
Heavenly Father's plan for our 
salvation. 


Share Feelings 

■ Share one of your favorite 
scriptures on the Atonement with 
your companion. 

■ Share your feelings about the 
Atonement. 


The Savior' s resurrection made possible the resurrection of all mankind. But Read 
God's greatest reward — eternal life — is reserved only for those who follow 
God's plan. Since the time of Adam, Jesus Christ has told us what we must 
do to follow that plan. The fourth article of faith summarizes his instructions: 

"We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first. 

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second. Repentance; third. Baptism by 
immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of 
the Holy Ghost." 

We must have faith in Christ, repent of our sins, receive the ordinance of 
baptism from one holding authority, and receive the Holy Ghost. We must 
also endure to the end by making further covenants and receiving other 
ordinances. We must do all that we can. The grace of Christ then makes it 
possible for us to return to the presence of God. 


6 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Baptism is the first ordinance we must receive as we come unto Christ. As 
missionaries, you hold open the gate of repentance and baptism for others. 

As you help people develop faith, repent, and be baptized, you help them 
take the first steps to obtain eternal life, the greatest gift of God. 

Discuss 

■ Describe your role in helping 
others obtain eternal life. 

It is very important that you understand the doctrine presented in this Read 

section as the Lord has taught it. The following activity will help you do this. 

Throughout your mission, refer often to the scriptural references provided. 


Scripture Activity 


Read as many of the references as time allows. Share the major point of each 
reference with your companion. After you have read all the verses in a 
section, summarize what you have learned. 


ihe Council in Heaven 
D&C 138:55-56 
Abraham 3:22-28 

What Satan Did during the 
Council in Heaven 
Moses 4:1-4 

Free Agency 
2 Nephi 2:27 
Helaman 14:30-31 
D&C 58:27-28 

The Fall 

Genesis 3:16-19 
Alma 12:21-24 
D&C 29:41-45 

Adam's Repentance and Baptism 
Moses 6:52-53, 59-60, 64-66 

The Atonement 
Alma 34:8-9 
D&C 19:16-19 
Third article of faith 


The Resurrection 
Mosiah 16:6-8 
Alma 11:42-45 
D&C 88:97-98 

What Man Must Do to Obtain 
Eternal Life 

2 Nephi 31:13-21 

3 Nephi 11:32-38 
3 Nephi 27:13-21 

The Purpose of Missionary Work 
D&C 18:10-16 
D&C 29:7 
D&C 84:20-22 

What Missionaries Should Teach 
D&C 33:10-12 
D&C 49:11-14 
D&C 53:3 


Summarize what you have learned from reading each scriptural passage. 
The Council in Heaven 


What Satan Did during the Council in Heaven 


Free Agency. 


The Fall 


Adam's Repentance and Baptism 


7 


LEARNER 
The Atonement. 


TRAINER 

o 


The Resurrection 


What Man Must Do to Obtain Eternal Life 


The Purpose of Missionary Work. 


What Missionaries Should Teach 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Set a time to complete the preceding scripture activity. Write a goal to 
complete the activity. 

■ Ask your companion for his insights on the verses. 


Invite 

■ Ask your companion to set aside 
time to study the scriptures in the 
activity. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion study the scriptures in 
the activity. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work, point out 
opportunities to apply these 
scriptures. 


8 


THE CONVERSION PROCESS 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to complete the scripture 
activity. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how your study of the 
scriptures helped you and your 
companion understand and teach 
the gospel. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

In order to accomplish your purpose as a missionary, you should understand Read and Discuss 
the conversion process from the nonmember's point of view. President 
Gordon B. Hinckley explained: 

"It is not an easy thing to make the transition incident to joining this Church. 

It means cutting old ties. It means leaving friends. It may mean setting aside 
cherished beliefs. It may require a change of habits and a suppression of 
appetites. In so many cases it means loneliness and even fear of the 
unknown" ("There Must Be Messengers," Ensign, Oct. 1987, p. 5). 

O What happens in the mind and heart of a nonmember to make him want to 
join the Church? It is impossible to answer that question specifically for every 
person. Some general changes occur, however, with most people. 

Understanding these processes from the nonmember's point of view will help 
you better accomplish your purpose. 

Find Out 

■ Why do you need to understand 
the conversion process from the 
nonmember's point of view? 

The most important process in conversion is for people to feel the Spirit of Read and Discuss 

the Lord. President Ezra Taft Benson has said: "If there is one message I have 

repeated to my Brethren of the Twelve, it is that it's the Spirit that counts. It 

is the Spirit that matters. I do not know how often I have said this, but I 

never tire of saying it — it is the Spirit that matters most" (mission presidents' 

seminar, 3 Apr. 1985). 

Nonmembers must feel the Spirit in order to develop faith, repent, and 
prepare for baptism. The scriptures often refer to feeling the Spirit as 
"hearing the voice of the Lord." 


Scripture Activity 

With your companion, read Mosiah 26:21 and Doctrine and Covenants 133:16. 
Then answer the following questions. 

* Whom will the Lord receive into his Church? 

■ Who is required to "hearken and hear" when the Lord speaks? 

o 


Share Feelings 

■ Tell your companion about a time 
when one of your investigators 
heard the voice of the Lord. Describe 
how feeling the Spirit helped the 
person progress to conversion. 


9 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Feeling the Spirit alone, however, is not enough to convert someone. When 
nonmembers feel the Spirit, they are free to obey or disobey. In order to be 
converted, they must obey God's commandments. The Lord said, 
"Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me" (D&C 38:22; italics added). In the 
scriptures, righteous people often show their willingness to follow Jesus by 
asking the Lord's servants, "What shall we do?" 

"Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto 
Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, What shall we do?" 
(Acts 2:37; italics added). 

"We have no place to worship our God; and behold, what shall we do?" (Alma 
32:5; italics added). 

"What shall we do, that this cloud of darkness may be removed from 
overshadowing us?" (Helaman 5:40; italics added). 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What two things must happen 
before a person can be converted? 


When people feel the Spirit and obey God's commandments, the Lord 
changes their hearts. They develop faith, repent, become converted, and are 
baptized. The following new members explain how they felt the Spirit, 
committed themselves to keep the commandments, and so became converted. 

"Once I got around the missionaries, I could feel their spirit. It was the spirit 
I was looking for. I decided then to do whatever was necessary to have that 
spirit in my life." 

"As soon as I recognized that this good feeling was the Spirit of the Lord, I 
began working on my relationship with my husband and children — and I 
even stopped smoking. I decided to be baptized so that this wonderful 
influence could remain in my life." 


Read 


o 

Discuss 

■ Ask your companion to summarize 
what generally happens in 
people's lives to lead them to 
conversion. 


It is your privilege to act as a servant of the Lord and help people feel and Read 

recognize the influence of the Spirit. It is also your obligation to invite them 
to obey and apply gospel principles in their lives. You help them make the 
transition from feeling the Spirit to obeying the Lord's commandments. 

Sometimes missionaries hesitate to ask people to change their lives. Some of 
the difficult changes that people need to make include beginning to pray; 
reading the Book of Mormon; attending church; giving up smoking, drinking, 
or harmful drugs; living the law of chastity; and paying tithing. These are big 
changes. It is understandable that missionaries might be afraid to invite 
someone directly to make these changes. 

While these changes may be difficult to make, you should not hesitate to ask 
people to repent. The only way you can help people return to live with God 
is by helping them feel the Spirit and inviting them to change. 

Discuss 

■ How can I develop the faith to ask 
people to change? 


10 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


O^End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Plan to find someone who is a convert to the Church. Plan to ask him 
questions such as these: 

1. What feelings prompted you to join the Church? 

2. What changes did you make in your life because you decided to join the 
Church? 

3. How did you feel when you made those changes? 

4. How has your life changed because you joined the Church? 

■ Write a goal to ask these questions to a convert. Carry this goal with you as 
a reminder. 


Invite 

■ Identify a person who is a convert 
to the Church. 

■ Invite your companion to ask the 
person the questions on the left. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion find a convert to the 
Church and discuss his 
conversion. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work, point out 
opportunities to learn how people 
become converted. 


11 


A MISSIONARY'S PURPOSE— CONVERT BAPTISMS 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to ask a convert about his 
conversion. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how studying the process 
of conversion helped you and your 
companion better understand the 
purpose of missionary work. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 


As an authorized servant of the Lord, your purpose is to bring people to 
Christ through repentance and the ordinances of baptism and confirmation. 
All who are accountable for their actions must receive the ordinance of 
baptism before they can enter God's kingdom. Christ told the Nephites: 

"And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and be baptized in my name, 
and become as a little child, or ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God" 
(3 Nephi 11:38). 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What is a missionary's purpose? 
Discuss 

■ Why do you think that 3 Nephi 
11:38 is one of the first things an 
investigator reads in the Book of 
Mormon? 


As a missionary you will be asked to set goals for baptizing people, invite Read 

people to be baptized, and perform or attend baptismal services. Throughout 
this process, you must understand the difference between goals to increase 
the number of baptisms and goals to bring more people to Christ. Numbers by 
themselves are not important and will not save the children of God. Every 
missionary, however, should have the goal to bring more and more people to 
conversion and baptism. Numbers are meaningful only as they represent 
children of God. 

The number of baptisms alone is not the important thing. What is important 
is for you to see conversion from an eternal perspective. Realize that as you 
help people feel the Spirit, develop faith, repent, become converted, and be 
baptized, you are helping them return to live with our Heavenly Father. 

Discuss 

■ What are the differences between 
goals centered on numbers and 
goals centered on bringing people 
to Christ? 


Despite your best efforts to teach and baptize, people may exercise their free Read and Discuss 
agency and reject your invitations. For missionaries who truly seek to bring 
souls unto Christ, this will be a painful experience. 

There is a temptation in such circumstances for missionaries to try to deny 
their disappointment. They might stop talking about baptism, for example, 
and feel threatened when baptism is mentioned as a goal. Or they might 


12 


LEARNER 

rationalize that other missionaries are letting numbers become more 
important than people. They may feel that their hard work is unnoticed. 
"Besides/' they may think, "I can't help it if the Browns decide not to be 
baptized." 


Do not yield to this temptation. One of the attributes of a true disciple of 
Christ is that he allows himself to feel sorrow for the sins of the world. He is 
developing the Christlike attribute of loving people even though their actions 
cause him grief. 

The great missionaries of the Book of Mormon were able to keep their minds 
focused on bringing souls to Christ even when their messages were rejected. 
For instance, after Alma the Younger was driven from the city of 
Ammonihah, he felt sorrow for the people who would not repent: 

"And it came to pass that while he was journeying thither, being weighed down 
with sorrow, wading through much tribulation and anguish of soul, because of 
the wickedness of the people who were in the city of Ammonihah" (Alma 
8:14; italics added). 

Similarly Nephi, the son of Helaman, became discouraged when he 
unsuccessfully tried to help the Nephites repent: 

"And it came to pass as he was thus pondering — being much cast down 
because of the wickedness of the people of the Nephites" (Helaman 10:3; 
italics added). 


Read the following situation, and discuss the differences between the 
missionary responses. 

Two missionaries were assigned to a city where there had been very few 
baptisms. They prayed and worked diligently for two months. They taught 
several people, but none accepted their invitation to be baptized. These 
missionaries could have responded to this situation in several different ways. 


Less Effective 

A missionary might think, "I hope I 
get transferred out of this place. At 
least I've worked hard and done my 
job." 

Another might feel, "It's not my 
fault that we haven't baptized. The 
people in this city are just 
hard-hearted." 


Effective 

A missionary might pray, "Heavenly 
Father, we love these people. We 
are sorry when they reject our 
message of thee. Please soften their 
hearts. Soften our hearts, too, that 
we may be more effective 
instruments in thy hands. Guide us 
to help them feel the Spirit that they 
may desire to come unto thee." 


TRAINER 


Find Out 

■ What temptation may arise when 
people reject your invitations to 
hear the gospel and be baptized? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
feeling sorrow because you are not 
baptizing and feeling sorrow 
because people won't repent? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What are the differences between 
these responses? 


LEARNER 


The missionaries in the less effective examples have typical human responses 
to the situation. They are impatient and think about their own feelings. On 
the other hand, the missionary in the effective example feels sorrow for those 
who reject the gospel message. He is unwilling to accept failure and has faith 
that the Lord will help him become a more effective bearer of truth. 

Read the following situation, and discuss the differences between the 
missionary responses. 

During and after your mission, you may be asked, "How many baptisms 
were you responsible for?" 


Less Effective 

A missionary might readily respond, 
"Twenty-three!" 

Another might think, "Oh, the 
number of baptisms isn't what 
counts. You can't tell a good 
missionary by how many baptisms 
he was responsible for." 


Effective 

After some thought a missionary 
might say, "Let's see if I can 
remember their names. There was 
the Ostler family, David Jacobsen, 
the Barkers. There were also a few 
that I still pray will be baptized — 
like the Lopez family, if they could 
just see ..." 


In the less effective examples, the missionaries were cynical and proud of 
numbers. They focused on their feelings of disappointment or pride. In the 
effective example, the missionary thought of converts as individuals. He 
concluded by talking about the Lopez family — not yet baptized but valuable 
children of God. He focused on his feelings for others. When you face similar 
situations, do you think about your own difficulties and success, or do you 
think about the Lord and his work and glory? 


Below are several situations involving missionaries. Underneath each are 
thoughts or feelings that missionaries might have in that situation. Discuss 
with your companion whether each missionary truly understands the 
purpose of missionary work. 

Situation 1 

As a missionary prepares to present a discussion, his thoughts could be 
these: 

A: I've got this discussion down really well. Things should go smoothly. 

B: What can I do to help them feel the Spirit? How can I help prepare their 
hearts to accept the invitation to ... ? 

C: I wonder if they will accept the invitation to ... ? 


TRAINER 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What are the differences between 
these responses? 

Read 


Share Feelings 

■ Share with your companion how 
you feel about focusing on bringing 
people to Christ through baptism. 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary truly understands the 
purpose of missionary work. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Answer: "A" focuses on the 
missionary and his preparation. "B" 
focuses on the missionary's desire to 
help prepare the investigators to feel 
the Spirit. "C" shows a lack of faith. 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Situation 2 

Missionaries could have these thoughts as they set monthly baptismal goals: 

A: How can I set a goal for something I cannot control? 

B: Let's see if we can set a new record for the number of baptisms this 
month. 

C: Which of our current and future investigators will feel the Spirit and 
prepare to be baptized this month? 

Situation 3 

Missionaries' attitudes about studying could be these: 

A: I study everyday because the mission rules tell me I should. 

B: Studying is good when you have the time. 

C: Studying helps prepare me to receive inspiration about what I should do 

Share Feelings 

■ Tell your companion how you try 
to show in your daily activities 
that you understand the purpose 
of missionary work. 


Answer: "A" and "B" show that the 
missionaries do not understand why 
studying is important. "C" shows that 
the missionary knows he must work 
to receive inspiration from the Lord. 


Ansiver: "A" shows no faith at all. 
''B" shows some faith but focuses on 
numbers rather than individuals. 

"C" shows confidence that 
investigators will feel the Spirit and 
want to be baptized. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ In your journal, describe how you want to show that you really understand 
the purpose of missionary work. 

■ Write a goal to do this. 


Invite 

■ Ask your companion to write his 
feelings about the purpose of 
missionary work in his journal. 

■ Help him determine when he will 
write in his journal. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to encourage your 
companion to write his feelings 
about the purpose of missionary 
work in his journal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work, point out ways 
to show that you understand the 
purpose of missionary work. 


15 


ACCOMPLISHING THE PURPOSE OF MISSIONARY WORK 


LEARNER TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to write his feelings about the 
purpose of missionary work in his 
journal. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how understanding the 
purpose of missionary work is 
helping you and your companion 
become better missionaries. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Experience has shown that some of God's children are prepared to accept the Read and Discuss 
gospel and receive baptism, no matter how effective the missionaries may be. 

People who are prepared are commonly called "golden contacts." There is a 
larger group who may be baptized, depending on the missionaries' 
effectiveness. They, too, are "golden" seekers of truth. 

Some missionaries feel that what they do will not make much difference. 

They feel that those who are prepared will join the Church no matter how 
effective the missionaries are. The fact is that you can help people from both 
groups become converted and baptized. You have been called and given the 
authority to preach the gospel to everyone— well prepared or not. The fifth 
article of faith refers to you: 

"We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the 
laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and 
administer in the ordinances thereof." 

You have been called of God through a prophet. You have had hands laid on 
your head by one in authority. You are to preach the gospel and administer 
the ordinances of baptism and confirmation. You can make a difference 
because God has his hand upon you. He has said: 

"I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and 
my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear 
you up" (D&C 84:88). 

Discuss 

■ How do you feel about your ability 
to succeed as a missionary? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about what 
you have been able to do with the 
Lord's help. 

You have received your call from a prophet. But you are free to make choices 
that will keep you from bringing souls unto Christ. Disobeying the 
commandments and mission rules, for example, will hinder your work. A 
more common obstacle, however, is the feeling that you have learned all that 
you need to know. You may think, "I'm tired of studying," "I already know 
all about that," or "This doesn't apply in our mission." You may indeed be 
doing well, but the Lord can teach you more. Within the short period of your 
mission, you cannot learn all there is to learn about saving souls. 


Read and Discuss 

o 


16 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


■ What can keep you from being as 
effective as you could be? 


The key to continued growth is humility. The Lord will teach you as you look Read 

to him. Take advantage of every opportunity to learn. Ask the Lord to teach 

you what you need to know and do to bring more of his children to him 

through the ordinances of baptism and confirmation. The Lord will bless you 

as you make this kind of effort to become an effective instrument in his 

hands. 

Discuss 

■ Why is it important to be learning 
throughout your mission? 


Your efforts to learn and grow can be focused on three general areas: Read and Discuss 

■ Developing Christlike attributes. 

■ Learning principles and skills that will help you proselyte more effectively. 

■ Continually setting goals to help more of our Heavenly Father's children 
return to live with him. 

You have many resources to help you learn and grow in these areas. The 
scriptures, prayer, counsel from your mission president, and the Missionary 
Guide are just a few examples. You will be able to bring more souls to Christ 
if you will use these resources. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

O " Set goals to improve in each of the three areas just discussed. 

■ Identify at least one resource that will help you achieve your goals. 


Invite 

■ Discuss each of the three general 
areas of improvement. Invite your 
companion to write goals to 
improve in each area. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion determine to improve 
in each of the three areas. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work, point out 
opportunities to improve in the 
three areas. 


Conclusion 

The principles in this chapter will help you to better understand your sacred Read and Discuss 

mission — to bring souls to Christ. As you become more familiar with 

Heavenly Father's plan for our happiness and salvation, you can begin to 

understand the worth of souls. You can feel the urgency of sharing the 

gospel message. As you live worthily and seek inspiration from the Spirit, the 

Lord will speak to those you teach through you. His voice, the scriptures tell 

us, will be your voice: 

"Whatsoever [you] shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be 
scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be 
the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God 
unto salvation. Behold, this is the promise of the Lord unto you, O ye my servants" 

(D&C 68:4-5; italics added). 


17 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

You have been called to this work by a prophet and set apart by one in 
authority. This should give you the confidence you need to succeed. You can 
make a difference. 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review principles 
related to the purpose of 
missionary work. 


18 


STUDY RECORD 


Date 


Time Spent 


Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Our Heavenly Father's Plan" 

Study certain scriptures. 


"The Conversion Process" 
Visit with a convert. 


"A Missionary's Purpose — 

Convert Baptisms " 

Write in your journal how you can 
show that you understand the 
purpose of missionary work. 

"Accomplishing the Purpose of 
Missionary Work" 

Set goals to (1) develop Christlike 
attributes and (2) develop 
proselyting principles and skills. 


19
