CHRISTLIKE ATTRIBUTES 


INTRODUCTION 

LEARNER 


This chapter is directed to individuals preparing to serve missions and to 
full-time missionaries. The purpose of this chapter is to help you develop 
certain Christlike attributes. As you develop these attributes, you will have 
the Spirit of the Lord more fully in your work. Members and nonmembers 
will feel the spirit that you carry and will better respond to your message. 
You will be able to bring more souls to Christ. Begin your study with prayer, 
and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply the principles you study. 

There are many Christlike attributes that you can develop. This chapter will 
discuss the following: 


1. Gospel Knowledge and Testimony 21 

2. Personal Righteousness 26 

3. Faith and Hard Work 31 

4. Charity 35 


Other attributes that you should develop include the following: 

5. Humility 7. Patience 

6. Kindness 8. Confidence 


Perhaps you thought of other attributes and skills that would help you be a 
better missionary. Discuss these with your companion and list them below: 


9 11. 

10 12 . 


Scripture Activity 

Read Doctrine and Covenants 4 and discuss the following questions: 

■ Who is the Lord speaking to, both specifically and generally? 

■ What specific blessings does the Lord promise to those who serve him and 
labor with all their might? 

■ Of the attributes listed, which ones do you feel that you have developed 
most fully? Which do you need to develop more fully? 


Speaking to those who would be sent forth as missionaries, the Lord said, 
"Purify your hearts before me; and then go ye into all the world, and preach 
my gospel unto every creature who has not received it" (D&C 112:28). 

Strive to develop those attributes that will help you bring more of our 
Heavenly Father's children back to him. The purpose of this chapter is to 
help you begin that process. 


TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What are other attributes that 
would help you be a better 
missionary? 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this chapter? 

■ How will developing these 
attributes help you to become an 
effective missionary? 


GOSPEL KNOWLEDGE AND TESTIMONY 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Your ability to teach the gospel and share your testimony depends largely upon Read and Discuss 
how well you understand gospel principles and how much you believe them. 

The scriptures are one of the most important ways in which you learn these 
principles. This section will help you study the scriptures more effectively. 

Then you will be able to understand them and use them with confidence. 

The Lord has counseled, "Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to 
obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, 
you shall have my Spirit and my word" (D&C 11:21). If you prayerfully study 
his word, you will be blessed with increased testimony and knowledge of the 
gospel. Then you can better serve others. 


Scripture Activity 

Look up each of the following verses and find the specific blessings promised 
to those who study the scriptures. 

Romans 15:4 2 Nephi 32:3 Alma 31:5 

D&C 11:21 D&C 18:34-36 D&C 84:85 

Discuss 

■ What are some of the blessings 
you have received because you 
have studied the scriptures? 

As you study the scriptures each day, particularly the Book of Mormon, your Read 
testimony and knowledge of the gospel will increase. The foundation of your 
testimony will be the following four truths: 

■ Jesus Christ is the Son of God and our Redeemer. 

■ Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. 

■ The priesthood has been restored to earth and is found only in The Church 
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 

■ The Book of Mormon is the word of God. 

Through scripture study, your love for the Lord and his work will grow, and 
the Spirit of the Lord will be with you. 

Share Feelings 

■ Describe how studying the 
scriptures daily in your mission 
has blessed your life and the lives 
of your investigators. 


The Latter-day Saint Editions of the Scriptures 

The Latter-day Saint editions of the standard works are valuable resources for 
your study and for teaching the gospel. They provide the following helps so 
that you can gain the most from your gospel study: 


■ Chapter headings 

■ Footnotes 

■ The Topical Guide 


■ The Bible Dictionary 

■ Maps and Gazetteer 

■ The Joseph Smith Translation 


Read and Discuss 


Practice 

■ Have your companion practice 
using the resources in the standard 
works to answer the questions 
about each scripture. An answer 
key is provided at the end of the 
chapter. 


21 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Answer the following questions to become familiar with each resource and 
the way it helps you study the gospel. Write the appropriate resource and 
answer in the spaces provided. 

Example: Who is Alma's audience in chapter 32 of Alma? 

Resource(s) Chapter heading 

Answer The poor whose afflictions had humbled them 

1. In Matthew 5:3, the Lord said, "Blessed are the poor in spirit." What is the 
meaning of "poor in spirit"? 

Resource(s) 

Answer 

2. In what year was 1 Corinthians written? 

Resource(s) 

Answer 

3. According to the chronological tables in your Bible Dictionary, in what year 
was Jerusalem captured (after Lehi left)? 

Resource(s) 

Answer 

4. The Apostle Paul visited the people in the city of Ephesus. Where is 
Ephesus? 

Resource(s) 

Answer 

5. Read Matthew 14:22-26. At what time of day did Jesus walk on the water 
to meet the Apostles? 

Resource(s) 

Answer— 

Find Out 

■ What resources are available in the 
Latter-day Saint editions of the 
standard works to help you in 
your study? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about the 
Latter-day Saint editions of the 
standard works. 


Scripture Study Skills 

As you pay the price to learn and apply scriptural truths, the Spirit will Read and Discuss 

whisper truth to your heart. You will begin to understand what the Savior 
meant when he said, "And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (3 Nephi 
12 : 6 ). 

Only by immersing yourself in the scriptures can you receive the promised 
blessings of scripture study. The following skills will help you receive these 
blessings: 

Skill 1: Identifying zvho or ivhat the passage refers to. One of the challenges of 
studying the scriptures is trying to identify who is speaking to whom about 
what. As you learn to identify characters and subjects, you will better 
understand the scriptures. 


22 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


To gain experience with this process, complete the following exercises. 
Identify who or what the words in bold refer to. 


Reference 

Doctrine and Covenants 5:24 
Behold, I say unto him, 
he exalts himself and 
does not humble himself 
sufficiently before me; 
but if he will bow down 
before me, and humble 
himself in mighty prayer 
and faith, in the 
sincerity of his heart, 
then will I grant unto 
him a view of the 
things which he desires 
to see. 


Who Is Referred To 


1. The Lord/Martin Harris 
2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 


Doctrine and Covenants 36:2 


And I will lay my hand 12. 

upon you by the hand 13. 

n of my servant Sidney 14. 

v ^ Rigdon, and you shall 15. 

receive my Spirit, the 16. 

Holy Ghost, even the 
Comforter, which shall 
teach you the peaceable 17. 

things of the kingdom. 


Practice 

■ Help your companion practice 
identifying who or what is referred 
to in these scriptures. An answer 
key is provided at the end of the 
chapter. 


Skill 2: Defining words and phrases. The scriptures are written in a different 
style than modern writings. Words used in the scriptures sometimes have a 
different meaning than we might expect. If you know how to find the 
definitions of words, you will better understand scriptural language. The 
Latter-day Saint edition of the Bible provides some definitions in the footnotes. 

Also, you can look up words in the Bible Dictionary or in a regular dictionary. 

Practice 

■ Help your companion practice 
finding definitions. An answer key 
is provided at the end of the chapter. 

Use either the footnotes or the Bible Dictionary to find and record the 
definitions of the following words. 


Reference 
1 Peter 3:1 
Acts 10:42 
Matthew 13:21 

1 Corinthians 13:12 

2 Corinthians 8:1 
^jlsaiah 3:22 

Matthew 17:12 


Ancient Words 

Conversation 

Quick 

By and by 

Glass 

To wit 

Wimples 

Listed 


Meaning 


23 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


When you understand words and phrases, you will find it easier to learn the 
meaning of scriptures and teach others the gospel. 

Skill 3: Recognizing lists. Throughout the scriptures, gospel principles are 
presented in the form of a list or series. A list can be as short as two items or 
as long as fifteen. 

Practice 

■ Help your companion practice 
identifying the lists in each 
scriptural reference. An answer 
key is provided at the end of the 
chapter. 

Read the following references. In the blanks provided, identify the list by 
writing the key word(s) in numerical order. 

Alma 32:28 — three ways to know that the word, which Alma compares to a 
seed, is good. 

1 

2 

3 

Doctrine and Covenants 4:5 — five attributes that qualify you to serve. 

1 2 3 

4 5 

Helaman 15:7 — three things scriptures lead us to. 

1 : 

2 

3. 

Alma 26:22 — four things to do to know mysteries and baptize thousands. 

1 2 

3 4 

A list presents information in an orderly way. As you understand the order 
of ideas in the scriptures, you will be able to better understand and apply 
scriptural teachings. 

Skill 4: Putting your name in the scriptures. One good way to ponder the 
scriptures is to substitute your name for the name of the person being spoken 
to. In this way, you make the counsel in the scriptures apply to you. 

Practice 

■ Help your companion practice 
substituting his name in the 
scriptures. 

Look up each of the following scriptures and substitute your name and 
situation in them. 

Joshua 24:15 
Isaiah 58:13-14 
Matthew 6:1-2 

Doctrine and Covenants 31:1-9 

You will gain knowledge and testimony from studying the scriptures. Study Read 
alone, however, is not enough if you are to fully understand the scriptures. 

You must also pray and ask the Lord to bless you with understanding. As 
you prayerfully study and ponder the scriptures, your testimony will grow 
and you will find truths to help you in your work. 


24 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


O 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Follow the missionary gospel study program. 

■ Write a goal to use the four skills mentioned in this section in your daily 
scripture study. 

■ Share what you have learned about understanding the scriptures at the 
beginning of your next study session. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to use the 
four skills mentioned in this 
section in his daily scripture study. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share what 
he has learned at the beginning of 
the next study session. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 


25 


PERSONAL RIGHTEOUSNESS 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to use the four skills 
discussed in the last section. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how developing the four 
skills helped you and your 
companion in your scripture 
study. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

The purpose of this section is to help you develop righteousness in your Read 

service as a missionary. Righteousness is goodness and worthiness. You must 
be living basic gospel principles to be able to declare, in the words of Alma: 

"And this is my glory, that perhaps I may be an instrument in the hands of 
God to bring some soul to repentance; and this is my joy" (Alma 29:9). 

In this section, you will study several major elements of righteousness: 
obedience, repentance, prayer and fasting, and recognizing communication 
from the Spirit. 


Obedience 

When you made the commitment to serve as a missionary, you showed that 
you want to serve the Lord. As you continue to obey the Lord's 
commandments, you will become more righteous. 

Because Heavenly Father has given you your free agency, he will never force 
you to obey or to be righteous. However, he will support and reward you as 
you show your love for him by honoring his commandments. 


o 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is one thing you must do in 
order to be righteous? 

■ How will the Lord help you to be 
obedient? 


Scripture Activity 


Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience from your 
mission in which you obeyed the 
Lord, and he blessed you with 
success. 

■ Share your testimony of the need 
to be obedient to the rules of 
missionary life. 

Read and Discuss 


Read the following scriptures, and discuss the answers to the questions. 

■ John 14:15: What does Christ require of those who love him? 

■ Doctrine and Covenants 93:1: What will be your reward if you are obedient? 

■ Doctrine and Covenants 82:10: What else does the Lord promise to the 
obedient? 


26 


TRAINER 
Discuss 

■ How will obedience influence lives 
of nonmembers and members? 

In 1829, the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation directed to his Read and Discuss 

brother Hyrum. Many people surrounding Hyrum had received special 
assignments from the Lord. Joseph, for example, was called to be a prophet; 

Oliver Cowdery was called to be a scribe. Others were sent on missions. 

What was Hyrum Smith's call, described in Doctrine and Covenants 11:20? 

Hyrum wasn't called to go on a mission or to be a scribe. The Lord wanted to 
teach him the importance of obedience. You, too, must begin by being 
obedient. 

Share Feelings 

■ Invite your companion to share an 
experience in which he received 
blessings from being obedient. 


Repentance 

When your goal is to become like Christ, you may fall short in your daily Read and Discuss 

attempts. Through the atonement of Christ, however, you are able to repent 
of your sins and be cleansed through the power of forgiveness. To help you 
better understand repentance, complete the following scripture activity. 


Scripture Activity 

Read the following scriptures, and discuss the answers to the questions. 

■ Alma 34:32: When should we repent? 

■ 2 Nephi 4:16-17: Why should Nephi, who was so righteous, have felt 
sorrow? What do his feelings tell you about repentance in your own life? 

■ Alma 26:22: What are some of the fruits of sincere repentance? 


Repentance is not something to avoid. It is a blessing given to you by a 
loving Heavenly Father that will help you progress. As you repent, you will 
become more righteous. You will be better able to help others repent and 
desire to serve the Lord. 

Find Out 

■ How can repentance help you 
become a better missionary? 


Prayer and Fasting 

Elder Jackson had never prayed as much as he had during the last few Read and Discuss 

months of his mission. He found that when he prayed sincerely each day and 

fasted each month, he could find the answers to important questions. These 

included, "How can I help my investigators resolve their concerns?" "What 

can I do to become more sensitive to the inspiration of the Holy Ghost?" 

Prayer and fasting worked together to make Elder Jackson more able to serve 
the Lord. You, too, will become more aware of Heavenly Father's influence in 
your work as you fast and pray regularly. President David O. McKay spoke 
of fasting when he stated: 

"What every man and every woman in this world needs in order to keep 

C himself or herself free and unspotted from the sins of the world, is the power 
'of self-mastery" ( Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], p. 212). 

As you and your companion pray for the Spirit of the Lord, you will be 
directed in your personal lives and in your work with investigators. Your 
companionship will be strong as together you ask the Lord for his blessings. 


LEARNER 

o 


27 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Find Out 

■ What do you need to do to receive 
direction from God? 

■ How will you and your companion 
benefit from personal and 
companion prayer? 

Having a prayer in your heart, or praying continually, means to remember Read 

the Lord and feel prayerful all the time. You may find yourself thanking God 
for the blessings you have or asking him for special help. The prayers of your 
heart will help your investigators to feel the influence of the Spirit and 
become converted. 

Discuss 

■ How can you pray always? 

Prayer and fasting are not the only ways to develop self-mastery. But they 
are essential in becoming more like Christ. 

Discuss 

■ How can prayer and fasting help 
you gain self-mastery? 

■ How can they help you become 
more righteous? 

Share Feelings 

* Share an experience from your 
mission in which the Lord blessed 
you and your investigators 
through your prayer and fasting. 

The scriptures identify qualities that you can develop as a result of prayer Read and Discuss 

and fasting. 


Scripture Activity 

Read each of the following scriptures. Identify the qualities that you can 
develop as a result of prayer and fasting. 

■ Isaiah 58:6-12 

■ Matthew 17:19-21 

■ Alma 5:46 

■ Heiaman 3:35 


Fasting and prayer strengthen you against temptation and improve your 
relationship with God. They increase your spirituality by creating an 
atmosphere in which the Holy Ghost can work with you and with those you 
teach. 

Find Out 

■ How do fasting and prayer help 
you to become a more effective 
missionary? 


Recognizing Communication from the Spirit 

President Benson counseled a group of newly called mission presidents: "The Read and Discuss 
Spirit is the most important single element in this work. With the Spirit 
magnifying your call, you can do miracles for the Lord in the mission field. 

Without the Spirit, you will never succeed regardless of your talent and 
ability" (mission presidents' seminar, 25 June 1986). 

Following the promptings of the Spirit is at the very heart of missionary 
work. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has said: "Now we want to carry this 


28 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


( ) message to the world in the way that the Lord wants us to carry it. We want 

' to preach the truth in purity and in perfection, and to do it in the way the 
Lord wants it done. The only single formula whereby we may do this is for 
us to live . . . that we can be guided by the Holy Ghost. We must be guided 
by the Spirit" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1949, p. 76; or Improvement Era, 

Nov. 1949, p. 727). 

Find Out 

■ Why is the Spirit so important in 
missionary work? 

Scripture Activity Read and Discuss 

Read John 14:26 and answer the questions below. 

■ What is the Comforter? 

■ What two things will the Comforter do to help you learn? 

■ What do you think you have to do to receive help from the Holy Ghost? 


You do not usually hear communication from the Spirit with your physical 
ears. The whisperings of the Spirit may be described as a voice, but it is a 
voice that you feel more than you hear. 


Scripture Activity 

What kinds of feelings do you have when the Spirit communicates with you? 
Identify how the Spirit communicates by reading and discussing each 
scripture below. 

■ 1 Nephi 17:45 

O " Mosiah 4:20 

■ Doctrine and Covenants 6:15, 23 
■ Doctrine and Covenants 9:8-9 


Share Feelings 

■ Share experiences you have had on 
your mission that show how the 
Spirit has communicated with you. 

■ Invite your companion to share 
feelings he has had when the 
Spirit has communicated with him. 

You must learn the difference between your own desires and feelings, and Read and Discuss 

the promptings of the Spirit. Revelation from the Lord will always be in 
harmony with the scriptures and revelations of the Lord's prophets. 

You can improve your communication with the Spirit by living the 
commandments and working hard. Elder Boyd K. Packer discussed another 
way to gain knowledge through the Spirit. He stated: 

"Oh, if I could teach you this one principle. A testimony is to be found in the 
bearing of it! Somewhere in your quest for spiritual knowledge, there is that 
'leap of faith,' as the philosophers call it. It is the moment when you have 
gone to the edge of the light and stepped into the darkness to discover that 
the way is lighted ahead for just a footstep or two. 'The spirit of man,' as the 
scripture says, indeed 'is the candle of the Lord.' (Prov. 20:27.) 

"It is one thing to receive a witness from what you have read or what 
another has said; and that is a necessary beginning. It is quite another to 
have the Spirit confirm to you in your bosom that what you have testified is 

U true. Can you not see that it will be supplied as you share it? As you give 
that which you have, there is a replacement, with increase!" ("The Candle of 
the Lord," Ensign, Jan. 1983, pp. 54-55). 


29 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

As you testify, work hard, and become more righteous, you will receive and 
understand the whisperings of the Spirit. 

Discuss 

■ Why is it so important for you to 
bear your testimony? 

■ How will the Lord reward you 
when you have the faith to do so? 


Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience in which you 
and your investigators felt the 

Spirit when you were bearing your 
testimony. 

■ Invite your companion to describe 
an experience in which he felt the 
Spirit when he was bearing his 
testimony. 

Righteousness is the goal of all of our Heavenly Father's children. You will 
become more righteous as you obey the commandments, repent, pray and 
fast, and learn to recognize communication from the Spirit. The Missionary 
Handbook is an important tool; refer to it daily. Study the rules in the 
handbook and learn the principles upon which the rules are based. Qualify 
yourself to be guided by the Spirit in your work. 

Read 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Set some specific goals to fast, pray, and seek the Spirit in your missionary 
work during the coming week. 

■ If it is available, read "The Candle of the Lord," by Elder Boyd K. Packer, 
found in the Ensign, January 1983, pages 51-56. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to fast, pray, 
and seek the Spirit in his work. 

■ Invite your companion to read 
"The Candle of the Lord" by Elder 
Boyd K. Packer if it is available. 

Follow Up 

■ At the beginning of the next 
session, discuss with your 
companion his efforts to seek the 
Spirit in his work. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 


30 


FAITH AND HARD WORK 


C3 LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goals that he wrote for the last 
section. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goals. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goals and what could 
be improved. 

■ Discuss how fasting, praying, and 
seeking the Spirit helped you and 
your companion become more 
righteous. 

■ Discuss your reading of "The 
Candle of the Lord" by Elder Boyd 
K. Packer. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

The purpose of this section is to help you strengthen your faith and Read 

understand the importance of working diligently on your mission. You must 
exercise faith and work hard to bring souls to Christ. 

Discuss 

■ Why do you think faith and hard 
work are discussed together in this 
section? 

(^)you will have more confidence and faith when you understand who you are, Read 
the divine purpose you have as a missionary, and the promises the Lord has 
given you as his servant. You will want to work diligently when you 
understand the sacred and urgent nature of your mission. 

Find Out 

■ What will increase your faith and 
your desire to work hard on your 
mission? 


President Ezra Taft Benson emphasized the importance of understanding our Read and Discuss 
identity and purpose in an address to newly called mission presidents: 

"I rejoice with you in your calls. I affirm to you that you have been chosen to 
this high and holy calling by direct revelation from the God of heaven, and I 
say to you: You are engaged in the greatest work in all the world— -preaching 
the gospel of Jesus Christ and bringing salvation to the souls of our Father in 
Heaven's children. The Prophet Joseph Smith so declared in these words: 'After 
all that has been said, the greatest and most important duty is to preach the 
Gospel [of Jesus Christ].' Those are the words of the Prophet. Through the 
Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord proclaimed this same truth to John and Peter 
Whitmer when he stated, 'The thing which will be of the most worth unto 
you will be to declare repentance unto this people, that you may bring souls 
unto me' (D&C 15:6; 16:6)" (mission presidents' seminar, 25 June 1986). 

Find Out 

■ What is the greatest work that you 
can do? 


The Importance of Faith 

(, ^Faith is power. Christ teaches us, "If ye will have faith in me ye shall have Read 

power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me" (Moroni 7:33). As you 
exercise faith, Christ will help you achieve what he asks you to do. 


31 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Scripture Activity 

Read Hebrews 11:1, and discuss the questions below. 

■ What does Paul mean by "things hoped for"? 

■ How is faith related to your goals? 

■ How does this verse relate to Genesis 18:14 and Luke 1:37? 


Discuss 

■ How can knowing that nothing is 
impossible with God help you in 
your missionary work? 


Read and Discuss 


You will be more successful in your work as you exercise faith and put your 
trust in the Lord. Believing that you can accomplish a goal with the Lord's 
help will strengthen your ability to achieve it. 

Share Feelings 

■ Describe how being called and set 
apart as a servant of the Lord 
affects your confidence and ability 
to do missionary work. 


The Effects of Hard Work 

Having faith and believing that you will succeed will get you off to a good Read and Discuss 

start. But even more is required. As James records, "Even so, faith, if it hath 
not works, is dead, being alone" (James 2:17). President Ezra Taft Benson 
said: 

"One of the greatest secrets of missionary work is work. If a missionary 
works, he will get the Spirit; if he gets the Spirit, he will teach by the Spirit; 
and if he teaches by the Spirit, he will touch the hearts of the people; and he 
will be happy. There will be no homesickness, no worrying about families, 
for all time and talents and interests are centered on the work of the ministry. 

That's the secret — work, work, work. There is no satisfactory substitute, 
esjpecially in missionary work" (mission presidents' seminar, Aug. 1982). 


Scripture Activity 

Read Doctrine and Covenants 4:2, and discuss this question: What does it 
mean to serve God with all your heart, might, mind, and strength? 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary is having faith and 
working hard. 

■ Ask him to explain his derision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 

Your faith and diligence combine to make you an effective instrument in the 
Lord's hands. Read the following situations. Decide which missionaries show 
faith and work hard. 


Situation 1 

Two elders are taking a city bus to a teaching appointment. One says to the 
other, "This is sure the hard way to get around. I hope our car is fixed by 
tomorrow." 


32 


TRAINER 


LEARNER 


(^~^)Missionary A: 


You can say that again! I feel like we waste time when we 
have to ride the bus. 


Missionary B: We're not just riding the bus. Elder. We're traveling in the 
company of — let's see — seventeen of our brothers and 
sisters who need to hear our message. Why don't we start 
with that man across the aisle in the blue sweater? 

Missionary C: Yes, but I suppose we can make use of the time. I wonder if 
we're allowed to eat on the bus. 


Situation 2 

A new missionary is finding her study of a foreign language to be a 
challenge. "I wonder if I'll ever learn this language," she sighs aloud to her 
companion. 


Missionary A: I am sure you will. Sister. It just takes time. Keep working at 
it, but don't push yourself so hard that it gets us both down. 


Missionary B: I know it's tough at first, but you'll soon get used to the 

language. When I began studying Japanese, I relied heavily 
on the Lord. I knew that with his help, I would be able to 
learn quickly. And I certainly put in some long hours 
myself, knowing that the Lord expected me to do my part. 

Missionary C: Don't worry so much about the language. You just need to 
get the Spirit and help others to feel it, too. 


o 

President Spencer W. Kimball discussed the special help we can receive when 
we work diligently: "God magnifies the efforts of the diligent. I find that 
sometimes when I have skimped on my time and my efforts, I feel a loss of 
the intensity of the Spirit. 

"But, when I do not limit my time or efforts, and lose myself in . . . [others'] 
needs, I find myself somewhat in the position mentioned by the Prophet 
Joseph, who said, '. . . Great things shall be accomplished by you from this 
hour; and you shall begin to feel the whisperings of the Spirit of God; and 
the work of God shall begin to break forth from this time; and you shall be 
endowed with power from on high.' (DHC 2:182.)" (The Teachings of 
Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1987], 
p. 177). 

As you diligently perform your missionary work, the Lord will guide, inspire, 
and strengthen you. Remember that holy angels attend missionaries: 

"Behold, I send you out to reprove the world of all their unrighteous deeds, 
and to teach them of a judgment which is to come. And whoso receiveth 
you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right 
hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels 
round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:87-88). 


Answer : In "A," the missionary does 
not see the opportunity to work 
while on the bus. In "B," the 
missionary takes advantage of the 
situation and looks for opportunities 
to share the gospel. In "C," the 
missionary is conscious of time but 
does not recognize an excellent 
opportunity to find people to teach. 


Answer: In "A," the missionary 
discourages hard work and focuses 
more on her own concerns. In "B," 
the missionary shows that she 
understands her companion's 
concern. Then she testifies that 
when missionaries have faith and 
work hard, they can succeed at 
difficult tasks. In “C," the 
missionary knows that the Spirit is 
essential, but she neglects faith and 
individual effort. 

Discuss 

■ Why must you have both faith and 
hard work to be an instrument in 
the hands of the Lord? 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What does the Lord do to help his 
missionaries? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience from your 
mission in which hard work and 
faith in the Lord blessed your 
efforts. 


33 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

Your success in your mission depends on you. Use the talents the Lord has 
given you and exercise faith in him. With faith and diligent work, you can 
accomplish the things he wants you to do. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Exercise faith by setting some specific goals and working diligently during 
the coming week. 

■ Share your experiences with faith and hard work at the beginning of your 
next study session. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to exercise 
faith by setting specific goals and 
working diligently during the 
coming week. 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
experiences at the beginning of the 
next study session. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 


34 


CHARITY 


o LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goals that he wrote for the last 
section. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goals. 

* Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goals and what could 
be improved. 

■ Discuss how faith and hard work 
helped you and your companion 
become more effective 
missionaries. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

The purpose of this section is to help you understand the meaning of charity Read and Discuss 
and know how to develop charity in your service to the Lord. 

The Bible Dictionary defines charity as "the highest, noblest, strongest kind 
of love, not merely affection; the pure love of Christ. It is never used to 
denote alms or deeds or benevolence, although it may be a prompting 
motive" ("Charity," Bible Dictionary, LDS edition of the King James Bible). 

You will have wonderful opportunities to practice true charity as you share 
the blessings of the gospel with your fellowmen. The Prophet Joseph Smith 
said: 

( j "It is a time-honored adage that love begets love. Let us pour forth 

love — show forth our kindness unto all mankind, and the Lord will reward 
us with everlasting increase" (History of the Church, 5:517). 

On another occasion, he taught: "Nothing is so much calculated to lead 
people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand, and watch over them with 
tenderness" ( History of the Church, 5:23-24). 

Much of what you do as a missionary is motivated by your feelings of charity 
for God's children. The skills you will learn in this section are simply a way 
to communicate those feelings. As people feel your love for the Lord and for 
them, they will be more open to the influence of the Spirit. 

Find Out 

■ What is charity? 

Discuss 

• What is the role of charity in 
missionary work? 


Scripture Activity 


Read the following scriptures, and identify the characteristics of charity 
mentioned. 

■Moroni 7:45-48 and 1 Corinthians 13:4-8 

■ 1 Corinthians 8:1 

■ Moroni 8:17 


Find Out 

■ Summarize the characteristics of 
charity as identified in these 
scriptures. 


35 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


President Heber J. Grant, a great missionary and prophet, showed charity at Read and Discuss 
an early age, as illustrated in the following incident: 

Heber shivered in the cold. He wrapped his thin coat around him. It would 
soon be his birthday, and all he wanted was a warm coat. He knew it would 
upset his mother if he asked for one. They were so poor. Sometimes they 
went to bed early because there was no fuel left to keep the house warm. 

Sometimes they would go to bed hungry because there was not enough food. 

To earn money, Heber' s mother would often sew until far into the night, 
making clothes for other people. 

On the day of Heber's birthday, his mother wished him a happy birthday 
and handed him the most beautiful coat he had ever seen. It was made from 
the material his mother had been sewing, and it fit him perfectly. Heber 

could hardly wait until he could go out in the cold and feel its warmth. 

/ 

A few weeks later, Heber was on an errand and saw a boy just his size 
crying with cold. He was wearing only a sweater, and Heber knew how cold 
he must feel. The boy looked at Heber's coat longingly. Heber stopped and, 
almost without thinking, took the coat off and gave it to the boy. 

That afternoon, Heber' s mother saw him wearing his old coat. She asked 
him, "What have you done with your lovely new coat?" Heber wondered for 
a moment how to tell her. Then he explained, "I saw a boy and he needed it 
lots worse than I did, so I gave it to him." 

"Couldn't you have given him your old one?" she asked. 

Heber looked up at his mother, hoping she would understand, and saw her 
eyes fill up with tears. He threw his arms around her as she answered her 
own question, "Of course, you couldn't, Heber," she said, "of course, you 
couldn't" (see "The Coat," retold by Lucile C. Reading, Children's Friend, Nov. 

1966, p. 5). 

Discuss 

■ Why do you think Heber parted 
with his treasured coat? 

■ How can you apply this story to 
your work as a missionary? 


How Charity Is Developed 

Charity is a gift from God and must be received from God. Like all other Read and Discuss 

gifts, it comes from "obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 
130:21). The prophet Mormon identified the law upon which the blessing of 
charity is based. He declared: 

"Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of 
heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all 
who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ" (Moroni 7:48). 

We should seek the gift of charity through earnest prayer. We can also 
develop this gift by serving Heavenly Father's children. King Benjamin 
taught: "Behold, I say unto you that because I said unto you that I had spent 
my days in your service, I do not desire to boast, for I have only been in the 
service of God. And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn 
wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow 
beings ye are only in the service of your God" (Mosiah 2:16-17). 

The desire to serve others is at the center of missionary work. Those who feel 
charity do things for others out of sincere love, without expecting something 
in return. As you develop love for others, you will look for opportunities to 
serve in whatever ways you can. 


36 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


O 

v Scripture Activity 

Read Alma 17:11, 19-39 and 18:1-21. Then discuss with your companion the 
following questions about how Ammon gave service. 

■ Why did King Lamoni allow Ammon to stay in his kingdom? 

■ What might King Lamoni have thought when Ammon said he wanted to be 
a servant? 

■ Why was Ammon able to teach the king, even though the Lamanites hated 
the Nephites? How did King Lamoni feel toward Ammon? 

■ What does Ammon's experience teach us about charity? 

Find Out 

■ How can you best serve others? 
Discuss 

■ What experiences have you and 
your companion had in serving 
others? 

■ How has your service helped you 
develop charity for others? 

■ In what other ways can you give 
service? 

One missionary told the following experience about giving service: "I Read and Discuss 

remember the morning my companion and I went around to some of the 

investigators and members we'd been working with and left short notes on 

their doors. We just wanted to let them know we were thinking of them by 

leaving the reference to a scripture that reminded us of them. I was surprised 

O by how much they appreciated that small act. The members went out of their 
way to thank us at church, and the investigators seemed genuinely touched. 

Doing this helped us feel a lot closer to them." 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about how 
important it is to give service. 

■ Share an experience in which 
giving small acts of kindness made 
a difference in your work. 

Find Out 

■ How can giving service help you 
to develop charity? 

When our prayers are accompanied by righteousness and service to others, 
the Lord will bless us with the gift of charity. 

Find Out 

■ What must we do in order to 
receive the gift of charity? 

Jesus Christ, the Ultimate Example of Charity 

The Savior is our example of perfect charity. He repeatedly showed selfless Read and Discuss 

caring and tenderness for others. We will increase in charity as we strive to 
treat others as he did. 


Scripture Activity 


Read the following scriptures, and identify the ways in which Jesus showed 
charity. 


■ Matthew 14:14-21 

■ Mark 15:12-28 

■ 3 Nephi 17:5-10 


37 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


To develop the pure love of Christ, pray "with all the energy of heart" and 
then treat others with sensitivity and compassion. As you show true charity, 
you will do nothing to embarrass or hurt another person or even make him 
uncomfortable. Instead you will forgive, encourage, and speak well of 
others — whether or not you receive the same in return. As a missionary, you 
have exceptional opportunities to develop and show charity as you interact 
with investigators. Church members, fellow missionaries, and the general 
public. 

How would you respond to the following situations in a charitable way? 

Situation 1 

Suppose another missionary says to you: "Listen, have you heard the awful 
things they're saying about Sister Bennett? Well, ..." 

Discuss 

■ Ask your companion how he 
would answer this missionary. 

Situation 2 

Despite your best efforts, you have just received your fourth rejection of the 
morning. For some reason, people on the street appear to be unreceptive 
today, and. they have not been polite in expressing their lack of interest. You 
are beginning to feel impatient and frustrated. Then you encounter a 
particularly insensitive person who starts to insult you on a crowded train by 
making unkind remarks about your missionary "uniform." 

Discuss 

■ Ask your companion how he 
would respond to this person. 

Situation 3 

Your companion has been quite ill lately, and he is unable to come to a 
district meeting. At the meeting, other missionaries ask you how your 
companion is feeling today. Before you can answer, one elder remarks, "He's 
always sick. You must be tired of splitting with the stake missionaries so that 
your companion isn't left home alone." "Flu again, huh?" murmurs another, 
winking at the group. Soon the district is laughing, making fun of "Elder 
Sick" and his clever way of avoiding work. Then a missionary turns to you 
and asks, "How can you keep working so hard yourself. Elder? Your 
companion must really drag you down." Suddenly, the room becomes quiet 
as everyone waits for your reply. 

Discuss 

■ Ask your companion what he 
would say. 

Situation 4 

While driving down a country road, you notice a man who appears to be 
having some trouble ahead. Your companion observes your concern and 
remarks, "It's too bad that the whole load fell off his pickup. Elder, but it is 
our preparation day, after all. Besides [chuckle], you must admit, he doesn't 
look like serious investigator material, huh?" 

Discuss 

■ Ask your companion how he 
would reply. 

Situation 5 

As you listen to your companion present this part of the discussion for the 
ninth time this week, you begin to think, "If he says 'you know' one more 
time. I'll ..." 

Discuss 

■ Ask your companion to describe a 
more charitable response to the 
elder's irritating habit. 

■ What is the relationship between 
your thoughts and your ability to 
develop the pure love of Christ? 


38 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 


Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience in which you 
showed charity for your 
companion. Describe how this 
helped to strengthen your 
companionship. 

As you develop charity, you will grow closer to the Lord and inspire others 
to do the same. You will be able to help bring about eternal changes in the 
lives of many — including yourself. 

Read and Discuss 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Select a specific act of service to perform in the coming week. 

■ Identify a way to be more sensitive to the needs of your companion. 

■ Share your experiences with increasing your charity at the beginning of the 
next study session. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to perform 
a specific act of service in the 
coming week. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
experiences with increasing his 
charity at the beginning of the next 
study session. 

Conclusion 


As you apply the principles in this lesson, you will develop Christlike 
attributes and become a more successful missionary. You will become more 
confident that the Lord can and will work through you. Then you will be 
better able to help bring to pass the eternal life of our Father's children. 

Read and Discuss 

Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review principles 
related to developing Christlike 
attributes. 


39 


Chapter Answer Key 

Page 22 

1. Matthew 5:3, footnote 3b (poor in pride, humble); 2. Bible Dictionary, 
"Pauline Epistles" (a.d. 55-56); 3. Bible Dictionary, chronological tables (587 
B.C.); 4. Gazetteer and maps (west coast of present-day Turkey); 5. Matthew 
14:25, footnote 25a, IE (between 3:00 and 6:00 A.M.) 

Pages 23-24 

Skill 1: 1. The Lord/Martin Harris 

2. Martin Harris/Martin Harris 

3. Martin Harris 

4. The Lord 

5. Martin Harris 

6. The Lord 

7. Martin Harris 

8. Martin Harris's 

9. The Lord 

10. Martin Harris 

11. Martin Harris 

12. The Lord/the Lord's 

13. Edward Partridge 

14. The Lord's 

15. Edward Partridge 

16. The Lord's 

17. Edward Partridge 

Skill 2: conduct, living, immediate, mirror made of polished metal, make 
known, a covering for the neck, desired 

Skill 3: (1) enlarges soul, (2) enlightens understanding, (3) becomes delicious 
(1) faith, (2) hope, (3) charity, (4) love, (5) eye single to the glory of 
God 

(1) faith on the Lord, (2) repentance, (3) change of heart 

(1) repent, (2) exercise faith, (3) bring forth good works, (4) pray 

continually without ceasing 


40 


STUDY RECORD 


Date Time Spent Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

" Gospel Knowledge and Testimony" 

Use the four scripture study skills 

in your daily scripture study. 


"Personal Righteousness" 

Set specific goals to fast, pray, 
and seek the Spirit in your 
missionary work during the 
coming week. 


"Faith and Hard Work" 

Exercise faith by setting specific 
goals and working hard to achieve 
them. 

"Charity" 

Perform a specific act of service. 


41
