THE COMMITMENT PATTERN 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Prepare 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


The purpose of this chapter is to help you learn what the commitment Read and Discuss 

pattern is and how it applies to missionary work. Begin your study with 
prayer, and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply the principles you 
study. 

The topics you will study in this chapter are listed below: 


1. The Commitment Pattern 44 

2. Using the Commitment Pattern in Proselyting 50 

3. Using the Commitment Pattern in Leadership 56 


Your purpose as a missionary is to bring souls to Christ through the 
ordinances of baptism and confirmation. As people open their hearts, listen 
to your message, and obey the Lord's commandments, they will feel the 
Spirit. They become converted when they begin to feel and recognize the 
Spirit and act on the promptings they receive. 

Find Out 

■ What is your purpose as a 
missionary? 


Discuss 

■ How do people become converted? 

■ How is the commitment to obey 
gospel principles related to 
conversion? 


In section 50 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord teaches missionaries Read and Discuss 

how to help others become converted. 


Scripture Activity 


Read Doctrine and Covenants 50:13-24, and discuss the following questions: 

■ What is the relationship between your preaching and the teaching of the 
Spirit (verse 14)? 

■ How should you preach the gospel (verses 17-18)? 

■ How should your listener receive the gospel (verses 19-20)? 

■ How can you know that you have taught by the Spirit of truth and that 
your message has been received in the same way (verses 21-23)? 


The commitment pattern is the tool you will use to help others feel the Spirit 
and obey gospel principles. As illustrated below, the commitment pattern is 
the process of (1) preparing people to feel the Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting 
them to make commitments when they feel the Spirit, (3) following up to help 
them keep their commitments, and (4) helping them resolve concerns that may 
hinder their progress. 


42 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


o The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 


Resolve Concerns 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 


o 


43 


THE COMMITMENT PATTERN 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The commitment pattern will help you bring souls to Christ through the 
ordinances of baptism and confirmation. It will also help you involve 
members in missionary work and teach other missionaries how to grow and 
improve. In all you do as a missionary, follow the commitment pattern as 
explained below. 

Prepare: Do all you can to help others feel the Spirit of the Lord. When they 
have this Spirit, they will want to do what is right. They will be more likely 
to make and keep commitments that will increase their faith. As previously 
illustrated, you will prepare people by — 

■ Building relationships of trust. 

■ Helping them feel and recognize the Spirit. 

■ Presenting the message. 

■ Finding out. 


Invite: Help investigators to make specific commitments when they are 
prepared to do so. For those you teach to become converted, they must act 
on the promptings of the Spirit by accepting commitments. As they fulfill 
commitments, their faith will increase and they will draw closer to the Lord. 


Follow Up: Do whatever is necessary to help others fulfill their commitments 
so that they can continue to feel the influence of the Spirit. You can 
encourage them and help them to meet challenges successfully. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to prepare? 

■ Why is preparing important? 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to invite? 

■ Why is inviting important? 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to follow up? 

■ Why is following up important? 


Resolve Concerns: Help investigators to find answers to their questions through 
study, prayer, and discussion with you. You may need to help resolve 
concerns at any point within the commitment pattern — while preparing, 
inviting, or following up. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to resolve 
concerns? 

■ Why is resolving concerns 
important? 


Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about the 
commitment pattern and how it 
has helped you to teach the 
gospel. 

Consider the following examples of missionaries using the commitment Read and Discuss 

pattern. 


44 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Prepare 

Less Effective 

The missionaries enter the home of 
their investigators, the Thurstons. 

As they sit down, one says, "We're 
so happy to be here. Before we 
teach you this discussion, may we 
begin with prayer?" 

Following the prayer, the 
missionaries begin teaching the first 
discussion. During the lesson, Mr. 
Thurston comments, "I've often 
wondered about the purpose of life. 

I find your beliefs about it very 
interesting." 

One of the missionaries replies, 
"Thank you; we know they are true. 
Now, the first principle of the 
gospel is faith in the ..." He 
continues to teach as the Thurstons 
listen. 

As the missionaries discuss the Book 
of Mormon, Mrs. Thurston says, 
"You boys seem to feel strongly 
about this Mormon book. Why?" 

"Because the Book of Mormon is the 
most correct book on earth," an 
elder begins, "and you can get 
closer to God by reading it than any 
other book — even the Bible. Does 
that answer your question?" 

"Mmm," Mrs. Thurston replies, "1 
guess it does." 


Effective 

As the missionaries enter the home 
of the Thurstons to teach the first 
discussion, one comments, "I just 
noticed this family picture. You 
have four children?" 

"That's right!" Mr. Thurston replies 
proudly. 

"They're a good looking bunch," the 
elder continues. "Where do they 
live?" 

"Well, my oldest son is in law 
school right now, and ..." The 
missionaries listen for a while about 
the Thurston family. One discovers 
that he has quite a bit in common 
with the Thurstons. 

The missionaries then prepare to 
teach the discussion by giving a 
preview of it and asking Mr. 
Thurston if he will invite someone 
to offer an opening prayer. As the 
discussion begins, Mr. Thurston 
says, "I've often wondered about 
the purpose of life. I find your 
beliefs about it very interesting." 

The missionary who is teaching 
asks, "What aspect of our beliefs do 
you find interesting?" 

"Well, your teachings emphasize 
families and how we are all part of 
God's family. I have always felt that 
families were an important part of 
life. I could never figure out, 
though, how God fit into the 
picture." 

After some discussion on the 
subject, the missionaries introduce 
the Book of Mormon. Mrs. Thurston 
says, "You boys seem to feel 
strongly about this Mormon book. 
Why?" 

"The Book of Mormon, Mrs. 
Thurston, is not an ordinary book," 
an elder begins. "It is scripture — the 
word of God. The Book of Mormon 
has brought me closer to God and it 
can do the same for you." 

His companion adds, "The Book of 
Mormon has influenced me, too. I 
remember the first time I read it. 


45 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


One part of it records the words of a 
prophet who was teaching the 
people about Christ, asking some 
important questions in the process. 
As I thought about the questions he 
asked, I . . . [He relates more of his 
experience and they read the verses 
together.] After that experience I felt 
closer to my Savior and grew to love 
this book. I know that its teachings 
are true." 


Find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 


The missionaries in the effective example began by building a relationship of Read and Discuss 

trust with the investigators as they talked about their families. They invited 

the Spirit into their discussion as they bore testimony and shared personal 

experiences. They took time to find out how their investigators felt as they 

presented the message. 

The missionaries in the less effective example focused upon presenting the 
discussion rather than preparing their investigators to feel the Spirit. They 
emphasized the importance of the Book of Mormon but did little else to 
prepare the Thurstons to feel the Spirit. 


Invite 


Less Effective 

At the end of the discussion, the 
missionaries feel that the Thurstons 
need some time to think about the 
Book of Mormon. One of the 
missionaries asks, "Will you think 
about the Book of Mormon and, if 
you have some time, do a little 
reading?" 


Effective 

The missionaries share their 
testimonies of the Book of Mormon 
with the Thurstons. Then they ask, 
"Brother and Sister Thurston, before 
our next meeting will you read the 
passages we have marked in the 
Book of Mormon?" 


Find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 


The missionaries in the effective example gave the Thurstons a simple and Read and Discuss 

direct invitation. The invitation in the less effective example was weak and 
was not specific. 


Follow Up 

Less Effective 
The missionaries made an 
appointment with the Thurstons for 
the second discussion and have 
returned to teach. One of the 
missionaries asks, "Did you think 
much about the Book of Mormon 
since our meeting?" 

"Oh, not really. We've been pretty 
busy." 

"I understand; I know it's hard to 
find time to read. Do you mind if 
we begin the discussion?" 


Effective 

At the end of the first discussion, 
the missionaries arranged to return 
in two days to see if the Thurstons 
had any questions about their 
reading in the Book of Mormon. At 
their next visit, one of the 
missionaries asks, "Did you read the 
parts we marked for you?" 

"I read some, but I wasn't able to 
read all of them," replies Mr. 
Thurston. 

"How about you, Mrs. Thurston?" 


46 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


1 / 


I read the Introduction. 


n 


"Good! We realize how busy both ol 
you are, and we're pleased that you 
were able to read some of the parts 
we marked. May we take ten or 
fifteen minutes now and read 
together?" 


Find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 


The missionaries in the effective example helped the investigators to be Read and Discuss 

successful in keeping their commitment to read the Book of Mormon. The 
missionaries in the less effective example encouraged the investigators but 
did not help them fulfill their commitment. 


Resolve Concerns 


Less Effective 

The missionaries are teaching the 
Thurstons principle 5 of the second 
discussion. Mrs. Thurston says, 

"Are you saying that the baptism 1 
received by my minister when I was 
younger doesn't count? That I didn't 
really accept Christ because my 
baptism wasn't performed by a 
Mormon?" 

"In a way, yes. You see, when 
Christ was on the earth he 
organized a Church with Apostles 
and leaders. He gave these leaders 
authority to perform ordinances 
such as baptism. If people do not 
have this authority, they don't have 
God's permission to perform certain 
ordinances — like baptism. Whatever 
they do doesn't really count, as far 
as God is concerned." 


"So to be saved, you must be a 
Mormon — right?" Mrs. Thurston 
asks slowly. 

"Yes," the elders say, "and that's 
why our message is so important." 


Effective 

The missionaries are teaching the 
Thurstons principle 5 of the second 
discussion. Mrs. Thurston says, 

"Are you saying that the baptism I 
received by my minister when I was 
younger doesn't count? That I didn't 
really accept Christ because my 
baptism wasn't performed by a 
Mormon?" 

"In a way, yes. We are saying that 
baptism must be performed by one 
having authority from God for it to 
be a valid ordinance in the sight of 
God. [The missionaries pause to 
allow Mrs. Thurston time to 
respond. She sits quietly and the 
missionaries continue.] I sense that 
this is a real concern for you. Would 
you share with us the circumstances 
of your previous baptism? You seem 
to have strong feelings about it." 

"Well, when I was in school, I really 
felt the need for religion," Mrs. 
Thurston replies, thoughtfully. "For 
the first time I felt as though God 
cared about me. I began attending a 
church and was later baptized by 
the minister. I really felt that I had 
accepted Christ. Why do I need to 
accept Christ again?" 

"If I understand correctly, you 
believe that the purpose of baptism 
is to show your acceptance of 
Christ," an elder says. "Is that 
right?" 

"Yes. Isn't that right?" 


47 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


"Yes, baptism does show our 
acceptance of Christ. It's more than 
that, though. It's the gateway 
through which we must pass to 
enter God's kingdom. And only 
those holding authority from God 
can admit us into God's kingdom." 

After more discussion about 
baptism, one missionary continues, 
"The Book of Mormon has really 
helped me understand this issue. 
May we read together what one 
prophet taught about baptism?" 


The missionaries in the effective example helped the investigator begin to 
resolve her concern by identifying the problem, asking her to tell them more, 
and reading from the Book of Mormon together. The missionaries in the less 
effective example explained the doctrine of proper authority but did not help 
the investigator resolve her concern. 


Read each situation below and decide how well the missionaries use the 
commitment pattern. Discuss your answers with your companion. 

1. Jack felt good about the things the missionaries taught him in the first 
three discussions. They are now teaching Jack the fourth discussion. He 
has attended church and is reading the Book of Mormon. He does not 
have a baptismal date set. 


2. The missionaries meet Brother Jones in the foyer of the chapel for the first 
time and ask, "Are you Brother Jones?" "Yes," he replies. "The bishop told 
us to come and talk to you," they continue. "We understand that you work 
for a furniture company here in town. We wonder if anyone at work 
would be willing to listen to the discussions." Brother Jones replies, "Well, 
Elders, I can't think of anyone right now." 


3. During the second discussion, the elders sense that Alex and his member 
wife, Carol, are feeling the Spirit. After discussing the first four principles 
and ordinances of the gospel, one elder asks Alex, "Will you follow the 
example of the Savior by being baptized a week from Saturday?" Alex 
looks at his wife and replies, "It was a long time ago that Carol joined the 
Church. I think I'm ready now." The missionaries congratulate him for his 
decision and make arrangements to teach the remaining discussions. 


Find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 

Read and Discuss 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Have him read a situation. 

■ Ask him to decide how well the 
missionaries apply the 
commitment pattern in each 
situation. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
situations. 


Ansiver: Less effective. The 
missionaries are preparing Jack to 
receive invitations. They should 
have invited him to be baptized 
before the fourth discussion, 
however. 

Answer: Less effective. The 
missionaries should have prepared 
Brother Jones by getting to know 
him before inviting him to introduce 
them to a nonmember associate. 
Invitations should be given when 
the Spirit is present. 


Answer: Effective. The missionaries 
prepared Alex by being sensitive to 
his feelings as they taught. They 
invited Alex to be baptized and 
made arrangements to follow up by 
teaching the rest of the discussions. 


48 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


( ] 4. Two sisters are visiting in the home of a member family, the Fosters, and 

sharing some of their missionary experiences. There is a good feeling in the 

room, and the sisters can sense that the teenage children are becoming Answer: Effective. The missionaries 

excited about sharing the gospel with their friends. One sister briefly prepared the Fosters by sharing 

explains the set-a-date principles and asks, "Will you and your family set a experiences and explaining the 
date when you will have someone prepared to listen to the missionary set-a-date principles. They invited 

discussions?" The family responds positively, and the sisters make an the Fosters to participate and made 

appointment to return to follow up. an appointment to follow up. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for the day, and select three specific finding or 
teaching situations. 

■ Write a goal to pause after each situation and answer these questions: 

1. How did we prepare others to feel the Spirit? 

2. What concerns did we help to resolve? 

3. If the people were prepared, did we invite them to make a commitment? 

4. What are we doing to follow up? 

■ Carry this goal with you during the day as a reminder. 


Invite 

■ Identify three specific finding or 
teaching situations. 

■ After each situation, help your 
companion discuss which elements 
of the commitment pattern you 
and he applied. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion pause after each 
situation and identify the elements 
of the commitment pattern that 
you and he applied. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work, point out 
opportunities to use the 
commitment pattern. 


49 


USING THE COMMITMENT PATTERN IN PROSELYTING 


o 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to discuss the elements of the 
commitment pattern used in three 
situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how using the 
commitment pattern in your work 
helped you and your companion 
to more effectively bring people to 
Christ. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Missionary work has four areas of emphasis: finding, teaching, baptizing and Read and Discuss 
fellowshippirig, and leadership. You should use the commitment pattern in 
each area to help others feel the Spirit and move toward conversion. 

The first three areas of missionary work are directly related to proselyting and 
will be discussed in this section. They are described below. 

Three Areas of Proselyting 
Finding people to teach: (1) Helping 
members and nonmembers prepare 
their friends and setting teaching 
appointments, (2) finding potential 
investigators through your own 
efforts, and (3) helping potential 
investigators make the commitment 
to be taught the second discussion. 

Teaching: Teaching investigators Be baptized, 

who have made a serious 
commitment to investigate the 
Church. 

Baptizing and fellowshipping: Continue to obey the 

Working with investigators who commandments and remain active 

have committed themselves to be members of the Church, 

baptized and are earnestly preparing 
for baptism. 

Find Out 

■ Describe each of the three areas of 
proselyting. 

■ What are the central commitments 
for each area? 

Following you will find brief explanations and examples of how you can use Read and Discuss 
the commitment pattern in proselyting. Each area is covered in greater detail 
in its own chapter of the Missionary Guide. 

o 


50 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Finding People to Teach 

You can use the commitment pattern to find people to teach. To do this, 
prepare nonmembers to feel the Spirit. When they have concerns, help them 
seek solutions. When they feel the Spirit, invite them to hear the missionary 
discussions. When they accept your invitation, folloio up to help them fulfill 
the commitment. 

You can also use the commitment pattern to find people to teach through 
members. To do this, prepare members to feel the Spirit. Then invite them to 
prayerfully select a friend or relative with whom to share the gospel. Help to 
resolve any concerns that may arise, and follow up to help the members keep 
their commitments. 

Find Out 

■ Describe how you can use the 
commitment pattern to find people 
to teach. 

Consider the following example of using the commitment pattern to find Read and Discuss 

people to teach: 

Elders Webster and Reeves have just moved into a new area and plan to 
become acquainted with the members. As they visit with the Bennetts, Elder 
Webster says, "This is a nice area, Brother Bennett; how long have you lived 
here?" 

"We like the neighborhood, too. Elders. We've been here for about five years 
now," Brother Bennett replies. The missionaries discover that Sister Bennett 
is a Primary teacher and that she regularly tends the neighbors' children. 

Brother Bennett works in the city. The missionaries talk about their families at 
home and speak enthusiastically about their new proselyting area. 

After the missionaries share their feelings about serving the Lord in their new 
area. Elder Webster says, "Brother Bennett, will you tell us about any 
nonmembers you work with who might like to learn about the gospel?" 

Brother Bennett responds a bit hesitantly, "Elders, I know a few nonmembers, 
and we're pretty good friends. But it's a challenge to know how to introduce 
the gospel. I'm not prepared to spoil a friendship by saying something 
wrong." 

Elder Webster replies, "We appreciate your concern. No one wants to 
damage a friendship. We believe, however, that the Lord can help us share 
the gospel with others in a way that won't offend." After discussing ways to 
approach nonmember friends and praying together, Elder Reeves says, "Will 
you approach a friend this week about the gospel?" 

"Okay, I'll give it a try," Brother Bennett agrees. "I'll pray first for the Lord's 
help." 

"Good!" declares Elder Reeves. "We'll call you next Thursday, if we may, to 
see how it went." 

Find Out 

■ How did the missionaries use the 
commitment pattern to find people 
to teach? 

In this example, the elders became acquainted with the Bennetts. This Read 

prepared the Bennetts to receive and accept an invitation to share the gospel 
with their friends. Elder Webster discussed a concern Brother Bennett felt, 
and Elder Reeves made arrangements to follow up. 

Discuss 

■ How have you used the 
commitment pattern to find people 
to teach in the past? 


51 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Read each situation, and decide how well the missionaries use the commitment 
pattern to find people to teach. Discuss your answers with your companion. 

Situation 1 

Sisters Moffatt and Walker share a spiritual message with Sister Jansson, after 
which they encourage her to describe her mission to Sweden. Sister Moffatt 
feels that the Spirit is present. She explains the set-a-date principles and asks, 
"Sister Jansson, will you set a date when you can have one of your friends 
prepared to hear the missionary discussions?" Sister Jansson accepts the 
invitation, and the missionaries arrange a time to meet with her again to 
learn what date she has set and whom she will prepare. 

Situation 2 

Elder Shaw knocks on the door and a man answers. Small children gather at 
the door, looking at their visitors curiously. "Hello, I'm Elder Shaw, and this 
is my companion. Elder Howell," the missionary begins, "We're from The 
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and we have a special message 
for you about how God has called prophets in our day. May we come in?" 


Teaching 

The purpose of teaching the gospel is to prepare investigators to feel the 
Spirit. You can prepare them by bearing testimony, presenting your message, 
asking questions, and sharing experiences. Since investigators will not always 
accept everything you teach, help them to resolve concerns and then continue 
to prepare them to feel the Spirit. Be sensitive to the promptings of the Spirit. 
When investigators feel the influence of the Spirit, invite them to act. Begin 
immediately to help investigators fulfill commitments by following up. 


Consider how these missionaries used the commitment pattern in their 
teaching. 

Brother and Sister Bennett invite their neighbors, the Scott Peterson family, to 
hear the missionary discussions. Elder Webster and his companion teach the 
first discussion in the Bennetts' home. While teaching the Petersons about 
prayer, the missionaries ask Scott to share an experience that he had with 
prayer. Scott describes an occasion when, as a boy, he became lost in the 
mountains. Two hours after praying to God for guidance, he found his way 
and located help. He felt that God heard his prayer. Elder Webster feels that 
Scott is touched by the Spirit during this story. He later invites the Petersons 
to have daily personal and family prayer. They accept the invitation, and 
Scott agrees to offer the closing prayer. The missionaries then review the 
commitments that the Petersons made during the discussion and make an 
appointment to return to teach the second discussion. Two days later, the 
missionaries stop by to read from the Book of Mormon with the family and to 
leam of their progress. 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to your companion 

■ Ask him to decide how well the 
missionaries use the Commitment 
pattern. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same with the following 
situation. 


Answer: Effective. The missionaries 
prepared the member, invited her to 
make a commitment when the Spirit 
was present, and made 
arrangements to follow up. 


Answer: Less effective. The 
missionaries should have prepared 
the man by getting to know him a 
little (asking him about his children, 
for example). The missionaries could 
then have offered to present their 
message. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Briefly describe how you can use 
the commitment pattern in your 
teaching. 

Read and Discuss 


52 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The missionaries prepared Scott and his family to feel the Spirit by meeting in 
the Bennetts' home for the first discussion. They invited Scott to share a 
personal experience about prayer and, when the Spirit prompted them, they 
invited the Petersons to pray daily. The missionaries then followed up by 
reviewing the commitments accepted during the discussion, and they made 
arrangements for future contact. 


Read each situation, and decide how well the missionaries use the 
commitment pattern in their teaching. Discuss your answers with your 
companion. 

Situation 1 

The missionaries are teaching Hal Loomis. He was somewhat receptive to the 
message presented in the first discussion. He accepted the commitment to 
read the Book of Mormon and pray. When the missionaries arrive to teach 
the second discussion, they learn that he has not yet read or prayed. They 
proceed to teach the second discussion, however. When they invite him to be 
baptized, he politely declines. The missionaries then ask for a return 
appointment. 

Situation 2 

After a stake missionary bears his testimony to Melvin and Jenny Woolf, 
everyone in the room feels the Spirit very strongly. The missionaries invite 
the Woolfs to read and pray about the Book of Mormon, and they accept. 
Before the missionaries leave, they review what they have taught by using 
the study guide. They then remind the Woolfs of their commitments and 
schedule a return appointment. 


Baptizing and Fellowshipping 

After investigators have firmly committed to be baptized, you will work with 
them, the members, and the priesthood leaders. This will lay the groundwork 
for their continued growth and activity in the Church. In addition, you will 
help priesthood leaders and members to commit themselves to fully involve 
new converts in the ward. 

As investigators anticipate baptism, begin to prepare them for continued 
activity by teaching them about membership in the Church. Invite them to 
commit to a lifetime of obedience to the commandments and activity in the 
Church. Follow up by helping them make a smooth transition into Church 
activity. Help the stake missionaries make appointments to teach the 
Discussions for New Members. 


Find Out 

■ How did the missionaries use the 
commitment pattern while they 
were teaching? 

Read and Discuss 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Ask him to decide how well the 
missionaries use the commitment 
pattern. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same with the following 
situation. 


Answer: Less effective. The 
missionaries should have continued 
to prepare Hal by reading the Book 
of Mormon and praying with him. 


Answer: Effective. The missionaries 
prepared the investigators to feel the 
Spirit and then invited them to read 
and pray about the Book of 
Mormon. They then made 
arrangements to follow up. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Describe how you can use the 
commitment pattern in preparing 
people for baptism and 
fellowshipping them. 


53 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Consider how well the missionaries use the commitment pattern in preparing 
people for baptism and fellowshipping them. 

The missionaries continue to teach the Peterson family. During the second 
discussion, Scott and his wife accept the invitation to be baptized. Now the 
missionaries are busy coordinating the baptismal service with the ward 
mission leader. Scott and his family have met two of the stake missionaries 
and several other members of the ward. They seem to feel comfortable 
attending church. 

During the last discussion, Brother and Sister Peterson accept the invitation 
to take an active part in fulfilling the mission of the Church. At the end of 
the meeting, the missionaries discuss with the Petersons which of their 
relatives and friends they would like to invite to the baptism. 

A few days later, the missionaries stop by to see who can attend the 
baptismal service. Elder Webster also makes an appointment to have the 
stake missionaries teach the Discussions for New Members. 


The missionaries prepared for the baptismal service by coordinating with the 
ward mission leader. They continued to prepare the Petersons for baptism by 
presenting the remaining discussions and introducing them to members of 
the ward. Meeting ward members helped to prepare the Petersons for 
long-term activity in the Church. 


Read each of the following situations, and decide how well the missionaries 
use the commitment pattern in preparing people for baptism and 
fellowshipping them. Discuss your answers with your companion. 

Situation 1 

Alan and his wife Rebecca will be baptized in three days. They have attended 
church once and met a few members only briefly. After the sixth discussion, 
the missionaries call the ward mission leader to notify him of the upcoming 
baptism and ask for his help. 


Situation 2 

Brother Richins, a stake missionary, has been with the missionaries during 
each discussion with Chris and Lori Jenson. He has been a great help in 
fellowshipping the Jensons. He notified Chris and Lori of the ward potluck 
dinner, for example, and has introduced them to many ward members. 
During the sixth discussion, the missionaries ask the Jensons, "Will you take 
an active part in fulfilling the mission of the Church — to proclaim the gospel, 
perfect the Saints, and redeem the dead?" 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ How did the missionaries use the 
commitment pattern when they 
were preparing people for baptism 
and fellowshipping them? 

Read and Discuss 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Ask him to decide how well the 
missionaries use the commitment 
pattern. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same with the following 
situation. 


Answer: Less effective. The 
missionaries should have prepared 
their investigators for long-term 
Church activity by introducing them 
to more members of the ward. 
Further, the missionaries should 
have been in closer contact with the 
ward mission leader to plan the 
baptismal service. 


Answer: Effective. A stake 
missionary was helping during the 
teaching process. He helped prepare 
the Jensons for continued activity in 
the Church. The missionaries 
invited them to take part in the 
mission of the Church. 


54 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your current list of investigators who have accepted an invitation to 
be baptized. 

■ Discuss with your companion how well you are using the commitment 
pattern to prepare your investigators for continued activity in the Church. 

■ In your next correlation meeting with the ward mission leader, discuss 
fellowshipping activities for each investigator moving toward baptism. 


Invite 

■ Discuss with your companion how 
well you are using the 
commitment pattern to prepare 
your investigators for continued 
activity in the Church. 

■ Invite him to take the lead in 
discussing how to involve 
members with the investigators 
who are scheduled for baptism. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion discuss fellowshipping 
activities with the ward mission 
leader in your next correlation 
meeting. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ As you are proselyting, point out 
opportunities to use the 
commitment pattern. 


55 


USING THE COMMITMENT PATTERN IN LEADERSHIP 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The principles of the commitment pattern can be valuable in your work with 
other missionaries. As you work with the missionaries, the central 
commitment you will want them to make is to become better leaders. You 
will prepare them by building trust, helping them feel the Spirit, and finding 
out about them. You will invite and follow up in much the same way that you 
do in other areas of missionary work. By helping missionaries feel the Spirit 
and make and keep commitments, you can help them to magnify their 
callings and have more success. 


Follow Up 

■ Discuss with your companion how 
well you and he are using the 
commitment pattern with your 
investigators. 

■ Discuss how using the 
commitment pattern has helped 
you and your companion in your 
proselyting. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Describe how you can use the 
commitment pattern to help other 
missionaries become better leaders. 


Consider the following example of a district leader using the commitment 
pattern to develop leadership in a missionary. 

The district leader is working with a member of his district. He can tell that 
the missionary needs some help asking direct, "will you" questions. As they 
proselyte during the day, the district leader correctly models asking these 
questions when inviting others to make commitments. He then asks the 
missionary to tell him whether these questions were effective or not. They 
discuss how he used the questions and the benefits of inviting in this way. 
The missionaries agree that this is the best way to invite people to make 
commitments. The district leader invites the missionary to use a direct, "will 
you" question in the next teaching appointment. 

After the appointment, the missionaries discuss their performance. The 
district leader compliments the missionary and promises to call later in the 
week to ask about his experiences in inviting people to make commitments. 


Read and Discuss 

o 


Find Out 

■ How did the district leader use the 
commitment pattern to help the 
missionary develop leadership? 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Have him read a situation. 

■ Ask him to decide which element 
of the commitment pattern the 
missionary is using. Also ask him 
which of the four areas of 
missionary work is described. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same with the following 
situations. 


56 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


In this chapter you have learned how to use the commitment pattern in 
proselyting and in helping missionaries become better leaders. Read each of 
the following situations. Decide which element of the commitment pattern 
the missionary is using. Also decide which of the four areas of missionary 
work is described. Discuss your answers with your companion. 

Elements of the Commitment Areas of Missionary Work 

Pattern 

m Prepare ■ Finding 

■ Invite ■ Teaching 

■ Follow Up " Baptizing and Fellowshipping 

■ Resolve Concerns " Leadership 

Example: While teaching the Miner family, you are able to share your 
testimony and find out their beliefs and feelings about the gospel. 

Answer: Prepare/Teaching 

1. You teach Brother Reynolds a discussion and stop by the next day to read 
the Book of Mormon with him. You also see how he is doing with his 
resolve to give up smoking. 

2. During your visit with Sister Jenkins, you feel prompted to ask, "Will you 
set a date to have someone prepared to hear the missionary discussions?" 

3. While working with Elder Jackson, you discuss some goals that he set last 
week. 

4. Bill says, "I'm not sure I can accept the idea that God and Jesus Christ 
appeared to Joseph Smith. I just can't imagine that." You respond by 
saying, "It is hard to imagine at first. Would you like to know if it really 
happened, though?" Bill replies, "I don't think it could have happened." 

O You smile and respond, "It did happen, Bill. And the Lord has provided a 
way to find out for yourself ..." 

5. You are teaching Brad and Susan Harless a discussion. They will be 
baptized this Sunday. At the end of the discussion, you ask them if they 
will invite some friends to their baptism. Brad says that he will talk with a 
few of his friends at work and see if they will come. Susan promises to do 
the same. 

6. You are visiting Brother and Sister Merrill, recent converts to the Church. 

You invite them to set a date to have someone prepared to hear the 

missionary discussions. Brother Merrill says, "I don't think I can do that. Answers: 1. Follow Up/Teaching; 

I've always been a pretty shy person." You respond by saying, "There was 2. Invite/Finding; 3. Follow 
a time in my life when I was hesitant to share the gospel ..." Up/Leadership; 4. Resolve 

7. You have felt the Spirit strongly during your visit with Blake. You invite Concerns/Teaching; 

him to attend a church meeting, and he readily accepts. 5. Invite/Finding; 6. Resolve 

8. You learn that Brother Johnson is an engineer at the local aircraft plant. He Concerns/Finding; 

assembles and wires cockpit instruments. He has worked there for three 7. Invite/Teaching; 

years and really enjoys it. 8. Prepare/Finding 


57 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today. Choose three specific situations in which 
you will be proselyting or developing leadership in another missionary. 

■ Write a goal to discuss with your companion how you used the 
commitment pattern in these situations. Answer the following questions 
after each situation: 

1. What did you do to prepare others to feel the Spirit? 

2. What did you invite them to do? 

3. What did you do to follow up? 

4. What concerns did you help resolve? 

Invite 

■ Identify three specific situations in 
which your companion will be 
proselyting or developing 
leadership in another missionary. 

■ After each situation, invite your 
companion to answer the four 
questions on the left. 

■ Carry this goal with you during the day as a reminder. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to discuss the four 
questions with your companion 
after each situation you have 
identified. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work, point out 
opportunities to use the 
commitment pattern in proselyting 
and leadership. 

Conclusion 


This chapter has focused on bringing people to Christ by using the 
commitment pattern: preparing them to feel the Spirit of the Lord, inviting 
them to obey the principles of the gospel, following up to help them keep their 
commitments, and helping them resolve concerns that may hinder their 
progress. This pattern applies to all areas of missionary work — finding, 
teaching, baptizing and fellowshipping, and leadership. 

Read and Discuss 

In order for you to use the commitment pattern successfully, you must have 
the Spirit of the Lord with you. As you develop faith, righteousness, 
diligence, and charity, you will have the guidance of the Spirit. You will be 
able to help others develop faith, repent, and come unto Christ. 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
of the commitment pattern. 


58 


STUDY RECORD 


) 

Date Time Spent Pages Studied Comments 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"The Commitment Pattern" 

Evaluate how well you used the 

commitment pattern in three 

specific finding or teaching 

situations. 

O "Using the Commitment Pattern 

in Proselyting" 

Evaluate how well you are using 

the commitment pattern with 

investigators who have accepted 
baptism. 

"Using the Commitment Pattern 

in Leadership" 

Evaluate how well you are using 

the commitment pattern in 

proselyting and in helping other 
missionaries develop leadership. 


59
