BUILD RELATIONSHIPS OF TRUST 


o 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


The purpose of this chapter is to help you and your companion improve in 
your ability to build positive, spiritual relationships with others. As 
investigators feel your love and concern, they will be prepared to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord. Begin your study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help 
you learn and apply the principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used in building relationships of trust. This 
chapter will discuss the following: 

1. Become Acquainted 62 

2. Build on Common Beliefs 64 

3. Show Empathy 67 

Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

4. Be dependable 

5. Meet the needs of investigators 

6. Show Christlike love for others 

7. Listen to others 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that would help in 
building relationships of trust. Discuss these with your companion and list 
them below: 


TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in building relationships of trust. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


Discuss 

■ What are other ways to build 
relationships of trust? 

Read and Discuss 


The Commitment Pattern 

Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 

Resolve Concerns 


60 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


C The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 

Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. Building 
relationships of trust is an important part of the preparation stage. 

Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ How does building relationships of 
trust relate to the commitment 
pattern? 


Missionaries prepare people to feel the Spirit of the Lord. When people open 
their hearts to the Spirit, they want to follow the Savior and keep his 
commandments. Your ability to prepare others to feel the Spirit depends 
largely on the warmth of your relationships with them. Your love and 
encouragement can help investigators, members, and missionaries to open 
their hearts to the Spirit. The following quotations from investigators about 
missionaries show the importance of building positive, spiritual relationships. 

"They put a lot of effort into making me feel comfortable. They took time to 
listen and answer my questions." 

"I felt that no matter what my past was like, they didn't judge me for it." 

"I was touched that they would share their deepest feelings with me. I 
respect and admire them for that." 


o 


Discuss 

■ Why is it important for you to 
build relationships of trust? 

■ How did the missionaries build 
relationships of trust with the 
investigators quoted above? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience in which 
someone who loved and trusted 
you helped you feel closer to the 
Spirit. 


Find Out 

■ Ask your companion to share an 
experience in which someone who 
loved and trusted him helped him 
feel closer to the Spirit. 


This chapter will discuss some of the many things you can do to build Read 

relationships of trust. You can help others feel your love and concern by (1) 
becoming acquainted, (2) building on common beliefs, and (3) showing 
empathy. Study this chapter carefully, and apply the principles you learn in 
your daily work. Help people accept the gospel by building strong 
relationships with them. 


61 


BECOME ACQUAINTED 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


One way for you to build relationships of trust with others is to get to know Read 
them better. When you share information about yourself with others, they 
begin to know you and want to share their experiences with you. You can 
help them understand why you want to share the gospel with them. You 
might talk about the following things: 

■ Your family and your feelings toward them (pictures are sometimes helpful) 

■ Your hometown 

■ Your interests 

■ The reasons you are serving a mission 

■ What the gospel has meant in your life 

Discuss 

■ Share with each other specific 
things about yourselves that would 
help investigators and members 
become better acquainted with 
you. 


As you share information about yourself, others will be more willing to tell 
you about themselves. You can find out things that will help you understand 
their needs and concerns. You might ask others about the following things. 

■ Families 

■ Work and interests 

■ Background and past experiences 

■ Feelings about God and religion 

■ Friendships with members of the Church 

■ Knowledge of and feelings about the Church 

■ Interest in the Church and the reasons they are willing to talk with the 
missionaries 


Read 


o 

Discuss 

■ What specific things will you want 
to find out about investigators' and 
members' families, work, interests, 
and backgrounds? 

■ What have you done in the past to 
become acquainted with people? 


You can also learn much about people by observing details. Take interest in 
what you see around you. Many objects in a home can help you better 
understand the people you visit. These include pictures, furnishings, books, 
trophies, and toys. You may also see investigators or members participating 
in sports or hobbies. Notice how Elder Lucas and his companion learned 
about the Fredrickson family: 

"One evening Elder Lucas and I were tracting and knocked on the door of 
the Fredrickson's home. They invited us in, and as we entered the living 
room we noticed several tennis trophies on the shelf. We asked who the 
tennis champion was. Mrs. Fredrickson said that her husband played 
regularly in tournaments. I asked if the whole family played and she said 
they did. We took a few moments to admire the many trophies. We asked 
each member of the family how long he or she had been playing. It was 
obvious that this family loved to play tennis together. As Mr. Fredrickson 
spoke about his accomplishments, he really seemed to open up to us." 


Read 


Discuss 

■ Think of the people who live in 
your area. What objects, interests, 
or personal activities have you 
noticed that you could ask them 
about? 


62 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


( By noticing and discussing the trophies, the missionaries began building a Read and Discuss 

relationship of trust. Their sincere interest helped the Fredricksons feel that 
they really cared. The discussions provide opportunities for you to learn 
about others and tell about yourself. Turn to the section "Create a Learning 
Atmosphere" on page 1-3 of the first discussion, and answer the following 
questions: 

■ How could discussing the items listed under "Teaching Helps" help you 
build relationships of trust? 

■ How could you use this section while teaching? 

As soon as you meet people, begin looking for opportunities to learn how 
they feel about the gospel. Share your own feelings. Also try to find common 
interests. This will greatly help you to build relationships of trust. 

Find Out 

■ How does becoming acquainted 
with people help you to build 
relationships of trust with them? 

■ How does becoming acquainted 
prepare people to feel the Spirit? 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for the day, and select three specific situations in 
which you can become acquainted with someone. These situations could 
include a first discussion, meeting a member for the first time, and personal 
contacting. 

■ Write a goal to become acquainted with these people. Carry this goal with 

O you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 

Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion become acquainted 
with three new individuals or 
families during the day. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to become 
acquainted with people. Discuss 
how you and your companion are 
doing. 


Invite 

■ Identify three specific situations in 
which you will be meeting people 
today. 

■ Invite your companion to write the 
goal to become acquainted with 
three new individuals or families. 


63 


BUILD ON COMMON BELIEFS 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to become acquainted with 
people in three situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how becoming acquainted 
with people helped them to feel 
the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

You can build relationships of trust by building upon beliefs that you share Read and Discuss 

with others. You do not need to tear down other people's beliefs to teach the 

gospel. Build instead upon the truths your investigators already believe. Point 

out the beliefs you have in common. People will feel your respect for their 

beliefs, and they will be more willing to listen to you. 


Scripture Activity 

With your companion, read Alma 18:24-32 and discuss the following 

questions: 

■ After Ammon asked King Lamoni if he believed in God, why did he ask 
him if he believed in a Great Spirit? 

■ Why did Ammon say that the Great Spirit was God? 

■ Was the Great Spirit in whom Lamoni believed the same as the God in 
whom Ammon believed? 

■ What might have happened if Ammon had tried to tell the king that there 
was no Great Spirit? 


Ammon built on the beliefs that he and King Lamoni had in common. He 
knew that the king believed in a Great Spirit and did not understand the 
nature of God. To teach Lamoni, Ammon did not need to destroy his beliefs. 

Rather, he used common beliefs to teach and to build a relationship of trust. 

Find Out 

■ What does it mean to build on 
common beliefs? 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary builds on common 
beliefs. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Read each situation, and decide which missionary effectively builds on 
common beliefs. Discuss your answers with your companion. 


64 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Situation 1 

The Barnes family seemed fairly open to the first discussion. During the 
second discussion, Mr. Barnes said: "In our church we believe that everyone 
has to be baptized. That's why we have babies sprinkled soon after they're 
born." 


Missionary A: Actually, Mr. Barnes, we do not believe in baptism for small 
children. It is a false doctrine. We believe that . . . 


Missionary B: It's good to talk with people who believe that baptism is so 
important. We also believe that all people must be baptized 
so they can return to live with Heavenly Father. The Savior 
gave us an example of baptism. He was baptized in the 
Jordan River. 

Missionary C: I'm glad you believe that everyone needs to be baptized, but 
small children don't need baptism. They are innocent 
before . . . 


Situation 2 

While two elders are trading, they meet a man who says, "You know where 

Mormons and I disagree? I believe that we are saved by grace." 

Missionary A: We also believe that grace is an important part of our 
salvation. May we come in and talk about it? 

Missionary B: We believe that we are saved by our works and by grace. 
You need both to be saved. 

Missionary C: We agree with you. We are saved by grace, but there is one 
other important part of salvation — our works. May we talk 
about this subject with you? 

Listen to the audiotape segments for "Building Relationships of Trust: Build 

on Common Beliefs." 


Practice building on common beliefs by responding to the following 

situations. Do not spend time trying to resolve concerns. Just identify the 

beliefs that you share with these people. 

1. When you are teaching an investigator about God, he says, "I think God 
loves us all, no matter what church we go to. The main thing is that we 
keep the commandments." 

2. When you ask an investigator what he believes about God, he says, "I 
believe in God as a power more than a being. It's the all-supreme force of 
nature — the force that creates life." 

3. When you invite an investigator to come to church, he says, "I don't think 
I could come on Sunday. I usually spend Sunday with my family. I've 
always felt that my family comes first." 

4. An investigator says, "I've always believed there were prophets — prophets 
like Christ, Muhammad, Moses, and all the others." 

5. You are talking with a Jewish man for the first time, and he says, "I don't 
know. I believe in the writings of Moses — what you call the Old 
Testament — but this Book of Mormon I can't believe." 

6. A new missionary says, "I know it's important to obey the mission rules, 
but it's sure hard to get up on time. I'm not used to this schedule." 


Answers: "A" emphasizes the 
difference between the investigator 
and missionary. "B" builds on 
common beliefs by pointing out the 
similarities between their beliefs. 
"C" is better than "A" but still 
emphasizes the differences. 


Answers: "A" builds on common 
beliefs by pointing out the 
similarities between the beliefs of 
the missionaries and the man. "B" 
tries to correct the man's beliefs and 
emphasizes the differences between 
their beliefs. "C" begins by pointing 
out similarities but ends up focusing 
on differences. 

Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him respond by building on 
common beliefs. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


65 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

7. When you ask an investigator what he thinks about Christ, he says, "1 
believe that he was certainly a great teacher. I love to read his teachings in 
the Bible. But I'm not so sure about his being the Son of God." 

8. A missionary says, "I want to love all of God's children in this city. But it’s 
hard to feel love when they slam the door in your face. Sometimes I really 
feei angry." 

9. An investigator says, "I've always felt that God is loving and is no 
respecter of persons. But why do so many people die needlessly in war 
and crime? Why are children bom with handicaps?" 


With your companion, select the one or two investigators with whom you are 
most familiar. Discuss their beliefs and values, and then answer the questions 
below: 

Read and Discuss 

■ What are the similarities between their beliefs and the beliefs taught in the 
discussions? 

■ How can you build on their beliefs to help them understand and accept 
gospel doctrines? 

■ How could you approach your next discussion to build on these common 
beliefs? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about how 
important it is to build on common 
beliefs. 

■ Share an experience in which 
building on common beliefs has 
helped you in your work. 


Find Out 

■ Why does building on common 
beliefs help build relationships of 
trust? 

■ How does building on common 
beliefs prepare people to feel the 
Spirit? 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for the day, and select three specific finding or 
teaching situations. 

■ Write a goal to identify the common beliefs of others in these situations and 
build on those beliefs. Carry this goal with you during the day as a 
reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 

Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today, 
and identify three specific finding 
or teaching situations. 

■ Invite your companion to write a 
goal to build on common beliefs in 
these situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion build on common 
beliefs in three situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to build on common 
beliefs. Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


66 


SHOW EMPATHY 


^ ' LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to build on common beliefs in 
three situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how building on common 
beliefs helped you and your 
companion build relationships of 
trust. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Empathy is the ability to put yourself in another's situation and share his Read and Discuss 

thoughts and feelings. Empathy is also looking at things from the other's 

point of view rather than yours. As you listen to investigators, members, and 

other missionaries, try to understand how they feel by asking yourself: "If I 

were in their position, how would I react to this?" "Why are they asking 

those questions?" "What are they thinking and feeling?" 

To help you understand what empathy is, read the following example and 
answer the questions. 

A missionary has just arrived in the mission field. He says to his companion, 

C -, "Boy, there sure is a lot to do — learning the discussions and teaching skills, 

) keeping track of our investigators, finding new people to teach, trying to 
improve in everything. Sometimes I wonder if I- can do it all. It's a good thing 
the Lord is helping us." 

■ What is this missionary's concern? 

■ If you have had a similar experience, describe how you felt. 

Find Out 

■ What is empathy? 

As you discussed these questions with your companion, perhaps you could Read 

understand this missionary's feelings. You have empathy when you have this 
feeling of understanding. But having empathy is not the same as showing 
empathy. A missionary can show empathy only if he has empathy. 

Showing empathy means telling others that you understand or are trying to 
understand their feelings. If you have had experiences like those of 
investigators, members, or missionaries, share these with them. If you 
haven't, try to understand their situations and express your feelings for them. 

Remember that in showing empathy, you must mean what you say. When 
you express empathy that you do not really feel, you offend people and do 
more harm than good. 

The following is an example of a missionary showing empathy: 

Elder Jacobsen invites Mr. Tucker, an investigator, to come to church. Mr. 

Tucker says, "Well, I don't think I could come to church. Sunday is my only 
day off work, and I don't think I could give it lip." Before discussing Mr. 

Tucker's concern, Elder Jacobsen says, "I think I understand what you are 
saying. We have one day during the week that I guess you could call our day 
off. I know I sure look forward to that. It's important to have some time to 
relax, isn't it?" 

u 


67 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The missionary in this example listened to Mr. Tucker's feelings. He then 
showed empathy by telling Mr. Tucker that he understood his situation. 


Read the following situations, and decide whether the missionaries show 
empathy. Discuss your answers with your companion. 


Situation 1 

The sisters returned to teach Karen the third discussion and asked her about 
her experiences with prayer. She said, "I'm sorry. I didn't try to pray. It's 
hard for me." 


Missionary A: Karen, I want you to know that prayer is very important. It's 
the only way we have of talking with our Heavenly Father. 

If you don't pray, then you . . . 

Missionary B: I see that prayer is not an easy thing for you. To tell you the 
truth, there are times when I find it hard to pray, too. 
Perhaps we could . . . 


Missionary C: Thanks for letting us know that you find praying difficult, 
but you really need to take time to do it. Prayer is 
important, and it's the only way you will come to know 
that . . , 


Situation 2 

The missionaries visit Brother Young, a member. He says, "I would really like 
to help you by getting someone for you to teach, but asking my friends 
scares me to death. It's hard to talk to someone about the Church. Give me 
some time to think about it." 

Missionary A: Brother Young, you are a wonderful member of the Church 
and one of the nicest people in this ward. I'm sure that you 
will influence many people with your testimony of the 
gospel. 

Missionary B: Brother Young, sharing the gospel is one of our most 

important responsibilities as members. That's how we help 
others to feel the happiness we feel. I'm sure the Lord will 
bless you if you'll just try. 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to show 
empathy? 


Discuss 

■ When have you showed empathy 
in the past? 

■ How has doing this helped you 
build a relationship of trust with 
someone? 


Read 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

* Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary shows empathy. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Answers: In "A," the missionary 
bears testimony but does not show 
empathy. In "B," the missionary 
shows empathy because she 
acknowledges that prayer is hard 
sometimes and that she has 
difficulties herself. In "C," the 
missionary thanks Karen but does 
not show empathy. 


Answers: In "A," the missionary 
expresses confidence in the member 
but does not show empathy. In "B," 
the missionary bears testimony of 
missionary work but does not show 
empathy. In "C," the missionary 
shows empathy by trying to put 
himself in the place of the member 
and share his feelings. 


68 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary C: It's not always easy to share the gospel, that's for sure. 

Sometimes all of us feel a little afraid of talking about the 
Church with our friends. I guess we treasure the gospel so 
much, and we're afraid our friends will turn us down. 

Listen to the audiotape segments for "Building Relationships of Trust: Show Listen and Discuss 

Empathy." 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him respond by showing 
empathy. 

■ Discuss whether he showed 
empathy and why he did or did 
not. 

Practice showing empathy by responding to the following situations. Do not 

spend time trying to resolve concerns. Just practice showing empathy. 

1. When you ask an investigator if he has received answers to his prayers, he 
says, "Last night I asked God to let me know if what you have been telling 
me is true. Well, this feeling came over me that I've never felt before. I just 
felt great all over." 

2. As you arrive for a teaching appointment, an investigator says, "I'm sorry, 
but I can't keep our appointment this evening. My son is sick, and I have 
to take him to the doctor." 

3. After reading a letter from home, your companion says, "Wow! My brother 
made the varsity basketball team. He really seems excited. I'd love to see 
him play." 

4. A missionary says, "I've been sleeping in lately. I feel guilty about it, but 
it's because I haven't felt well. Something's wrong with my stomach. I 
have these pains and cramps sometimes. I don't quite know what to do 
about it." 

5. A member says, "I don't know if you are aware, but I'm in the elders 
quorum presidency. That calling really takes a lot of time. I'd like to help 
you more with missionary work, but right now it's hard. With my Church 
job and my family and my work, I can barely keep everything going." 

6. An investigator says, "I'm sorry, but I just don't think we can come to 
church on Sunday. My new job requires me to work late at night, and I 
hardly get to see my family — maybe another time." 

7. A member says, "I know that missionary work is important, and I want to 
be involved. It's just so hard for me to talk to my friends about the 
Church." 

8. An investigator says, "I like what you've told me about your Church, but 
I'll be honest with you. The part about Joseph Smith seeing God is a little 
hard to believe." 

9. After you invite an investigator to pray, he says, "No, I'm sorry. Praying in 
front of people would embarrass me. I don't even like to speak publicly." 

With your companion, select two investigators with whom you are now Read and Discuss 

working, and answer the following questions: 

■ What are the beliefs or habits of these investigators? 

■ Which of these beliefs or habits are not consistent with the gospel? 

■ How hard will it be for the investigators to change these beliefs or habits 
and accept new ones? 

■ How can you show empathy to them? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about how 
important it is to show empathy. 


69 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


■ Share an experience from your 
missionary work in which you 
showed empathy to someone and 
helped them. 


Find Out 

■ Why does showing empathy help 
you to build relationships of trust? 

■ How does showing empathy 
prepare people to feel the Spirit? 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this section 

by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three specific situations in which 
you could show empathy. 

■ Write a goal to show empathy to the people in these situations. Carry this 
goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today. 
Select three specific situations in 
which your companion could show 
empathy. 

■ Invite your companion to write a 
goal to show empathy in these 
situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write the goal to help your 
companion show empathy in three 
situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to show empathy. 
Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


Conclusion 


The principles presented in this lesson will help you build relationships of Read 

trust with nonmembers, members, and other missionaries. Remember that 

you are not selling the gospel or just telling an important message. You are 

helping people feel the Spirit so that they will want to keep commitments. As 

they do, they will find happiness and be able to return to live with their 

Heavenly Father. The Savior gives us the perfect example to follow. He 

showed perfect love toward all of God's children. 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Folloiv Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
used in building relationships of 
trust. 


70 


STUDY RECORD 


Date Time Spent Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Become Acquainted" 

Become acquainted with three 

new individuals or families. 


“Build on Common Beliefs" 

Build on common beliefs in three 
finding or teaching situations. 


"Show Empathy" 

Show empathy in three finding 
or teaching situations. 


71
