HELP OTHERS FEEL AND 
RECOGNIZE THE SPIRIT 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in helping others feel and 
recognize the Spirit. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


The purpose of this chapter is to increase your ability to help others feel and Read 
recognize the' influence of the Holy Ghost. As people feel the Spirit and obey 
gospel principles, they can come unto Christ through baptism. Begin your 
Study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply the 
principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used in helping others feel and recognize 
the Spirit. This chapter will discuss the following: 


1. Bear Testimony 74 

2. Share Experiences 77 

3. Identify the Influence of the Holy Ghost 82 


Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

4. Give blessings as God's authorized servants 

5. Read scriptures 

6. Sing Church hymns 

Discuss 

■ What are other ways to help 
others feel and recognize the 
Spirit? 


o 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that would help others to Read and Discuss 
feel and recognize the Spirit. Discuss these with your companion and list 
them below: 


7. 


8 . 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 


72 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 


Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. Helping 
others feel and recognize the Spirit is an important part of the preparation 
stage. 

Find Out 

■ How does helping others to feel 
and recognize the Spirit relate to 
the commitment pattern? 


President Ezra Taft Benson said: "If there is one message I have repeated to 
my brethren of the Twelve it is that it's the Spirit that counts. It is the Spirit 
that matters. I do not know how often I have said this, but I never tire of 
saying it — it is the Spirit that matters most" (mission presidents' seminar, 3 
Apr. 1985). 

To illustrate how important the Spirit is in missionary work, read the 
following comment from a recent convert: "When I got to know the 
missionaries, I could feel that there was something special about them. I 
remember wishing that I could be like them. It was a really strong feeling. It 
was easy for me to think about God when they were around. I know now 
that the Holy Ghost made me feel like I did." 


Read 


Discuss 

■ Why is the Spirit essential in 
missionary work? 


Scripture Activity Read and Discuss 

Read the following scriptures and discuss the answers to the questions. 

Acts 2:37-38 

■ How did the people feel about Peter's teachings? 

■ What did the Holy Ghost do? 

Mosiah 5:1-2 

■ What effect did the Spirit of the Lord have upon the people? 

Luke 24:15-16, 30-32 

■ How did the Spirit testify of Christ? 

In this chapter you will study sections on praying, bearing testimony, sharing 
experiences, and identifying the influence of the Holy Ghost. Each of these 
principles will enable you to help others feel and recognize the Spirit. 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 


73 


BEAR TESTIMONY 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Bearing testimony is one of the most powerful ways to help others feel the Read and Discuss 

Spirit. As you testify, the Holy Ghost can witness to them that what you 
have said is true. The purpose of bearing your testimony is to invite the Spirit 
into the discussion and to testify of the truth. 

Find Out 

■ Why is it important to bear 
testimony? 

While bearing your testimony, do not use words that only Church members Read 
understand. Many investigators do not understand terms like "bear 
testimony," "exaltation," and "beyond a shadow of a doubt." Read the 
following examples. 


Less Effective 

"I want to bear you my testimony 
that revelation is on earth and 
teaches mortal man all that is 
needed for exaltation. I know this 
with every fiber of my being . " 


Less Effective 

"Mr. Fox, after hours of study and 
prayer, I have received personal 
revelation that we should eat meat 
only in times of winter and that 
hunting animals is an evil practice." 


Effective 

"God does speak to a prophet on 
the earth. God tells his prophet all 
that we need to do to return to 
Him." 


Effective 

"As I have kept the Word of 
Wisdom, the Lord has blessed me 
with his Spirit. I have come to 
realize that this commandment is 
true." 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these two testimonies? 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What is a simple testimony? 

■ What words do Church members 
often use in their testimonies that 
could be confusing to 
nonmembers? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 

■ Was the testimony in the less 
effective example related to the 
subject? 


In the less effective example, the missionary used words like "bear you my 
testimony," "exaltation," and "every fiber of my being." These terms are 
unfamiliar and confusing to most nonmembers. The testimony in the effective 
example is simple and direct, and the missionary used words that the 
investigator could easily understand. 


You should testify of what you are teaching, rather than of something 
unrelated or personal. Be sure to maintain an equal relationship with your 
investigators. Do not share your testimony in a way that sounds as if you are 
better than they are. 

A missionary has just finished teaching the Word of Wisdom to the 
investigator and is going to bear his testimony. Read the following examples 
of how he could do this. 


74 


LEARNER 

In the less effective example, the missionary's testimony about eating meat 
and hunting was personal and did not relate to teaching the Word of 
Wisdom. Also, his statement about "hours of study" and receiving "personal 
revelation" did not maintain an equal relationship. The testimony in the 
effective example, however, was humble and related to the subject. 


Read the following situations, and decide which missionary effectively bears 
testimony. Discuss your answers with your companion. 


Situation 1 

You are teaching the Williams family about the Book of Mormon. They seem 
receptive and promise to read the assigned pages. 

Missionary A: By reading the Book of Mormon and praying about it, I have 
come to realize that this book is God's word. 

Missionary B: I bear you my solemn witness that the Book of Mormon is 
the word of God. 


Missionary C: You need to know, as I know, that the Book of Mormon is 
holy writ from inspired servants of God. 

Missionary D: Brother Williams, the Book of Mormon is the word of God. 


Situation 2 

James Kelly just accepted the invitation to be baptized and is looking forward 
to his baptismal date. 

Missionary A: James, baptism is a sacred ordinance that only those of us 
who have been authorized by Christ can perform. Heavenly 
Father is pleased with your decision to join the true Church 
by being baptized by one who holds the proper authority. I 
assure you that God will recognize your baptism into this 
Church. 


Missionary B: James, your decision to be baptized is the best decision you 
have ever made! I'm confident that baptism is a true 
commandment. By being baptized you will be leaving the 
wicked world behind as you enter into the Lord's true 
kingdom here on earth. 


TRAINER 
Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ How can a testimony that relates 
to the subject help an investigator 
to feel the Spirit? 

■ What does it mean to maintain an 
equal relationship when bearing 
testimony? 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary effectively bears 
testimony. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Answer: "A" is an effective 
testimony. It is short and it relates 
to the subject. "B" uses the words 
"solemn witness," which 
investigators may not understand. 
"C" uses the words "holy writ" and 
"inspired servants" and creates an 
unequal relationship with the words, 
"You need to know, as I know." 

"D" is an effective testimony. 


75 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

Missionary C: James, we are glad that you have decided to be baptized and 
that you feel so good about it. Baptism is a sacred and true 
commandment of God, and he will bless you for your 
obedience. 

Missionary D: Congratulations, James. When I was baptized I felt that God 
approved of my decision. I felt good all over. I know that 
baptism is a true commandment. 

Answers: "A" and "B" do not 
maintain an equal relationship and 
use unfamiliar words. "C" is an 
effective testimony because it is 
simple and direct. "D" is an 
effective testimony because it 
maintains an equal relationship and 
is simple and direct. 

Bearing your testimony can help an investigator when he has difficulty 
believing what you are teaching. Be sure to bear testimony whenever you feel 
you need the Holy Ghost to bear witness of the truth of what you teach. 
Remember the following when you bear your testimony: 

Read 

■ Avoid words that nonmembers will not undetstand. 

■ Bear a simple testimony that is related to the subject. 

Discuss 

■ What are the purposes of bearing 
your testimony? 

■ What can you do to bear your 
testimony more effectively? 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today. Select three specific finding or teaching 
situations in which you could bear testimony. 

■ Write a goal to bear your testimony in each situation. Carry this goal with 
you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 

Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today. 
Select three specific finding or 
teaching situations in which your 
companion could bear testimony. 

■ Invite your companion to write a 
goal to bear his testimony in these 
situations. 

Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion bear testimony. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, identify 
opportunities to bear testimony. 
Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


76 


SHARE EXPERIENCES 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to bear his testimony in three 
situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how bearing testimony 
helped others to recognize the 
Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

When you share religious experiences with others, you help them to feel the Read and Discuss 
Spirit and to feel closer to you. These experiences could include how you 
gained a testimony or how you received direction from the Holy Ghost. 

Always tell about experiences that will help your investigators understand the 
gospel and uplift them in some way. 

Find Out 

■ Why is it helpful to share 
experiences with investigators? 


Discuss 

■ What experiences have you shared 
with investigators in the past few 
days? 


Elder Bruce R. McConkie said the following about sharing personal Read and Discuss 

experiences: "Perhaps the perfect pattern ... is to teach what is found in the 

scriptures and then to put a seal of living reality upon it by telling a similar 

thing that has happened in our dispensation and to our people and — most 

ideally — to us as individuals" ("The How and Why of Faith-promoting 

Stories/' New Era, July 1978, pp. 4-5). 

The following is an example of a missionary telling an experience that he had 
with prayer: "I was having difficulty receiving answers to my prayers, and I 
decided to turn to the Book of Mormon for help. I read about Enos and 
realized that I could get answers to my prayers if I really prayed as he did. I 
have never prayed all day, but I have tried to pray with the sincerity of Enos. 

I feel that my prayers have improved because I feel closer to God, and I feel 
more of his influence in my life." 

When you are sharing experiences, be simple, clear, and direct. Share only 
those parts of the experience that relate to the subject and will uplift the 
investigator. Use words that the investigators will understand. Do not share 
past transgressions, even if you are trying to help a person who is having 
problems that you have had. 

Consider the following examples of sharing experiences. 


Less Effective 

"You know, when I was about 
eighteen years old, I wanted to 
know why my parents married 

O outside of the temple. They told me 
that I should marry in the temple, 
yet they didn't get married in the 


Effective 

"I remember that when I was a little 
boy, I asked my dad about the 
purpose of life. He told me that 
more than anything he wanted to 
live a good life so that he could be 
with Christ and with my mom and 


77 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


temple at first. They got married in us kids forever. He said that eternal 

the temple when I was twelve. I still marriage was so important to him 

remember going to the temple with because it made this desire possible. 

my family and wearing white. Come My father helped me to believe that 

to find out, my parents were worthy families are an important part of life 

to be married in the temple, but my and that they can be together 

dad's grandparents were not forever." 

members of the Church. My dad 

really loved his grandparents 

because he used to spend summers 

with them when he was a boy. They 

had a farm, and dad would help 

milk the cows. Dad wanted his 

grandparents to attend the wedding, 

but you have to be a member to go 

into the temple. So, my parents got 

married by the justice of the peace 

first. They planned to marry in the 

temple, but when dad lost his job 

and stopped paying tithing, he was 

unworthy to go to the temple. My 

family started paying tithing when I 

was eleven years old, and then we 

went to the temple just one year 

later." 


In the less effective example, the missionary shared past transgressions of his 
family — his parents were not married in the temple, and his family didn't 
pay tithing. The missionary also gave too many unnecessary details — his age 
and how his dad milked cows in the summer for his grandparents. In the 
effective example, the missionary was direct and clear, and he did not reveal 
past transgressions. He explained how the experience helped him gain a 
testimony of the purpose of life and the eternal nature of families. 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Why is it important to use words 
that nonmembers can understand 
when sharing an experience? 

■ Why is it important to tell only 
important information? 


When you share your own experiences, you encourage others to share theirs. Read 
As investigators share experiences, they begin to see how the Lord has 
helped them. The following is an example of how you could encourage 
someone to share an experience. Read the missionary's part, and have your 
companion read the part of the investigator. 

Missionary: How did you feel yesterday when you went all day without 

smoking? 

Investigator: Well, it was different. After all. I've smoked for twenty years 
now. 

Missionary: What did you do to keep from smoking? 

Investigator: I chewed a lot of gum and tried to keep busy by working in 
my shop. 

Missionary: We encouraged you to pray for strength. How did prayer 

help? 


78 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


(' ) Investigator: I must admit that I was a bit skeptical about praying for help 

to stop smoking. However, it did help. 

Missionary: Mr. Evans, we are grateful that you found strength through 

praying. We were praying for you, too. Would you tell us 
what happened as you prayed? 

Investigator: It's sort of silly sounding. I'd really rather not go into detail. 

Missionary: We understand that sometimes it's difficult to talk about 

prayers and religious things, but we really would like to hear 
about your experience. 

Investigator: Well, I suppose it would be all right since you're missionaries. 

I felt a little unsure about asking God for help to stop smoking 
when I hadn't prayed for so long. But you know, when I was 
out in my shop I just prayed to God as if he were my 
neighbor. I asked him for help to stop smoking, and I got a 
tingle over my whole body. I knew that he would help me 
and that he really would like me to stop smoking. 

Missionary: Thank you for sharing that experience with us, Mr. Evans. 


In the example, the missionary continued to ask the investigator questions to 
help him share his experience. The investigator hesitated at first, but the 
missionary showed empathy and continued to encourage him. After the 
investigator shared his experience, the missionary thanked him warmly. 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionary help the 
investigator to share his 
experience? 

■ What did the missionary do when 
the investigator did not want to 
share his experience? 

■ Why is it important to encourage 
investigators to share their 
experiences? 

Read and Discuss 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary effectively shares 
experiences and encourages 
someone to share an experience. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same with the following 
responses. 


Read the following situations, and decide whether the missionaries effectively 
share experiences and encourage investigators to share experiences. Discuss 
the answers with your companion. 


Situation 1 

You are teaching the Collins family about the Book of Mormon. You want 
them to understand how important this book of scripture has been in your 
life. 


Missionary A: Joseph Smith only had a third-grade education, and I doubt 
he could have written this book. The Book of Mormon 


mentions cement and highways, and most scholars didn't 
know until a few years ago that the ancient inhabitants of the 
Americas had such things. Evidence like this has helped me to 
know that the Book of Mormon is true. 


79 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary B: The Book of Mormon has been a source of spiritual 

regeneration to me ever since I began reading it. I gained my 
testimony by reading this sacred book. I know that you, too, 
will gain a testimony of the divine origin of this record as you 
read it. 

Missionary C: I have found that as I study the Book of Mormon, I feel closer 
to God. In high school, a friend of mine was a member of 
another church. We would talk a lot about religion and our 
differing beliefs. Because of our discussion, I had to find out if 
the Book of Mormon was true. Through praying and reading 
the Book of Mormon, I received an answer from God. Even 
now, I feel God's direction as I study this book of scripture. 

Situation 2 

You are teaching Mark Heaton, a college student, about the Word of 
Wisdom. Mark says, "Living here on campus isn't really what you would call 
living a Christian life-style. It would be hard to stop drinking and partying." 

Missionary A: What you said reminds me of an experience that I had. I was 
reading in the Bible about the crucifixion of Christ, and I felt 
an overwhelming witness of the Spirit that Jesus died for my 
sins. I don't want to disappoint him by not living the Word of 
Wisdom. 

Missionary B: I have been in similar kinds of situations, Mark. I played on 
the high school football team, and all the players would go to 
parties after each game. They would drink beer and play 
poker all night. There were just a few of us who didn't go to 
the parties. The team players teased us so much that the other 
guys finally gave in and started going. By the end of the 
season, I was the only one who wouldn't go. After the season 
was over, several players told me that they respected me for 
my standards. 

Missionary C: Let me read to you what the Lord told Nephi [missionary 
reads 1 Nephi 3:7]. Nephi had faith to do what God 
commanded even when it was difficult. I know that when I 
have faith to keep the commandments, God blesses me. All 
you have to do is have faith that God will bless you, and he 
will. Besides, you may influence some of your friends to do 
what is right. 

Situation 3 

You are teaching Mark and Catherine the first principle of the first 
discussion. You feel it is appropriate to ask them to share an experience that 
they have had with God. 

Missionary A: Mark, we have shared spiritual experiences that we have had 
with God. Have you had any spiritual experiences with God 
that you could share? 

Missionary B: Catherine, we noticed that you seemed impressed as we 
shared our feelings about God. What feelings do you have 
about God that you could share with us? 

Missionary C: Many nonmembers have not had a lot of experiences with 

God unless they are really religious people. You two seem to 
be religious. Can you think of any experiences that you can 
tell us about? 

Missionary D: You mentioned earlier that certain events had helped you 
know that there is a God. Will you share with us some of 
your experiences? 


o 


Answer: "A" is not an experience 
but rather an attempt to prove that 
the Book of Mormon is true. "B" 
uses words that nonmembers may 
not understand. "C" is a good 
personal experience. It relates to the 
subject, uplifts the investigator, and 
uses language that a nonmember 
can understand. 


o 

Answer : "A" is an experience that 
does not relate to the subject. "B" is 
a good experience. It relates to the 
subject and uses language that the 
investigator can understand. In "C," 
the missionary uses a scripture but 
does not share an experience. He 
does not maintain an equal 
relationship. 


Answer: "A" uses the words 
"spiritual experiences," which 
investigators may not understand. 
"B" is an effective example because 
it is direct and uses words and ideas 
that investigators can understand. 
"C" does not maintain an equal 
relationship. "D" is effective because 
the missionary refers to a previous 
comment and asks a simple, direct 
question. 


80 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him respond by relating an 
experience. 

■ Discuss whether his response was 
appropriate and why it was or was 
not. 


Collect experiences that you can use in your teaching. Begin to do this by 
responding to at least three of the following situations. If you cannot think of 
experiences for each situation, try to have experiences that you could share. 
Do not try to resolve concerns in this exercise. Just practice relating 
experiences. 

1. How did you learn that the Book of Mormon is the word of God? 

2. How did you learn that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God? 

3. What helped you decide to go on a mission? 

4. How do you know that the Word of Wisdom is a true commandment? 

5. How did you feel after you were baptized and confirmed a member of the 
Church? 

6. How did you learn that the modern-day prophet and Apostles are called 
of God? 

7. How did you learn that the Bible is God's word? 

8. How does Heavenly Father answer your prayers? 

9. How do you know when the Holy Ghost is telling you that something is 
true? 

10. How did you gain an appreciation for the atonement of Jesus Christ? 


Find Out 

■ How can collecting experiences 
help in your missionary work? 

■ What can you do to collect 
experiences? 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned by doing the 

following: 

■ Review your schedule for today. Select three specific finding or teaching 
situations in which you can share experiences and encourage others to 
share experiences. 

■ Write a goal to share experiences and encourage others to share experiences 
in these situations. Carry this goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Help your companion identify 
three specific situations in which 
he can share experiences and 
encourage others to share 
experiences. 

■ Invite your companion to share 
experiences and encourage others 
to share experiences in these 
situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion share experiences and 
encourage others to share 
experiences. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to share experiences. 
Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


81 


IDENTIFY THE INFLUENCE OF THE HOLY GHOST 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to share experiences and 
encourage others to share 
experiences in three situations. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how sharing experiences 
helped others recognize the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

The Holy Ghost bears witness of God and Christ and testifies of truth. The Read 

investigators you teach may feel the Spirit without recognizing its 
promptings. Your responsibility is to recognize the promptings of the Spirit 
and to help others identify and understand what they are feeling. 

Discuss 

■ Can you think of a recent situation 
in which you were able to identify 
the influence of the Holy Ghost? 


Scripture Activity 

Read the following scriptures with your companion, and discuss the answers 
to the questions. 

John 14:26; 15:26 

■ What is the role of the Comforter (Holy Ghost)? 

■ Of whom does the Holy Ghost bear witness? 

Doctrine and Covenants 8:2-3 

■ How does the Holy Ghost reveal God's will? 

■ How can you use this scripture to help investigators? 

1 Samuel 3:3-10 

■ Who helped Samuel recognize that the Lord was calling him? 

■ How can you help your investigators as Eli helped Samuel? 

Find Out 

■ What are the roles of the Holy 
Ghost? 

■ What is your role in helping others 
recognize the influence of the Holy 
Ghost? 

Share Feelings 

■ Relate an experience in which the 
Holy Ghost helped you in your 
missionary work. 

Encourage investigators to express how they feel before you tell them that Read and Discuss 

they are feeling the Spirit. This will help them understand what they are 
feeling. It will also make it easier for you to tell them that what they feel is 
the Spirit of the Lord. 


82 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


When you sense that your investigator is feeling the Spirit, you should tell 
him what he is feeling, as in this example. 


Missionary: Mr. Carter, I want you to know that we are children of God. 

He sent us here to earth to prove ourselves and prepare to 
return to him. How do you feel about the idea that God sent 
us here to earth and gave us a plan so that we could return 
to him? 


Investigator: Well, to tell you the truth, I always thought that there was 

more to life than just going to work and paying the bills. I 
have never heard of a specific plan from God, though. 

Missionary: I'm glad you feel that there is more to life than just trying to 

make ends meet. Brother Carter, it has been a pleasure to 
share these truths with you tonight. How have you felt 
about the things we have discussed? 


Investigator: What you are saying seems right. I have never been taught 

that God has a specific plan for us. That idea feels good. 

Missionary: What do you mean when you say that it feels good? 

Investigator: Well, it's hard to describe. But as we talked tonight, I 

noticed that I felt calm and relaxed — not my usual nervous 
self. Also, what you had to say seemed to make sense. It felt 
right. 


Missionary: 

o 


Brother Carter, I have felt the same peaceful feelings here 
tonight. The feeling of calmness and the feeling that what 
we taught is right are promptings from our Heavenly Father. 
The Holy Ghost is witnessing to you that what you have 
learned tonight is true. 


Discuss 


■ How did the missionary encourage 
the investigator to share how he 


felt? 


The missionary asked a question that began, "How do you feel . . . ?" This Read and Discuss 

question helped Brother Carter begin to think about his feelings. The 
missionary then asked, "How have you felt about the things we have 
discussed?" This, too, helped Brother Carter to share his feelings. 

Take a few moments to think about times in your life when you have felt the 
Spirit. Use the following items to help you remember these times. 

■ Praying 

■ Singing hymns 

■ Attending a baptismal service 

■ Reading the scriptures 

■ Hearing or bearing testimony 

■ Doing temple work 

■ Having a child born into the family 

■ Talking with a friend about the Church 

■ Talking with your parents 

■ Receiving counsel from a Church leader 

Ask yourself: How can remembering these experiences help you identify the 
promptings of the Spirit for investigators? 


83 


LEARNER 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today. Select three specific finding or teaching 
situations in which you can identify the Spirit for an investigator. 

■ Write a goal to identify the Spirit in these situations. Carry this goal with 
you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, discuss what went well and how you could improve. 


TRAINER 


Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today, 
and identify three specific finding 
or teaching situations in which 
your companion can identify the 
Spirit for investigators. 

■ Invite your companion to identify 
the Spirit in these situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion identify the Spirit for 
investigators in three situations 
today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to identify the Spirit 
for investigators. Discuss how you 
and your companion are doing. 


Conclusion 

The principles presented in this lesson will enable you to help others feel and Read and Discuss 

recognize the Spirit of the Lord in their lives. The people you teach will 

eventually feel the Spirit as they sincerely pray to know the truth and listen 

to your message and humble testimony. When you sense that others are 

feeling the Spirit, tell them what they are feeling and help them understand 

it. This may be the first time they have felt it. Remember the counsel of 

President Ezra Taft Benson: "It is the Spirit that matters most" (mission 

presidents' seminar, 3 Apr. 1985). 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to Invite 

improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this ■ Invite your companion to write 

chapter often for suggestions and help. goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
used in helping others to feel and 
recognize the Spirit. 


84 


STUDY RECORD 


Date 


Time Spent 


Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Bear Testimony" 

Bear testimony in at least three 

situations. 


"Share Experiences" 

Share personal experiences and 

O invite others to share 

experiences in at least three 
situations. 

"Identify the Influence of the 
Holy Ghost" 

Help investigators understand 
that they are feeling the 
Holy Ghost in at least three 
situations.
