PRESENT THE MESSAGE 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in presenting the message. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


The purpose of this chapter is to help you improve your ability to present 
gospel messages. By studying this chapter, you will learn to present the 
discussions and other messages in an effective and spiritual way. Begin your 
study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply the 
principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used in presenting the message. This 
chapter will discuss the following: 


1. Present with Faith 88 

2. Present the Message Clearly 92 

3. Personalize the Message 96 


Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

4. Present correct doctrine 

5. Use audiovisual aids effectively 


Read 


Discuss 

■ What are other ways to effectively 
present the message? 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that would help in Read and Discuss 

presenting messages. Discuss these with your companion and list them 

below: 


6 . 

7. 

8 . 


86 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 


Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. Presenting 
the message is an important part of the preparation stage. 

Find Out 

■ How does presenting the message 
relate to the commitment pattern? 

The Lord told his missionaries to teach by the Spirit of truth so that "he that Read 

preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are 

edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:22). You should teach the gospel 

simply and directly and by the power of the Spirit. As you do, those you 

teach will be able to gain a testimony of the gospel message, develop faith, 

repent, and want to come unto Christ. 

Find Out 

■ What can you do to help those 
you teach gain a testimony? 

This chapter focuses on the following ways to help you present the message: Read 

present with faith, present the message clearly, and personalize the message. 

As you do these things, you will help people want to come unto Christ. 

Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 


87 


PRESENT WITH FAITH 


LEARNER 

The Apostle Paul said, "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the 
evidence of things not seen" (Hebrews 11:1). Presenting the message with 
faith means to have hope and confidence that those you teach will open their 
hearts, feel the Spirit of the Lord, and believe the gospel. It also means 
believing that those you teach will accept the commitments that lead to 
conversion and baptism. As you present your message with faith, the Lord 
will bless you with his Spirit. You will know that you are teaching the truth. 


To present a message with faith, present the doctrines as facts and avoid 
negative phrases. Consider the following examples: 


Less Effective 

"I am pretty sure that Joseph Smith 
is, or was, a Prophet of God." 


"We think that baptism is very 
important." 


"I've been a member of the Church 
for almost four years now. The 
gospel is the best thing that I have 
come across so far." 


Effective 

"Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God." 


"To enter the kingdom of heaven, 
we must be baptized and become 
members of the Church of Jesus 
Christ." 


"The Lord has testified that this is 
'the only true and living church 
upon the face of the whole earth' 
(D&C 1:30). I know that this is 
true." 


The less effective examples contain words that show doubt, such as "pretty 
sure," "think," and "best thing so far." The effective examples contain words 
that show confidence in the doctrines, such as "I know" and "we must." 
These examples are statements of fact rather than opinion. 


To present a message with faith, you must not apologize for teaching 
someone the gospel of Jesus Christ. Consider the following examples: 


Less Effective 

"I'm really sorry for taking so much 
of your time. We were not looking 
at our watches. I hope you'll forgive 
us." 


Effective 

“We appreciate you allowing us to 
take the time to share this message 
with you. I feel that you realize how 
much it means to us." 


88 


TRAINER 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What does it mean to present a 
message with faith? 

■ Why is doing this important? 

Read 


Discuss 

* What is the difference between 
these examples? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 

Read 


Find Out 

■ How can using positive words help 
you present a message with faith? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


( 1 "If we would have known that "We can sense that your family 

teaching you would have caused doesn't want you to learn about the 

such contention in your family, we gospel. I know that investigating the 

wouldn't have been so persistent. Church is the right thing to do. We 

We are really sorry." are sorry that your family doesn't 

feel good about your desires." 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 

In the less effective examples, the missionaries said they were sorry for taking Read and Discuss 

an investigator's time and for causing contention. In the effective examples, 

one missionary thanked the investigators for their time and for allowing him 

to share an important message. The other missionary acknowledged the 

problem and expressed empathy. However, he did not say he was sorry for 

having taught the investigator the gospel. 

At times, people may not agree with the doctrines or principles you teach. 

Respect the right of each investigator to believe as he desires. There is no 
place in teaching the gospel for contention or arguing. When you avoid 
contention and arguing, you help to maintain an environment in which the 
Spirit can work. Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: 

"The gospel is one of peace, harmony, unity, and agreement. In it argument 
and debate are supplanted by discussion and study. Those who have the 
Spirit do not hang doggedly to a point of doctrine or philosophy for no other 
reason than to come off victorious in a disagreement. Their purpose, rather, 
is to seek the truth by investigation, research, and inspiration" ( Mormon 
Doctrine, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 161). 

o Scripture Activity 

Read the scriptures below and discuss the questions that follow. 

3 Nephi 11:29-30 

■ Who is the father of contention? 

■ Why is it important to avoid contention? 

4 Nephi 1:2, 13, 15, IS 

■ Why was there no contention in the land? 

■ What was the result of having no contention or disputations among the 
people? 

Find Out 

■ How can avoiding contention help 
you present a message with faith? 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a passage to him while he 
follows along. 

■ Have him underline places where 
the missionaries present their 
message with faith. 

■ Ask him to answer the questions 
at the end of the passage. 

■ Do the same for the following 
passage. 

( j Consider the following example of Elder Meyer and Elder James presenting 
their message with faith. While reading the example, try to find and 
underline places where the missionaries do the following things. 


89 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


■ Present the doctrines as facts. 

• Do not apologize for teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. 

■ Avoid contention and arguing. 

Elder Meyer and Elder James are teaching John and Suzanne Linford the first 
discussion. After becoming acquainted and creating a friendly feeling. Elder 
Meyer feels impressed to begin the discussion. He says, "Our message today 
is true. We would like you to try sincerely to find out whether it is true." The 
missionaries begin with a word of prayer and then teach the first principle. 

At the end of the first principle. Elder James says, "John and Suzanne, God 
lives. He is my Heavenly Father, and I love him with all my heart. Suzanne, 
how do you feel about God?" 

"I believe in God and feel that he is near." 

"Thank you, Suzanne. John, how do you feel about God?" asks Elder James. 

"I'll level with you, Elders; I don't believe in God. People say that there is a 
God and that he is all powerful. Well, if he is so powerful, why doesn't he 
do something about all the wars and all the starvation in the world. You can't 
tell me that there is a God." 

"We appreciate your feelings, John. You have raised a very good question. It 
is hard to know why God allows these things to occur ..." 

"Allows these things to occur! If there is a God, why doesn't he do 
something about them?" exclaims John. 

Discuss the following questions before reading the rest of the example. 

■ How are the missionaries presenting their message with faith? 

■ What would you do next? 

Elder Meyer calmly replies, "John, it's very evident that there is great 
confusion and destruction in the world today. Why do you think these things 
happen?" 

"Now you're asking me? I really don't know. I guess religion has always 
puzzled me because it doesn't seem to answer basic questions. People say 
there is a God, but I watch the news and can't believe it. I don't have 
anything against you two or the Mormon religion, but how can you say that 
you believe in God?" 

Elder James replies, "Our message today is that God lives and that he loves 
you, your wife, and everyone on the earth. Please listen with your heart 
while we share our feelings about God and how we know he lives." 

John looks at Suzanne and then back at Elder James and says, "I'm interested 
in what you have to say. Please continue." 

The missionaries continue teaching the discussion and discuss many aspects 
of the gospel. At the end of the discussion, John and Suzanne agree to read 
the Book of Mormon and pray to know of its truth. 

Before the missionaries leave. Elder Meyers says, "I notice that we have gone 
a few minutes longer than we anticipated. I hope that this has not caused 
any problem. The truths we have shared with you tonight are very 
important. We sincerely appreciate your time." 

Discuss the following question: 

■ How did the missionaries present their message with faith? 

In this section you have learned to present a message with faith by doing the 
following: 

■ Present the doctrines as facts. Be positive and show conviction. 

■ Do not apologize for teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. 

■ Avoid contention and arguing. 


Answer The missionaries presented 
many doctrines as facts, for 
example, "Our message today is 
true," "God lives," and "He is my 
Heavenly Father." The missionaries 
also avoided any argument. 

Read 


Answer : The missionaries continued 
to present the doctrines as facts. 
They did not argue with John's 
feelings about God. They 
acknowledged that they had taken 
more time than planned and 
thanked the Linfords for sharing the 
time with them. 

Read 


90 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

) 

Practice 

■ Read the following investigator 
responses. Prepare to take the part 
of the investigator. 

■ Read an activity to your 
companion. Have him take the 
part of the missionary and present 
the message with faith. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 

Practice presenting a message with faith by doing each of the following 
activities. Take the part of the missionary, and have your companion take the 
part of the investigator. Do not practice resolving concerns. Just practice 
presenting with faith. 


1. Teach the entire first principle of the first discussion. 

Investigator response: When asked 
about God, say kindly, "I have 
thought about it and firmly believe 
there is no God." 

2. Teach the entire second principle of the first discussion. 

Investigator response: When asked 
about your feelings for the Savior, 
say, "I believe that Christ was 
perhaps a good man. But I believe 
that he receives far too much 
recognition. There have been a lot of 
other good people on this earth." 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three specific situations in which 
you will be presenting a message. 

■ Write a goal to present these messages with faith. Carry this goal with you 
during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 

Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today. 
Identify three specific situations in 
which your companion could 
present a message. 

■ Invite your companion to teach 
these messages with faith, 
applying the principles found in 
this section. 


o 


o 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion present messages with 
faith in three situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to present your 
message with faith. Discuss how 
you and your companion are 
doing. 


91 


PRESENT THE MESSAGE CLEARLY 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


To present the message clearly, teach so that investigators are able to 
understand what you are saying. You do not only use words to 
communicate. This section will focus on some things that will help you 
present the message clearly, such as varying your tone of voice, using 
eye-to-eye contact, and using appropriate body language. 

You should vary your tone of voice when you present a message. To do this, 
express your thoughts and feelings clearly, and pronounce your words 
clearly. Be enthusiastic. Vary the speed of your speech or the loudness of 
your voice to show excitement, reverence, or other feelings. Speak calmly 
even if the other person becomes emotional or angry. Avoid using slang or 
talking in ways that may distract others or be inappropriate for a minister of 
the Lord. 


Prepare 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to present the message with 
faith in three situations. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how presenting the 
message with faith helps 
investigators to feel the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Read and Discuss 


Activity 

■ Have your companion practice 
teaching the following paragraph 
of the first discussion six times. 
Each time he should use one of 
the suggested voice characteristics. 
This will help him see the different 
ways in which things can be said. 

■ Discuss the question that follows 
the activity. 


The first paragraph of the first discussion follows. Practice teaching the 
paragraph Six times. Each time you teach, use one of the suggested voice 
characteristics. Discuss with your companion how changing the emotion, 
loudness, or speed of your voice can affect your message. 


Discussion Paragraph 
"Most people believe in a Supreme 
Being, even though they may call 
him by different names. We know 
that God lives. We want to share 
with you our feelings about him" 
(discussion 1, principle 1). 


Voice Characteristics 

1. Loud 

2. Soft 

3. Fast 

4. Slow 

5. Vary the pitch (high and low) 

6. No change in pitch (monotone) 


Discuss 

■ How can varying your tone of 
voice help you present a message 
clearly? 


o 


92 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


C Missionaries who teach effectively and with enthusiasm use a combination of Read 
the voice characteristics just listed. 

While teaching the discussions, talking to someone at a door, or stopping 
someone on the street, it is important to maintain good eye contact with the 
person. When you do this, you show the person that you care about him and 
that what you are saying is important. Don't constantly stare into the other 
person's eyes, but look at him frequently, for a few seconds each time. 

Find Out 

■ How do you maintain good 
eye-to-eye contact? 

Discuss 

■ How could you improve your 
eye-to-eye contact with others? 

Consider the following story shared by a senior companion: Read 

"My companion, Elder Johnson, had been on his mission for two weeks. 

While he was teaching a discussion, I noticed that he rarely looked at our 
investigators. He would occasionally glance over at me but never for more 
than a few seconds. The investigators looked around the room and did not 
concentrate on what he was saying. 

"In companion study the next morning, I asked, 'Elder Johnson, last night 
when we were teaching the Jacobsons, I noticed that it was hard for you to 
look them in the eye. Can you tell me why this was difficult?' Staring at the 
ground, he replied, 'I just find it hard to look people in the eye. Maybe I'm 
not sure that I'm saying the right things. I don't know.' 

"That morning I took some time to help Elder Johnson. We took turns 

O teaching a discussion, concentrating on having good eye-to-eye contact. The 
more we practiced, the better he became. I also noticed that I didn’t look into 
the investigators' eyes as often as I should. I told him that if he would teach 
what is in the discussions and try to look people in the eye, the people 
would be more likely to listen closely to what he was teaching. 

"Elder Johnson seemed to change from that time on. It took some work, but I 
could tell that the people we taught listened more to what he was saying, 
and he even seemed more confident." 

Discuss 

■ What effect did eye-to-eye contact 
have on the investigators? 

■ How did improving eye-to-eye 
contact help this missionary? 

■ How would improving eye-to-eye 
contact help you? 

Use appropriate body language by sitting upright and on the edge of your Read 

chair. Use your hands for expression. Smiling is a simple act, but it 
communicates warmth and genuine love for those you are teaching. Avoid 
gestures that would detract from your message such as tapping your feet or 
bouncing your knee. By sitting properly, using your hands, and smiling, you 
tell others that you care for them and want them to listen to your message. 

Find Out 

■ How can using appropriate body 
language help you present a 
message effectively? 


93 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him underline places where 
the missionaries present the 
message dearly. 

■ Have him explain what principles 
the missionaries use to present the 
message clearly. 

■ Do the same with the following 
situation. 


In the following situations, identify and underline the things the missionaries 
do to present their message clearly. Answer the questions following each 
situation. 


Situation 1 

The elders are invited into the living room and asked to sit down on an old 
sofa. Elder Crandall politely declines the offer and asks Mr. Thomas if he has 
two hardbacked chairs. With a puzzled look on his face, Mr. Thomas says, 
"Sure." Elder Crandall sits on the edge of his chair and begins looking for a 
couple of scriptures. His companion sits down, stretches out his long legs, 
puts his hands in his pockets, and leans back a little in the chair. He rests the 
flip-chart on his leg as though trying to perform a balancing act. 

The missionaries get to know Mr. Thomas and then begin to teach the first 
discussion. Elder Crandall looks at Mr. Thomas and tries to perceive his 
thoughts. His companion rarely looks at Mr. Thomas or even Elder Crandall. 
When he is not teaching, he looks at the flip-chart or the ground or the 
ceiling but rarely into the investigator's eyes. 

Discuss the following questions: 

■ What are the differences between these two missionaries? 

■ What is the body language of Elder Crandall's companion telling you? 

■ Why does Elder Crandall look at Mr. Thomas? 

■ What do you think Mr. Thomas feels about these two missionaries? 

■ How could these missionaries improve? 


Answers: Elder Crandall is using 
appropriate body language and 
trying to maintain good eye contact. 
His eye contact helps him learn how 
Mr. Thomas is receiving the 
message. His companion's body 
language says that he may not really 
care about the investigator or the 
message. 


Situation 2 

As Sister Franks is teaching the fifth principle in discussion 1, she says, "As a 
witness of Christ, Joseph Smith received authority to teach the gospel. He 
also brought forth additional scriptures." 

As soon as she mentions additional scripture, Mr. Peters sits up in his chair, 
leans forward, points with his finger, and says, "Oh, so that's where your 
Book of Mormon came from. Is that what you mean when you say he 
brought forth additional scripture?" 

Leaning forward in her chair and looking at Mr. and Mrs. Peters, Sister 
Franks replies, "That is exactly what we mean, Mr. Peters." 

Mr. Peters then leans back in his chair with his hands behind his head. He is 
doing some deep thinking. He then brings his chair forward and says, "So 
what you're telling me is that a fourteen-year-old boy saw God the Father 
and Jesus Christ and then translated the Book of Mormon from some gold 
plates?" 

Sister Franks warmly replies, "That is exactly what we are saying." 


94 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


^Discuss the following questions: 

■ What did you learn from Mr. Peters's body language? 

■ When Sister Franks leaned forward in her chair, what could that have 
communicated to Mr. Peters? 

■ How would you warmly say, "That is exactly what we are saying"? 


In this section you have learned the following principles: 

■ Speak clearly by varying the tone and speed of your voice. 

■ Use good eye-to-eye contact. 

■ Use appropriate body language to communicate your feelings. 


Practice presenting each of the following messages clearly to your companion. 

1. Tell your companion why you came on a mission. 

2. Present principle 5 of discussion 1. 

3. Present a discussion principle of your choice. 

Teach your companion about faith. 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three specific teaching situations 
in which you can present a message. 

■ Write a goal to present the message clearly in these situations. Carry this 
goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how how you could improve. 


Answers : Mr. Peters's body language 
showed that he was a deep thinker 
and interested in what the sisters 
were saying. Sister Franks 
maintained good eye-to-eye contact 
and leaned forward in her chair. 

This helped Mr. Peters understand 
that she was serious about what she 
was teaching. 


Practice 

■ Have your companion practice 
presenting the following four 
messages clearly. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve in varying his voice, 
maintaining good eye contact, and 
using appropriate body language. 


Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today, 
and identify three specific 
teaching situations in which your 
companion could present a 
message. 

■ Invite him to present the 
message clearly in these 
situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion present the message 
clearly in three situations today. 


■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point 
out opportunities to present the 
message clearly. Discuss how 
you and your companion are 


doing. 


95 


PERSONALIZE THE MESSAGE 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to present the message clearly 
in three situations. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how presenting the 
message clearly helped you 
prepare others to feel the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 


You should personalize your message so that people of different ages, 
backgrounds, and life-styles will understand it. Think about the needs of 
those you teach. Then use the suggestions in this section to personalize your 
message to meet those needs. 

You can better personalize your message if you use the discussion booklets as 
you teach. Experience has shown that investigators do not mind if you refer 
to the discussions. Missionaries who do so are often better teachers. They can 
concentrate on the people they teach and personalize the discussions to fit 
their needs. 


One way to personalize your message is to simplify the words you use. 

Think about the ages of the investigators and how familiar they are with the 
Church. For example, you would teach a thirteen-year-old differently than 
you would an adult. You would approach a non-Christian differently than 
you would a believer in Jesus Christ. You would teach a member different 
things than you would a nonmember. 

Another way to personalize your message is to alter the pace of your 
teaching. When investigators clearly understand the principles being taught, 
you may need to increase the pace of the discussion. To do this, reduce the 
amount of detail that you teach. When investigators need additional 
explanations, you will need to decrease the pace of the discussion. For 
example, if your investigator is familiar with the Church, you do not need to 
spend a lot of time on teachings he understands and may easily accept. Other 
investigators might be hearing about the gospel for the first time and may 
need additional help to understand it. 


Read and Discuss 


Disctiss 

■ Why is it better to refer to the 
discussions as you teach? 

Read 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to personalize 
your message? 


Discuss 

■ How will personalizing your 
message help those you teach? 

Read the following example of how Elder Parker personalized the message by Read 
simplifying the words in principle 3 of discussion 1 to fit the needs of 
nine-year-old Ben. 

Missionary: God chooses righteous men as his witnesses. Ben, what 

does "witness" mean? 


96 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


f ''■|Investigator: 
Missionary: 


Investigator: 

Missionary: 


I don't know. 

A witness is someone who has been asked to tell the truth 
about something. In this case, God has asked special men to 
tell people the truth about him and his plan for us. These 
men are called prophets and Apostles. 

Are you an Apostle? 

No, Ben. We do tell the truth about God, but prophets and 
Apostles are . . . 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionary simplify 
the first discussion to help Ben 
understand? 

■ How did the missionary's effort 
help Ben? 


Read the following example of how Sister Adams changed the pace of 
principle 3 of discussion 3 to personalize the message for her investigator. As 
you read this example, you may wish to follow along in the discussion 
booklet and compare the material there to the example. 


Missionary: 


Investigator: 


Missionary: 


To overcome the effects of this apostasy, God has 
proclaimed his truth to us in our day. He has proclaimed it 
through living prophets, just as he did in Bible times. As we 
explained in our first visit, God the Father and Jesus Christ 
visited Joseph Smith. 

Yes, I remember. In fact, Steve and Karen invited me over to 
their family home evening the other night. We were talking 
about how Jesus told.Joseph Smith not to join any church. 

At first I didn't know whether I could accept this idea. But 
the more I think about it and hear what you teach, the more 
I feel that Christ would have only one church. 

Thank you for sharing your ideas, Jan. Christ does have 
only one church, and he restored it to the earth through 
Joseph Smith. The Prophet Joseph Smith also brought forth 
many other important things to help us know the truth. 
Through him . . . 


Read and Discuss 


Discuss 

■ How did this missionary 
personalize the pace of the 
discussion? 

■ Why did she use this pace? 


The missionary realized that the investigator understood the contents of the 
second paragraph. So she moved forward to the third paragraph. 


J Read the following situation. Decide which missionary best personalizes the 
message by simplifying the words or changing the pace. Read the part of the 
missionary, and have your companion act as the investigator. 


Read 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read the situation to him. 

■ Have him read the missionary's 
part in a response. You read the 
investigator's part. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary effectively personalized 
the message. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


97 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Situation 

The Tonkins have been referred by some members. The missionaries 
contacted the Tonkins and invited them to hear the first discussion. As they 
became acquainted with Mr. and Mrs. Tonkin, they learned that the Tonkins 
already knew a great deal about the Church. 

Missionary Response A 

Missionary: Most people believe in a Supreme Being, even though they 

may call him by different names. We know that God lives. 
We want to share with you our feelings about him. 

Investigator: Yes, both my wife and I believe in God. We have committed 

our lives to him. We look to him as our Father and go to 
him for help in solving our problems. 

Missionary: Good. As you know, God is perfect, all-wise, and 

all-powerful. He is also . . . 


Answer: "A" is not effective because 
the missionary continues with the 
discussion when the investigator 
already believes and understands 
the principle involved. 


Missionary Response B 

Missionary: Most people believe in a Supreme Being, even though they 

may call him by different names. We know that God lives. 
We want to share with you our feelings about him. 

Investigator: Yes, both my wife and I believe in God. We have committed 

our lives to him. We look to him as our Father and go to 
him for help in solving our problems. 

Missionary: Good. We also believe that we are children of our Father in 

Heaven. He has provided a plan that will allow us to return 
to him. Jesus Christ is central to this plan. We would like to 
share our teachings about the divine Sonship of Jesus 
Christ . . . 


Answer: "B" is effective because the 
missionary states that he, too, 
believes in God as his Father. He 
then personalizes the discussion by 
going on to teach principle 2. 


Missionary Response C 

Missionary: Mr. and Mrs. Tonkin, as a result of our conversation, I feel 

that you have a strong belief in God. Is that correct? 

Investigator: Yes, you're right. We both feel that God is our Father and 

that all of our problems can be solved with his help. 

Missionary: Mr. Tonkin, did you know that God has developed a plan 

that will allow us to return to him? 

Investigator: No. I know that God loves us, but I didn't know that he had 

a specific plan. 

Missionary: Well, God wants us to become more like him. He prepared a 

plan that will bring us joy in this life and, later, eternal life 
with him . . . 


Answer: "C" is effective because the 
missionary identifies principles that 
the investigator does not understand 
and continues teaching the 
discussion in the prescribed order. 


Another way to personalize your message is to provide examples and 
illustrations. You can use the examples provided in the discussions, or you 
can create your own. Effective examples and illustrations are brief. They 
clearly relate to the subject and teach correct doctrine. They refer to things 
that the investigator is familiar with. 

Use examples and illustrations when the investigator needs more explanation 
or clarification. Do not use too many, however; use your find-out skills to 
determine when the investigator understands your message. 


Read 


Find Out 

■ How can you make examples and 
illustrations effective? 

■ When should you use examples 
and illustrations? 


98 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


^~^]Compare these two examples. 


Read 


Less Effective 

Investigator: So you are saying that the Book of Mormon supports the 

Bible and that these two books of scripture will help me 
draw closer to Christ. 

Missionary: Exactly. These books work together like hanging a door. You 

wouldn't use only one hinge, would you? 

Investigator: No. 

Missionary: Of course not. You would use two, three, four, or as many 

hinges as you needed to support the door. The Bible is one 
hinge; the Book of Mormon another. We also have other 
scripture — the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of 
Great Price. In fact, there are many other commentaries 
written about Christ that would also serve as hinges to 
firmly establish the truth, like a door with many hinges. 


Effective 

Investigator: So you are saying that the Book of Mormon supports the 

Bible and that these two books of scripture will help me 
draw closer to Christ. 

Missionary: Exactly. Do you feel like you would . . . ? 

Discuss 

■ What are the differences between 
these examples? 

O In the less effective example, the missionary gave an illustration when it was Read and Discuss 
not necessary. He also presented the false idea that commentaries are the 
same as scripture. 

Consider the following example of a missionary giving an example to help 
clarify baptism for the dead. 

Investigator: Baptism for the dead? That is an interesting thought. I don’t 
understand how such a thing is possible. 

Missionary: Let me explain it another way. Have you ever had to do 

something really important for your boss, something he would 
have done himself if he could have? 

Investigator: Yes. Once I made a major presentation to several 

representatives of other companies because my boss was 
seriously ill. 

Missionary: Baptism for the dead is similar. Baptism is an essential 

ordinance. There are many people who are no longer living 
who have not been baptized. They are like your boss who was 
ill and not able to attend the presentation. Just as you 
represented your boss and did the work he was unable to do, 
we represent those who have died and are baptized in their 
behalf. 

Investigator: Oh, I see. So you are the one who actually goes into the water 

for them. Right? 

Missionary: Right. 

Discuss 

■ Was this illustration effective? Why? 


The missionary gave an illustration that referred to things in the investigator's 
life, did not contain unnecessary detail, was related to the subject, and was 
free of false ideas. 


99 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Read the following situation. Decide which missionary effectively uses an 
example or illustration. Read the part of the missionary, and have your 
companion act as investigator. 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read the situation to him. 

■ Have him read the missionary's 
part in a response. You read the 
investigator's part. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary effectively gives an 
example or illustration. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same with the following 
responses. 


Situation 

The missionaries are teaching the Sherman family discussion 3, principle 4. 

After some discussion about the priesthood, Mr. Sherman says, "You have 

said a lot about this priesthood authority, but I don't see why it is so 

important." 

Missionary Response A 

Missionary: That's a good question. Let's suppose that you knew someone 

who had printed some driver's licenses. You decided to use 
one of these licenses instead of going to the driver's license 
bureau. Do you think that a police officer would honor that 
driver's license? 

Investigator: No. 

Missionary: Why not? 

Investigator: Because the person who gave it to you did not have authority 
to give driver's licenses. 

Missionary: That's correct. Similarly, anyone who acts for God must have 

authority from him, or the act is not valid. The priesthood 
gives certain men authority from God to act for him. Without 
it, the actions they take are like the driver's license — invalid. 

Missionary Response B 

Missionary: Well, let me give you an example that will help. One day the 

Apostles were baptizing and giving the Holy Ghost to people. 
A magician named Simon wanted to have the same power the 
Apostles did. Peter told Simon that this gift of God could not 
be purchased with money. Does this help you see why the 
priesthood is important? 

Investigator: I can see that . . . 

Missionary Response C 

Missionary: Thank you for sharing your feelings. Let me explain the 

priesthood in another way. You have mentioned how much 
you enjoy flying remote control airplanes. How would you 
feel if Bobby, without asking your permission, got out your 
planes and tried to fly them? 

Investigator: I would be furious! 

Missionary: Why? 


o 


100 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Because we have a rule in our house that nobody touches 
those planes without my permission. 


Missionary: Priesthood authority is similar. This is God's Church, and he 

has established laws for his children to follow. Just as you 
give your children permission to fly your planes, God gives 
authority to men to act for him. Without this authority, called 
priesthood, we couldn't direct his church. 


Answers: "A" is effective. The 
missionary uses an example that is 
brief, relates to the question, and 
teaches correct doctrine. "B" is not 
effective because the example does 
not relate to the question. "C" is 
effective because the example relates 
to the question and refers to things 
the investigator is familiar with. 


Listen to the audiotape segments for "Present the Message: Personalize the 
Message." 


Practice personalizing your message in the following situations. Do not spend 
time resolving concerns. Just practice simplifying the message, changing the 
pace of the message, and giving examples and illustrations. 


1. You are teaching discussion 2, principle 2. Your investigator is having 
difficulty understanding the Atonement. Give an example or illustration. 

2. Teach your companion discussion 1, principles 1 and 2. As you do, you 
find out that the investigator (your companion) has some close friends who 
are members of the Church. He has had some long conversations with 
them about God and Jesus Christ. Personalize the discussion. 

3. Teach discussion 5, principle 3, on fasting. You are teaching a 
twelve-year-old nonmember, the child of an inactive member. Personalize 
the discussion. 

4. Teach discussion 2, principle 1. You are teaching an adult who sincerely 
wants to learn about the Church but does not understand everything you 
say. Personalize the discussion. 


Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Locate a set of the discussions. 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have your companion respond by 
personalizing the message. Take 
the part of the investigator in each 
situation. 

■ Help your companion understand 
what he did well and what he 
needs to improve. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today. Identify three specific teaching situations 
in which you will be involved. 

■ Write a goal to personalize the message in these situations. Carry this goal 
with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Identify three specific teaching 
situations in which your 
companion could personalize the 
message today, 

■ Invite your companion to write a 
goal to personalize the message in 
these situations. 


101 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion personalize the 
message in three situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to personalize the 
message. Discuss how you and 
your companion are doing. 


Conclusion 

The principles in this chapter will help you present the message of the gospel Read 
to nonmembers. They will help you teach clearly and with faith. They will 
help you personalize your message to meet the needs of those you teach. As 
you do these things, you will prepare others to feel the Spirit and accept 
commitments that will lead them toward baptism. 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
used in presenting the message. 


102 


STUDY RECORD 


Date Time Spent 


Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Present with Faith" 

Present the message with faith in 
at least three teaching situations. 


"Present the Message Clearly" 

O Present the message clearly in at 
least three teaching situations. 


"Personalize the Message" 
Personalize your message in at 
least three teaching situations. 


103
