FIND OUT 


o 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The purpose of this chapter is to help you and your companion improve in 
finding out the thoughts, feelings, and beliefs of others. When you do this 
effectively, you show those you teach that you are genuinely concerned about 
them. They will more likely open their hearts to feel the Spirit of the Lord. 
Begin your study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply 
the principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used to find out what others think and feel. 
This chapter will discuss the following: 

1. Listen 106 

2. Ask Appropriate Questions 110 

3. Ask Additional Questions 115 

Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

4. Rephrase questions 

5. Respond with encouragement 

6. Ask nonjudgmental questions 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that would help in finding 
out. Discuss these with your companion and list them below: 


Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in finding out. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


Discuss 

■ What are other ways to find out 
what others think and feel? 

Read and Discuss 


104 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 


Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. Finding out 
is an important part of the preparation stage. It shows that you sincerely care 
about another person. 

Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ How does finding out relate to the 
commitment pattern? 

As a missionary, you help prepare people to feel the Spirit of the Lord. When Read 
they do, they want to follow the Savior and keep his commandments. When 
you find out people's feelings, beliefs, and intentions, you help prepare them 
to feel the Spirit and make the commitments that lead to conversion. 

A recent convert recently said about the missionaries: "They really seemed 
interested in me. They had a message, but they were not just telling me 
about it. They always wanted to know my feelings about what they were 
telling me and were always willing to listen to my questions. I really enjoyed 
talking to them." 

Discuss 

■ Why is it important to find out 
people's thoughts and feelings? 

■ How did the missionaries' concern 
for her thoughts and feelings make 
this convert feel? 

Find Out 

■ Ask your companion to share an 
experience in which someone took 
the time to listen and find out his 
feelings about something. 

This chapter will focus on listening effectively, asking appropriate questions, Read 
and asking additional questions. As you apply the principles that you learn, 
you will become a more effective servant of the Lord. 


105 


LISTEN 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Listening when other people speak will help you find out their concerns. Read and Discuss 

feelings, and beliefs. Listening includes hearing what another person says, 
looking for nonverbal messages, restating the person's message, and pausing 
to let the person think. This section will discuss these ideas. 

Find Out 

■ What is listening? 


An important part of listening is hearing what the other person says. It is Read and Discuss 

easy to be thinking of what to say next while he is speaking. Be well 
prepared before a discussion so you can concentrate on what is being said to 
you. 

Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience in which 
someone listened as you expressed 
your feelings. 

■ Describe how you felt about the 
person who sincerely listened. 


People often communicate their feelings through nonverbal messages. These Read and Discuss 
include the way a person is sitting, his facial expressions, what he does with 
his hands and legs, his tone of voice, and the movements of his eyes. 

Noticing these things will help you know what he is feeling and thinking. 

Read the following descriptions of nonverbal messages. Discuss with your 
companion what you think each message means. Then read the possible 
meanings provided afterwards. 

■ When asked a question, the investigator wrinkles his brow, looks at the 
ceiling, and gives a brief answer. 

■ The investigator is fidgeting and keeps looking at his watch while you are 
teaching. 

■ The investigator avoids looking at you when you invite her to read the Book 
of Mormon. 

■ The investigator is sitting on the edge of his chair and is looking directly 
into your eyes. 

An investigator who wrinkles his brow and looks at the ceiling may be 
showing that he does not understand what you are teaching. An investigator 
who keeps looking at his watch and fidgeting may be showing that he is 
concerned about time and has another appointment. An investigator who 
avoids looking at you may not be prepared for the invitation or may have 
something else on her mind. An investigator who looks directly at you is 
likely interested in the message and is thinking carefully about what you are 
teaching. 

Find Out 

■ How will looking for nonverbal 
messages help you find out 
people's feelings? 

After listening for verbal and nonverbal messages, you may want to restate Read and Discuss 

what you heard. Restating is summarizing in your own words what the 

investigator said to see if you understood him correctly. This also helps your 

investigator make sure that he explained himself clearly. Consider the 

following example. 

Investigator: I've always believed in Bible prophets like Moses, Noah, and 
Abraham. But I haven't heard of any prophets on the earth in 
our day. 

Missionary: Do you mean that having a prophet today is a new idea for 

you? 


106 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Investigator: Not necessarily new, but when I think of prophets, I think of 
men who lived before Christ. 

In this example, the missionary restated the message he heard. This helped 
him understand it and helped the investigator clarify his feelings. 

Find Out 

■ What does it mean to restate a 
message? 

■ How can restating help you find 
out people's beliefs and concerns? 

Another important element of listening is pausing. Sometimes people need Read and Discuss 

time to think about and reply to a question. Pause after you ask a question to 
let the investigator gather his thoughts and express his feelings. Do not be 
afraid of silence. 

Of course, you shouldn't pause for too long, especially when someone feels 
uncomfortable or pressured to speak. Pause when you have asked a question, 
when a spiritual experience has been shared, or when a person is having 
difficulty expressing himself. 

Find Out 

■ What does it mean to pause, and 
when should you do it? 

■ How can pausing help you find 
out people's true feelings? 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a passage to him while he 
follows along. 

■ Have him underline places where 
the missionaries use listening 
skills. 

■ Discuss the questions at the end of 
the passage. 

■ Do the same for the following 
passage. 


In the following passages, identify and underline the nonverbal messages 
that show what the investigator is thinking or feeling. Also identify and 
underline places where the missionary restates the investigator's message and 
pauses. 

Elder Cooper looks across the table at Mr. Ramsey and asks, "Mr. Ramsey, 
did you ponder the words you read and ask the Lord if the Book of Mormon 
is true?" 

Mr. Ramsey looks at his wife, shrugs, and says with a smile, "Well, it's got 
the words of Christ in it like the Bible, so I didn't feel a need to pray." 

Elder Cooper answers, "You're right — the Book of Mormon does have 
Christ's words, like the Bible. Do you believe that the Book of Mormon was 
revealed to Joseph Smith by the Lord?" 

Frowning a little, Mr. Ramsey holds the Book of Mormon in his hands as if 
he is judging its weight. Finally he replies, a little defensively, "I really didn't 
need to pray since it's got the words of the Bible in it." He puts the book on 
the table, sits back in his chair, and looks over to Elder Jameson as if the 
matter is closed. 


107 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Looking back at Mr. Ramsey, Elder Jameson asks quietly, "Do you mean that 
the Book of Mormon is the same as the Bible?" Mr. Ramsey shifts in his seat 
and reaches over to the Book of Mormon, pulling nervously on its pages. The 
missionaries sit silently. Resting one elbow on the table and scratching his 
head as if searching for the words, he mumbles, "No, I don't suppose it's 
exactly the same." 

Discuss the following questions before reading the rest of the story. 

■ What nonverbal messages did Mr. Ramsey give, and what do you think 
they meant? 

■ When did the missionaries restate the message or pause? 

Elder Jameson starts to speak, but his companion shakes his head slightly. 

His eyes tell the other to wait. Elder Cooper offers a silent prayer: "Dear 
Father, please help us understand the feelings in Brother Ramsey's heart. 
Help him feel comfortable about sharing his feelings." 

Trying to explain himself again, Mr. Ramsey declares, "I mean, yes, it is the 
same; what I read seemed to be straight out of the Bible." 

Elder Jameson says, "I am glad you noticed that the passages are similar, Mr. 
Ramsey. How do you feel about that?" 

Mr. Ramsey looks at his wife, and she nods for him to go on. He sighs and 
continues, "Well, I don't want to upset you boys, but I'm having a hard time 
believing that Joseph Smith didn't just copy chunks out of the Bible and put 
them in this book." 

"So you feel that Joseph Smith used the Bible to help him write the Book of 
Mormon?" 

"That's right, at least the parts I read." 

Discuss the following questions: 

■ What nonverbal messages did Mr. Ramsey give, and what do you think 
they meant? 

■ When did the missionaries restate the message or pause? 

It is not easy to learn what a person is thinking from his nonverbal messages. 
Be careful not to jump to conclusions. Pray for the guidance of the Spirit as 
you try to understand the thoughts and feelings of others. 

Listen to the audiotape segments for "Find Out: Listen." 


Practice effective listening while your companion shares one or two of the 
following experiences with you. As you practice, remember to restate, pause, 
and look for nonverbal messages. 


Answers: Mr. Ramsey's nonverbal 
messages included a shrug, a smile, 
a frown, judging the weight of the 
Book of Mormon in his hands, 
replying defensively, shifting in his 
seat, pulling nervously on the pages 
of the Book of Mormon, resting an 
elbow on the table, and scratching 
his head. Elder Jameson restated by 
asking, "Do you mean that the Book 
of Mormon . . . ?" 


Answers: Mr. Ramsey's nonverbal 
messages included looking at his 
wife as if searching for approval. 
Elder Jameson paused and looked at 
his companion, giving Mr. Ramsey 
more time to think about his 
feelings. Elder Jameson restated Mr. 
Ramsey's message and allowed him 
to confirm his feelings. 


Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Ask your companion to use good 
listening skills as you share a 
personal experience with him. 
Choose an experience from the list 
that follows. 

■ After you share the experience, 
invite your companion to answer 
the questions. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 

■ Share another experience if 
necessary. 


o 


108 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


1. Learning from his first companion 

2. Missionary work in his first area 

3. A spiritual missionary experience 

4. Feelings about a family he baptized 

Answer the following questions: 

■ How did your companion feel about his experience? 

■ What happened to make him feel the way he did? 

■ What listening skills did you use to help find out how he felt? 

■ What nonverbal messages helped you understand the way he felt? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about how 
important it is to listen effectively 
so that you can understand others' 
thoughts and feelings. Discuss the 
value of respecting others' points 
of view. 

Find Out 

■ Why does listening to others help 
prepare them to feel the Spirit? 

Invite 

■ Identify three specific finding or 
teaching situations in which your 
companion can use the skills of 
effective listening today. 

■ Invite your companion to use 
these skills in these situations 
today. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion use the skills of 
effective listening in three 
situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to use the skills of 
effective listening. Discuss how 
you and your companion are 
doing. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule, and select three specific finding or teaching 
situations in which you will be involved today. 

■Write a goal to listen, restate messages, pause, and look for nonverbal 

O messages in these situations. Carry this goal with you during the day as a 
reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


109 


ASK APPROPRIATE QUESTIONS 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to use effective listening skills 
in three situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how listening effectively 
helped you and your companion 
prepare others to feel the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

An important part of teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ is finding out about Read 
others' thoughts, feelings, and beliefs through asking appropriate questions. 


You can learn how to ask appropriate questions by practicing, gaining 
experience, and being guided by the Spirit. As you use this skill, others will 
be more willing to share their feelings and beliefs with you. You should ask 
questions in the following situations: 

■ When prompted by the Spirit. 

■ When indicated in the right column of the discussions. 

■ When the investigator seems confused or uncertain. 

■ Before teaching in order to become acquainted — to learn about the 
investigator's family, work, and interests. 

■ After teaching a principle to find out if the investigator understands and 
believes what you have taught. 

■ Before you teach a discussion or principle to learn about the investigator's 
beliefs. 


To find out if an investigator understands a principle or doctrine, ask a 
question that helps him share his feelings and beliefs. Don't ask one that can 
be answered with "yes" or "no." Consider the following examples: 


Discuss 

■ Discuss the questions you used in 
a recent teaching appointment. 
What did you find out? 

Read 


Find Out 

■ Why is it important to ask 
questions? 

■ Why is it important to know when 
to ask questions? 

Read and Discuss 


Less Effective 

Do you understand that our sins 
will keep us from returning to God? 


Do you understand what the Book 
of Mormon is? 


Effective 

What is the result of sin? 


What do you understand the Book 
of Mormon to be? 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 


o 


no 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


You understand what we have told What do you think about the 
you about Joseph Smith, don't you? Prophet Joseph Smith? 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 

In the less effective examples, the investigator can answer with a "yes" or Read and Discuss 

"no." In the effective examples, the investigator can respond by sharing his 

feelings about the subject. When you ask questions that encourage the 

investigator to share his feelings with you, you will find out if he 

understands and believes what you are teaching. 

You should not ask questions designed to make the investigator give you the 
answer you want. These kinds of questions manipulate the investigator. You 
should ask questions that maintain an equal relationship between you and 
the investigator. To do this, ask questions to show you are interested in 
others' thoughts and feelings and respect what they have to say. Consider 
the following examples: 

Less Effective Effective 

Since you told us that you believe in How do you feel about Joseph 

Jesus Christ, how do you feel about Smith as a prophet of God? 

the fact that he loves us enough to 

send us a prophet like Joseph 

Smith? 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 

Since you place so much emphasis Mr. Franklin, will you live the Word 

O on health, Mr. Franklin, how would of Wisdom? 
you feel about obeying the Lord's 
law of health — the Word of 
Wisdom? 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 

From what we have told you about What does repentance mean to you? 
repentance, we think you 
understand what it is and know 
how to repent. Is that right? 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 


In the first two less effective examples, the missionaries seem to be 
manipulating the people to accept a belief or commit to live a principle. In the 
third example, the missionary talks down to the person rather than 
maintaining an equal relationship. In the effective examples, the missionaries 
show that they respect the investigators and sincerely want to know their 
feelings. 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to ask 
questions that do not manipulate 
the investigator? 

■ What does it mean to have an 
equal relationship with the 
investigator? 

■ Why must you have an equal 
relationship with an investigator 
before you can find out his 
feelings and beliefs? 


Ill 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


o 


You should ask questions that are simple and direct. They should be specific 
and should relate to the principle being discussed. Consider the following 
examples. 

Less Effective Effective 

What are your feelings about the What are your feelings about the 

atonement of the Savior — his resurrection of Jesus Christ? 

suffering in the Garden of 

Gethsemane, his death on the cross, 

and his resurrection from the dead 

on the third day? 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 

How do you feel about the Read 

priesthood being restored to the 
earth? 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 

What do you understand the Book 
of Mormon to be? (Investigator 
responds.) Will you read the Book 
of Mormon? (Investigator responds.) 

Will you pray and ask God if it is 
true? (Investigator responds.) 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these questions? 

The first less effective example is wordy. The second is too general and does Read 
not specifically relate to the principle being taught. The third question is 
actually three questions. The effective examples are simple and direct, and 
they relate to the subject being taught. 

Find Out 

■ What are simple and direct 
questions? 

■ Why is it important to keep 
questions simple and direct? 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary asked an appropriate 
question. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


How do you feel about what we 
have said? 


Do you understand what the Book 
of Mormon is, and will you read it 
and ask God if it is true? 


Read the following situations, and identify the questions that do the 
following: 

■ Maintain an equal relationship 

■ Do not manipulate the investigator 

■ Are simple and direct 


112 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


C~ ' Situation 1 

The missionaries have just finished teaching Mr. Johnson about the Holy 

Ghost as a witness of the truth. 

Missionary A: How do you feel about the things we have been teaching 
you? 

Missionary B: You told us that you were Christian, so 1 would imagine that 
you believe in the Holy Ghost, don't you? 

Missionary C: What are your feelings about the Holy Ghost as a witness of 
the truth? 

Situation 2 

Sister Jones has just taught Alison about the Book of Mormon. 

Missionary A: Do you understand what we have just told you about the 
Book of Mormon? 

Missionary B: From what we have said, what do you understand the Book 
of Mormon to be? 

Missionary C: Since the Book of Mormon is translated by the power of God 
and is a second witness for Jesus Christ, how do you feel 
about it? 

Situation 3 

You are talking with Brother Evans about preparing his neighbors to hear the 

missionary discussions. 

Missionary A: Since the prophets have spoken so strongly about every 

O member being a missionary, I'm sure that you will help us 

out, won't you? 

Missionary B: Brother Evans, will you continue to prepare your neighbors 
to hear the missionary discussions? 

Missionary C: Finding people for the missionaries to teach is a great 

responsibility for the members. When should we come by 
and teach your neighbors? 

Listen to the audiotape segments for "Find Out: Ask Appropriate Questions." 


Practice asking appropriate questions. As your companion reads each of the 
situations below, respond with an appropriate question. Do not try to resolve 
concerns. Remember to ask questions that do the following: 

■ Maintain an equal relationship 

■ Do not manipulate the investigator 

■ Are simple and direct 

1. You have taught an investigator about the law of tithing. Find out if he 
understands. 

/ 2. You have taught an investigator about the Word of Wisdom. Find out if he 

V_y' understands. 

3. You have taught an investigator about the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 

Find out if he understands. 


Answers : "A" is general and not 
direct. "B" manipulates the 
investigator and is not simple. "C" 
is simple and direct and does not 
manipulate the investigator. 


Answers: "A" allows only for a "yes" 
or "no" answer and talks down to 
the investigator. "B" is a simple and 
direct question. In "C," the 
missionary is manipulating the 
investigator and trying to make him 
give a positive answer. 


Answers: "A" manipulates the 
member. "B" is simple and direct 
and encourages the member to 
cooperate. "C" manipulates the 
member and assumes that he has 
prepared some of his friends. 

Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him respond by asking an 
appropriate question. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


113 


LEARNER 

4. You have taught an investigator about a living prophet and twelve 
Apostles on the earth today. Find out how he feels. 

5. You have taught an investigator that everyone needs baptism in order to 
enter the kingdom of God. Find out how he feels. 

6. You are with an investigator during a follow-up visit. Find out how he is 
coming with his reading of the Book of Mormon. 

7. You are visiting with a member of the ward. Find out the member's 
feelings about missionary work. 

8. Brother Jackson has been preparing his friend Alex to hear the missionary 
discussions. Find out how Brother Jackson feels about Alex's preparation. 


TRAINER 

o 


Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about the 
importance of asking appropriate 
questions. 

■ Share an experience in which 
asking appropriate questions 
helped you find out important 
information. 


Find Out 

■ Why does asking appropriate 
questions help you find out 
investigators' beliefs, feelings, and 
thoughts? 

■ How does asking appropriate 
questions help prepare others to 
feel the Spirit? 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and identify three specific finding or 
teaching situations. 

■ Write a goal to ask appropriate questions to find out investigators' thoughts, 
feelings, and beliefs in these situations. Carry this goal with you during the 
day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today, 
and identify three finding or 
teaching situations in which your 
companion can use appropriate 
questions. 

■ Invite your companion to ask 
appropriate questions in these 
situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion ask appropriate 
questions in at least three 
situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to ask appropriate 
questions. Discuss how you and 
your companion are doing. 


114 


ASK ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS 


TRAINER 


Many times you will notice that an investigator is hesitant or uncertain about 
what you are teaching. When this happens, you should ask a question and 
then listen. Continue to ask additional questions and listen until your 
investigator says that you understand his feelings. Whenever you sense that 
the investigator has a question or concern, stop the presentation and ask 
questions to find out how he feels. 

As you ask these questions, sincerely try to find out the investigator's 
feelings and concerns. Do not make him feel that you are interrogating him. 
Show that you are interested in his needs and feelings. 

o 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to ask appropriate questions 
in three situations. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how asking appropriate 
questions helps prepare others to 
feel the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Read 


Find Out 

■ How can asking additional 
questions help you find out an 
investigator's thoughts and 
feelings? 


Discuss 

■ Think of a recent teaching 
appointment in which you asked 
additional questions to find out 
what your investigator was feeling. 
What questions did you ask? 


Read the following discussion between Mr. Bennett and Elder Jones. Notice Read 
the additional questions (in italics) that Elder Jones asks. 

During the discussion, Elder Jones says, "Baptism must be performed by 
members of the Church who have the priesthood and are authorized to 
perform ordinances in the name of Christ." From the expression on Mr. 

Bennett's face, Elder Jones can sense that his investigator has some concern 
about baptism. "Mr. Bennett," he asks, "how do you feel about baptism for 
the remission of sins?" 

Mr. Bennett raises his eyebrows and wipes his forehead. "Well, I'm not quite 
sure what I think." 

Sensing that there is more to Mr. Bennett's feelings. Elder Jones says, "I can 
see that something we have said about baptism concerns you. Would you mind 
sharing your feelings with us?" 

"Elders, I was baptized years ago, and to tell you the truth, I really don't 
think baptism is that important." 


115 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Elder Jones nods his head and says, "Would you tell us why you feel that baptism 
is not important?" 

Mr. Bennett begins, "My parents were very religious, and I was raised in a 
strict home. The local minister baptized me when I was seven or so. I really 
didn't know what was going on; I was so young." 

Elder Jones, still feeling that there is more to Mr. Bennett's concern, says, "I 
can understand your feelings. I was baptized when I was eight, and I'm sure 
that I didn't fully understand what was happening. Is there something more 
about baptism that is bothering you?” 

Looking across the table at the elders, Mr. Bennett replies, "I guess I just 
don't see what difference it makes whether I join a church or not. I have a 
friend at work who just joined a Christian church in the area, and it has not 
made any difference in him." 

Trying to understand how Mr. Bennett feels, Elder Jones continues, "So you 
feel that if a person is going to make the commitment to be baptized into a church, it 
should make a real difference in his life. Is that right?" 

"That's right. If you say you are Christian, you had better be a good one." 

Find Out 

■ How did Elder Jones know that 
Mr. Bennett had a concern about 
baptism? 

■ What follow-up questions did 
Elder Jones ask? 

■ What did the missionary do to 
make sure that he correctly 
understood Mr. Bennett's concern? 

Elder Jones's additional questions were appropriate, simple, and direct. They Read 
helped him learn what Mr. Bennett was feeling. They also helped him 
communicate his feelings of charity for Mr. Bennett. 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read the situation to him. 

■ Have him read the missionary's 
part in a response. You read the 
investigator's part. 

■ Ask your companion to decide 
whether the missionary effectively 
asks additional questions. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Read the following situation. Take the part of the missionary in the 
responses. Your companion will take the part of the investigator. Decide 
whether the missionary effectively asks additional questions. 

Situation 

You are teaching an investigator the third discussion. You have just shared 
information about the priesthood and he says, "I don't understand this part 
about authority." 


116 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


) Missionary Response A 

Investigator: I don't understand this part about authority. 

Missionary: What is it about authority that you don't understand? 

Investigator: It's just all so confusing. 

Missionary: I think that as we continue teaching the discussion, the 

principle of authority will become clear to you. Priesthood is 
the . . . 

Missionary Response B 

Investigator: I don't understand this part about authority. 

Missionary: Priesthood authority is the power given to man to act in the 

name of God. Does that help you understand what we mean? 

Investigator: I guess so. 

Missionary: You sound like you are not sure about something. Would you 

mind sharing your feelings with us? 

Investigator: It's just all so confusing. It's all so new to me; 1 think the 
ideas will just take time to sink in. 

Missionary: They will take some time, but you will get them. Peter, James, 

and John came . . . 

Missionary Response C 

Investigator: I don't understand this part about authority. 

Missionary: What is it about authority that you don't understand? 

( ) Investigator: Well, I don't know, really. I didn't want to interrupt your 

presentation. Why don't you continue? I'll catch on in a 
minute. 

Missionary: We sense that something is confusing to you. Will you share 

your feelings with us? 

Investigator: Well, I guess I've always thought that a person could receive 
authority by being a Bible scholar and devoting his life to 
God. 

Missionary: You are saying that you have always believed a person can 

receive priesthood through study at a seminary or religious 
school and by service to God, right? 

Investigator: Yes, I think that's right. 

Missionary: Is there anything else? 

Investigator: This part about Peter, James, and John giving authority to 
Joseph Smith— did that really need to happen, or could he 
have just devoted his life to God and studied the Bible? 

Missionary: I'll answer that question in a minute, but first let me see if I 

understand . . . 

Listen to the audiotape segements for "Find Out: Ask Additional Questions." 


Answer: The missionary asks a 
question, but instead of asking 
another one, he continues with the 
discussion. He could have asked, 
"Would you mind telling us what 
part of the principle of authority is 
confusing to you?" 


Answer: The missionary tried to 
explain what authority means. 

When he sensed that the 
investigator was confused, he asked 
an additional question. The 
missionary then assumed that he 
knew the concern, agreed with the 
investigator, and continued 
teaching. 


Answer: The missionary asked a 
number of additional questions. 

Even when he felt that he knew the 
investigator's concern, he asked 
another question and learned more 
about the investigator's feelings. 

This is a good example of asking 
follow-up questions to find out what 
another person is truly feeling. 

Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Take the part of the investigator 
who has the feelings listed in the 
right column. Have your 


117 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Practice asking additional questions to find out what other people think and 
feel by responding to the following situations. Your companion will take the 
part of the investigator or member. He will not tell you immediately what his 
concern is. Do not spend time trying to resolve concerns. Just practice asking 
additional questions. 

1. You ask Mr. Heath to pray at the end of the first discussion, and he says, 
"I don't think I can." 


2. You have just concluded the second discussion by inviting Mr. Jensen to 
be baptized. He says, "I don't think that I am ready for that kind of 
commitment." 


3. You have invited Mr. Sinclair to learn about the Church. He responds by 
saying, "I don't know that I would make a good member of your church." 


4. You invite Mr. Hayes to go to church, and he says, "I don't think that you 
really need to go to church." 


5. Mr. Fesser says, "I appreciate your invitation to attend church, but I can't 
go right now." 


6. You ask Mr. Chung to read the Book of Mormon, and he says, "No, I 
would rather not." 


7. You ask Mr. Holland if he believes that the priesthood was restored 
through Joseph Smith, and he says, "I don't think that a restoration was 
necessary." 


With your companion, review today's teaching appointments. Discuss the 
discussions that you will give. Decide what you would like to find out about 
your investigators' beliefs and feelings during the discussions. Write these 
things down, and practice how you are going to find out about them. 


companion cover the right column 
before you begin this practice. 

■ Have your companion ask 
questions to discover your 
feelings. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


True feelings: 

1. He thinks that God doesn't listen 
because he prayed that his 
grandfather would live — but his 
grandfather died. 

2. He has heard some strange things 
about the Latter-day Saints, 
especially about their temples and 
their eating habits. But he doesn't 
know if the things he has heard 
are true. 

3. Mr. Sinclair has heard of the 
Word of Wisdom and has a 
smoking habit. 

4. He feels that God is everywhere 
and that people have invented 
organized religion. 

5. He works on Sunday afternoons 
and spends the mornings with his 
family. 

6. Mr. Chung feels that the Bible is 
the only word of God, and he 
faithfully attends a Bible study 
class offered at his church. 

7. Mr. Holland feels that God has 
commissioned him and his wife to 
be ministers and that they now 
have God's authority. 

Read and Discuss 


118 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three specific finding or teaching 
situations. 

■ Write a goal to ask additional questions to learn more about investigators' 
thoughts, feelings, and beliefs. Carry this goal with you during the day as a 
reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 

Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion ask additional 
questions in three situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to ask additional 
questions. Discuss how you and 
your companion are doing. 

Conclusion 

As explained in this chapter, you can find out the thoughts and beliefs of Read and Discuss 

others by listening, asking appropriate questions, and asking additional 

O questions. As you do these things, you will help others discuss their feelings 
and prepare them to feel the Spirit of the Lord. You will also show them that 
you respect their thoughts and feelings and that you care about them. 

Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to Invite 

improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this ■ Invite your companion to write 

chapter often for suggestions and help. goals to help him improve. 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
used in finding out how people 
think and feel. 


Invite 

■ Review your schedule for today, 
and identify three specific finding 
or teaching situations in which 
your companion could ask 
additional questions, 

■ Invite your companion to ask 
additional questions in these 
situations. 


119 


STUDY RECORD 


Date Time Spent Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Listen” 

Listen effectively in three specific 

finding or teaching situations today. 


"Ask Appropriate Questions" 

Ask appropriate questions in three 
finding or teaching situations today. 


"Ask Additional Questions" 

Ask additional questions to find 
out further information in three 
finding or teaching situations today. 


120
