RESOLVE CONCERNS 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The purpose of this chapter is to teach you how to help others resolve their 
concerns so that they can accept the gospel and keep their commitments. 
Begin your study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply 
the principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used in resolving concerns. This chapter 
will discuss the following: 

1. Discover the Concern 123 

0 2. Discuss the Concern .• 127 

3. Help Resolve the Concern 134 

Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

4. Answer the question 

5. Give additional information 

6. Give examples and illustrations 

7. Show empathy 


Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in resolving concerns. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


Discuss 

■ What are other ways to resolve 
concerns? 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that could be used to 
resolve concerns. Discuss these with your companion and list them below: 


Read and Discuss 


121 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 


Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. At any time 
within this process, investigators may have concerns that keep them from 
progressing. You are responsible to help them resolve their concerns. Then 
they can feel the Spirit and prepare to accept commitments that lead to 
conversion. 

Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ How does resolving concerns 
relate to the commitment pattern? 

People may hesitate to share their concerns. Your attitude will often Read and Discuss 

determine whether they do or not. A former investigator explained: "I was 

never quite sure we were understanding one another. [The missionaries] 

seemed determined to cover their stuff and didn't really listen to what I was 

saying. They didn't realize how hard it was for me to believe what they were 

saying." 

A convert had a different experience: "I really appreciated the way [the 
missionaries] answered my questions and helped me discover what I needed 
to do. They always seemed to have time to hear me out and to help me find 
the right answers. I also knew that they accepted me even though I was 
really at odds with them sometimes. They patiently worked with me until I 
finally realized how much I really believed what they were saying." 

This chapter will focus on a few of the many important things you can do to 
help others resolve their concerns. These things include discovering and 
discussing the concern, and helping to resolve the concern. 

Find Out 

■ How can resolving concerns help 
people progress toward baptism? 


DISCOVER THE CONCERN 


LEARNER TRAINER 

When you are teaching investigators, one of your biggest challenges will be Read 
finding out what their concerns are. For example, an investigator may say 
that he is not interested in hearing more about the Church. But his real 
concern may be that he does not want to stop smoking. 

Suppose that you are suffering from poor eyesight, so you visit the doctor. 

He doesn't check your eyes, though, or ask you any questions. Instead, he 
removes his glasses and hands them to you saying, "Here, have these. 

They've really helped my vision." You try them on — and everything is a 
blur. When you explain this to the doctor, he replies, "Oh don't worry; you 
may have to squint a little at first, but you'll get used to it." 

Discuss 

■ What did the doctor neglect to do? 

■ Would you feel confident about 
this doctor's decision? 

■ How does this story relate to you 
as you help people with their 
concerns? 


This eye doctor may have been highly skilled, but he did not meet your 
needs. He did not find out what kind of problem you had before he gave you 
a solution. You probably felt that he didn't really care about you. 

Avoid doing what this doctor did. Show that you care for others by listening 
to them and showing that you understand them. 


Read the following example. Take the part of the missionary, and have your 

O companion act as the investigator. 

Missionary: Will you come to church this Sunday? 


Investigator: Maybe. I'm not sure I can make it, so don't wait for me. You'll 
see me if I come. 


Missionary: What is it that may stop you from coming? 

Investigator: Well, I've just got a lot of things going this weekend. 

Missionary: Do you feel that coming to church may help you find out a 

little more about us and our beliefs? 


Investigator: I think I would like to hear more about your beliefs before I 
make any kind of commitment. 


Missionary: So you would like to find out a little more about the Church 

before attending our meetings — right? 

Investigator: Well, I just don't want you Mormons to think you've got a 
new recruit here to join your church. Now don't get me 
wrong; I like what I hear, but I'll just decide things in my own 
time. 


Read 


Missionary: 


We respect your feelings and appreciate you sharing them 
with us. What are some ways you might suggest of finding 
out about the Church . . . ? 


Discuss 

■ What did the missionary do to find 
out the investigator's concern? 

■ What might have happened if the 
missionary hadn't found out why 
the investigator didn't want to 
attend church? 


123 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The missionary used good follow-up questions. He restated the investigator's 
comments to make sure that he understood the concern. 


Read 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read the situation to him. 

■ Have him read the missionary's 
part in a response. You read the 
investigator's part. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary found out what the 
investigator's concern was. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Read the following situation and the missionary responses. Take the part of 
the missionary in the responses. Your companion will take the part of the 
investigator. Decide which missionary best finds out what the investigator's 
concern is. 


Situation 

While following up on the first discussion, you ask the investigator how he 
felt about what he read in the Book of Mormon. He replies, "I didn't get the 
time to read your book." 


Missionary Response A 

Investigator: I didn't get the time to read your book. 

Missionary: We're sorry to hear that. May we read from it together right 

now? 


Investigator: Well, why don't you go ahead and tell me more about your 
beliefs. 

Missionary: Okay. Two major obstacles stand in the way of our becoming 

like our Heavenly Father. First, . . . 


Answer: The missionary did not ask 
a good follow-up question. 


Missionary Response B 

Investigator: I didn't get the time to read your book. 

Were you too busy? 

I guess so. 

How do you feel about reading the Book of Mormon? 


Missionary: 

Investigator: 

Missionary: 

Investigator: 


Oh, I think that reading it would be useful; I'll see what I can 
do tonight. 

Missionary: Fine. In fact, let's read some of the Book of Mormon right 

now. Would you please turn to page . . . ? 

Investigator: Uh, why don't you go ahead and tell me some more about 

your beliefs. 

Missionary: Okay. Two major obstacles stand in the way of our becoming 

like our Heavenly Father. First, . . . 


Answer: The missionary began to 
ask follow-up questions. But he 
needed to ask a few more when the 
investigator seemed reluctant to 
read the Book of Mormon. 


Missionary Response C 

Investigator: I didn't get the time to read your book. 


Missionary: Were you too busy? 

Investigator: I guess so. 


124 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary: How do you feel about reading the Book of Mormon? 

Investigator: Oh, I think that reading it would be useful; I'll see what I can 

do tonight. 


Missionary: Fine. In fact, let's read some of the Book of Mormon right 

now. Would you please turn to page . . . ? 

Investigator: Uh, why don't you go ahead and tell me some more about 
your beliefs. 


Missionary: I sense that you have some concerns about reading the Book 

of Mormon. Would you mind sharing them with us? 


Investigator: Well, I don't like to admit it, but I haven't read anything in 
years. I just don't think I can read "Bible" writing. 


Listen to the audiotape segments for "Resolve Concerns: Discover the 
Concern." 


Practice asking questions to discover the concerns of the investigators in the 
following situations. When your companion takes the part of the investigator, 
he will not tell you immediately what his concern is. Do not spend time 
trying to resolve concerns. Just practice discovering the concern. 

1. Vou ask Mr. Heath to pray at the end of the first discussion, and he says, 
"Why don't you pray?" 


2. You ask Mr. Green if he read the Book of Mormon, and he says, "No, I 
didn't get the time." 

3. You have just ended the second discussion by inviting Mr. West to be 
baptized. He says, "I don't think I'm ready for that kind of commitment." 


4. You try to set a second appointment with Mr. Fesser. He says, "I'm going 
to be busy this next week; why don't I give you a call later?" 


5. You have invited Mr. Wells to learn about the Church. He responds by 
saying, "I don't know that I would make a good member of your church." 


6. You invite Mr. Black to church, and he says, "I don't think that people 
really need to go to church." 


Answer: The missionary asked 
several follow-up questions that 
helped him discover the real reason 
the investigator had not read the 
Book of Mormon. 

Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Take the part of the investigator 
with the concern listed in the right 
column. Have your companion 
cover the list before you begin this 
practice. 

■ Have your companion ask questions 
to discover your feelings. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to improve. 


Concerns: 

1. He is not sure he can remember 
the steps of prayer. 

2. Mr. Green still feels that the Bible 
is the only word of God. 

3. He doesn't feel that you need to 
belong to any particular church to 
worship God. 

4. He is feeling a little pushed and 
just wants time to read the entire 
Book of Mormon. 

5. Mr. Wells has heard that every 
member must serve a full-time 
mission, and he doesn't feel that 
he could do something like that. 

6. He says that he feels God is 
everywhere, and people have 
invented organized religion. His 
real reason, though, is that he 
likes to play golf on Sundays. 


LEARNER 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three specific finding or teaching 
situations. 

■ Write a goal to discover people's concerns in these situations by asking 
questions. Carry this goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


TRAINER 


Invite 

■ Identify three specific finding or 
teaching situations in which your 
companion could discover people's 
concerns. 

■ Invite your companion to ask 
specific questions in these 
situations to discover the true 
concerns of others. 


Follow Up 

■ Write the goal to help your 
companion ask questions to find 
out people's concerns. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to ask questions to 
find out people's concerns. 


126 


DISCUSS THE CONCERN 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to discover people's concerns 
in three situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how discovering the 
concerns of investigators helped 
you and your companion prepare 
them to make commitments. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

When you find out what an investigator's concern is, you should discuss it Read 

with him. This will help him know what he needs to do and will let him 
know that the concern has not damaged your relationship. 

Discuss 

■ Why should you discuss concerns 
with others? 


Missionaries often feel that they need to resolve investigators' concerns by Read 

bearing testimony or by sharing experiences, scriptures, and examples. In 
many situations, however, it is better to simply help others discover their 

O own solutions. Look at the difference between the following two responses to 
an investigator's concern: 

Mr. Dunn: Mr. Black at work said that Mormons aren't Christians. He 

said that you worshipped a prophet and didn't pay much 
attention to Jesus Christ. 

Response A: As the name of our Church shows, we do believe in Christ. I 
bear you my testimony that Jesus Christ is the cornerstone of 
our religion. 

Response B: I appreciate your concern, Mr. Dunn. As you think about 
what we've been teaching you, how do you feel about Mr. 

Black's opinion? 

Discuss 

■ Which response more effectively 
helps the investigator discover his 
concern? Why? 


The missionary asked Mr. Dunn a question to help him discover his concern. 
Explaining why Mormons are Christians is not as powerful as letting the 
investigator discover the answer himself. 

Read the following dialogue, and notice how the missionary asks questions to 
help the investigator think through his concern. Take the part of the 
missionary, and have your companion act as the investigator. 

Investigator: I've enjoyed the discussions we've had, but I feel I need to 

talk to someone else about your church before listening to any 
more. 


Missionary: 


Investigator: 


Thank you for being honest with us, Brother Jefferson. Who 
do you think would be a good person to talk to? 

Mr. Roberts, a minister, has been a friend of the family for 
years. I could ask for his opinion. 


Read 


127 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary: How do you think he might feel about another church? 

Investigator: Well, obviously he doesn't believe in the Mormon church, but 
at least he will be able to offer a different point of view. 


Discuss 

■ What did the missionary do to 
help the investigator think through 
his concern? 

■ What might have happened if the 
missionary had told the 
investigator not to see a minister? 


The missionary tried to help the investigator think about what a minister 
might say about the Church. You, too, can help investigators consider the 
results of their decisions. Notice how the missionary does this as you 
continue reading the dialogue. 


Missionary: It's important for you to feel right about what we are sharing 

with you, and I appreciate your concern. What are some ways 
in which we've asked you to find out about the truth of our 
message? 


Investigator: I see what you're saying. I know you've been asking me to 
pray and read your Book of Mormon. 

Missionary: How do you feel about studying the scriptures and asking the 

Lord in prayer about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day 
Saints? 


Investigator: I know God answers prayers. I guess that's something I just 
need to do. 


Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the missionary trying to 
do? 

■ What might have happened if the 
missionary had told the 
investigator what to do? 


The missionary asked questions to help the investigator think about the Read 

results of turning to the Lord and the scriptures for guidance. The 
investigator might have been offended if the missionary had simply told him 
to pray rather than talk to a minister. 

Find Out 

■ How can you help others think 
about the results of their 
decisions? 


Tell the investigator that you are confident he will make the right decisions. 
Encourage him to turn to the Lord while he seeks solutions. These things will 
help his faith and confidence grow. Notice how the missionary does these 
things as you continue to read. 


Missionary: That's a good decision. I'm sure that your friend, Mr. Roberts, 

would advise you to do the same thing. Why don't we kneel 
down right now and ask the Lord to give you the guidance 
and answers you seek. Will you pray? 


Investigator: Sure. (They kneel and the investigator prays.) 

Missionary: Thank you for that prayer, Brother Jefferson. I know that the 

Lord felt your sincere desire to find the truth. As you continue 
to rely on the Lord to help you make decisions, you will be 
blessed with the guidance you seek. 


Read 


128 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Discuss 

■ What did the missionary 
encourage the investigator to do? 


The missionary told the investigator that he could make the right decisions 
and tried to build his faith. He sincerely complimented him and encouraged 
him to pray and study the scriptures. 

Encourage others to turn to the Lord to help them resolve their concerns. 
This is a key principle to use in effective missionary work. In summary, 
discussing the concern means to — 

■ Find out if the investigator knows how to resolve his concern. 

■ Help him see the results of his decisions. 

■ Tell him that you know he can make the right decisions. 

■ Encourage him to seek the Lord's help. 

The remainder of this section will illustrate these points. 


Find Out 

■ How can helping others to resolve 
their concerns be more effective 
than resolving them yourself? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about the 
importance of letting others 
resolve their own concerns. 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read the missionary's 
part in a response. You read the 
investigator's part. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionaries discuss the concerns 
well or not. He should consider 
whether they use the four points 
just discussed. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Read the following situations, and decide whether the missionaries are 
effectively discussing the concerns. Take the part of the missionary in the 
responses. Your companion will take the part of the investigator. Discuss 
your answers with your companion. 

Situation 1 

During a follow-up visit, a missionary asks, "How do you feel about what we 
discussed in our last visit concerning Joseph Smith and the Book of 
Mormon?" 

"It was interesting," the investigator replies slowly. "It's certainly an 
incredible story, and you guys obviously believe it— but I'm having a hard 
time, myself. There's a lot of religions preaching different things, and a lot of 
people who believe in those religions." 

"So you're not sure that Joseph Smith's experience actually happened, right?" 
asks the elder carefully. 

"Yes, I guess that's about it." 


129 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary Response A 

Missionary: Last time we visited, we talked about reading and praying 

about the Book of Mormon as a way to find the truth. Did you 
do that? 

Investigator: I read part of your book, but I felt uncomfortable about 
praying. 

Missionary: You told us last Tuesday that you had had a good experience 

with prayer. If you pray about what we have told you, I know 
that God will answer your prayers. Will you pray about the 
truthfulness of our message? 


o 


Answer : The missionary told the 
investigator what he should have 
done instead of helping him 
discover a solution. Also, he did not 
express confidence in the 
investigator. 


Missionary Response B 

Missionary: What do you think you should have done to find out the 

truthfulness of our message? 

Investigator: Well, I read part of your book. Answer: The missionary helped the 

Missionary: We talked about doing something else too — what was that? investigator discover what to do. 

1 o o But set U p a ver y une q ua i 

Investigator: I'm not ready to pray about anything yet. Look, why don't I relationship and did not express 

give you guys a call when I want to hear some more? confidence in the investigator. 


Missionary Response C 

Missionary: Do you remember that last Tuesday we discussed some ways 

in which you can find out the truth of our message? 

Investigator: Yes, I see what you're getting at. You said to read the Book of 

Mormon for myself and pray about it. 

Missionary: That's right, and you shared a great experience you had had 

when your prayers were answered. Did you pray to ask the 
Lord if the Book of Mormon was true? 

Investigator: Well, I read part of your book, but I felt awkward about 
praying. 

Missionary: We are glad that you read from the Book of Mormon. Do you 

believe that God will answer your prayers? 

Investigator: Yes, I think he answers everyone in his own way. 

Missionary: Why do you feel awkward about praying about the Book of 

Mormon and Joseph Smith? 

Investigator: I don't know. I guess I'm not sure I'm ready for the answer. 

Missionary: Sounds like you know what to do, but you're not sure you 

want to do it. 

Investigator: Yes, you're right. 


Answer: The missionary helped the 
investigator understand what he 
must do. Then he helped him 
understand the results of prayer and 
offered encouragement. This is a 
good example of discussing 
concerns. 


Situation 2 

"Ten percent sounds like a lot!" Mr. James declares. "I don't know how we 
can afford to pay it." 

"I understand how you might feel," replies Elder Smith. "I come from a large 
family, and my father has always struggled to support us. We never had 
much money left over to buy the things we wanted. Is that the way you're 
feeling?" 

"Yes," Mr. James agrees. 

o 


130 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary Response A 

Missionary: What do you think you should do to show your faith in God? 

Investigator: I know what you're trying to say, but right now feeding my 
family is more important to me than donating money to the 
Church. 


Missionary: We understand your concern, but what did we just read in 

the Bible about the blessings that would come to those who 
pay tithing? 


Investigator: I need money now, not "blessings" later. 
Missionary: Do you think the Lord knows that? 


Answer: The missionary was 
manipulative and established an 
unequal relationship. 


Missionary Response B 

Missionary: 

I can appreciate your concern. In view of what we've been 
reading, what do you think you could do to solve the 
problem? 

Investigator: 

I'm not sure. It seems that paying tithing will hurt, and not 
paying tithing will hurt, too. I guess it's one of those trials of 
faith you were talking about. 

Missionary: 

Paying tithing certainly does take faith, Mr. Smith. How do 
you think the Lord might bless you for showing your faith 
by paying tithing? 

Investigator: 

Oh, I guess he probably won't let my family go hungry. 

Missionary: 

I believe that too, Mr. Smith. We can see how the Lord has 
blessed you in your life already because you have put him 
first. Will you live the law of tithing? 

Missionary Response C 

Missionary: 

My father had the faith to pay tithing, and we were really 
blessed. Do you think that you could have the faith to pay 
tithing? 

Investigator: 

Like I said, we have a lot of bills to pay. This tithing is going 
to hurt us financially. 

Missionary: 

I understand your concern, but I promise you that the Lord 
will bless you. Do you think he will let you down, Mr. 

Smith? 


Answer: The missionary helped the 
investigator discover what to do and 
helped him see the possible results 
of his decisions. He also 
complimented him. 


Investigator: I think he helps those who help themselves. My family 

comes first. 

Missionary: But as we read, the Lord promises to give material blessings 

to those who keep the law of tithing. Paying tithing is a way 
of helping your family. 


Answer: The missionary tried to 
resolve the concern for the 
investigator instead of letting him 
discover the solution. 


Listen to the audiotape segments for "Resolve Concerns: Discuss the 
Concern." 


Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. Take the role of the 
investigator while he practices. 

■ Have your companion cover the 
helps and practice discussing the 
concerns in the situations. 

■ If necessary, read the helps to 
your companion to help him 
discuss the concerns. 


131 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The following are concerns of investigators and members. Practice discussing 
these concerns by responding to the following situations. Remember the 
following as you practice: 

■ Find out if others know how to resolve their concerns. 

■ Help them see the results of their decisions. 

■Tell them that you know they can make the right decisions. 

■ Encourage them to seek the Lord's help. 

1. "Mr. White at work said that Mormons aren't Christians. He said that you 
worshipped a prophet and didn't pay that much attention to Jesus Christ." 


Helps: 

How do you feel about Mr. White's 
opinion? 


2. "Ten percent sounds like a lot. I don't know how we can afford to pay 
it." 


What do you think you should do? 
How might the Lord bless you for 
paying tithing? 


3. "I respect you for not drinking, but it's going to be hard not to go to the 
bar and have a drink with my friends. They'll think I've turned all 
religious." 


You respect us. How might your 
friends feel about you? What do you 
think you could do? 


4. During your follow-up visit, Mr. Giles says, "Look, I've been talking to a 
guy at work. He told me that you Mormons have to pay a lot of your 
income to church leaders and that you don't drink. He also told me you 
have big fancy temples." 


What are some good ways of 
finding out about our beliefs? What 
are some good sources of truth? 
Who would be a good source of 
information about the Mormon 
church? How do you feel about 
praying to ask God about the truth? 


5. "I'm sure that you've had some good experiences with prayer, but I really 
don't think that God will answer me." 

6. "I've got too much studying to do for school this semester. I don't think 
I'm going to be able to read your Book of Mormon." 

7. "Our family has gone to hear Reverend Gabriel's sermons ever since I was 
about five years old. I just can't imagine going to church someplace else." 

8. "I feel good about your church, but I've already been baptized." 

9. Mr. Steiner is going to be baptized this Sunday. You are following up to 
see if he invited the three families he wanted to. He says, "It's not as easy 
as I thought. I've intended to talk to them for days, but I guess I'm just 
nervous about doing it." 

10. A missionary says, "I want to love all of God's children in this city. But 
it's hard to feel love when they slam the door in your face. Sometimes I 
really feel angry." 

11. "I'm sure the leaders of the Church are good men, but I can't promise 
that I'll do everything they say." 

12. "If you people had never denied blacks the priesthood, I would probably 
have joined the Church." 


Practice 

■ Help your companion identify 
specific concerns that your 
investigators may have. 

■ Practice discussing these concerns. 
Take the part of the investigator, 
and have your companion take the 
part of the missionary. 

■ Help him understand how well he 
discussed these concerns. 


With your companion, review the investigators you are now teaching. 
Identify concerns they have or future concerns they may have. Practice 
discussing these concerns. Have your companion take the role of the 
investigator, and you take the role of the missionary. 


132 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


■ How does discussing investigators' 
concerns with them better help 
them to feel the Spirit? 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three situations in which you 
may be discussing the concerns of investigators. 

■ Write a goal to effectively discuss concerns in these situations. Carry this 
goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion how you did. Discuss what went 
well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Identify three specific situations in 
which your companion could 
discuss the concerns of 
investigators today. 

■ Invite your companion to write a 
goal to effectively discuss concerns 
in these situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion effectively discuss 
concerns in three situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goals. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to discuss concerns 
with others. Discuss how you and 
your companion are doing. 


133 


HELP RESOLVE THE CONCERN 


LEARNER 


Sometimes investigators have concerns because they have wrong or 
incomplete information. They may not completely understand what you tell 
them. Or, they may have heard of unusual doctrines or practices that they 
find hard to accept, such as polygamy. You should be able to explain 
unfamiliar ideas to investigators and help them discover what they need to 
do to resolve their concerns. You can do this by using your own experience, 
examples, and the scriptures. 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to discuss the concerns of 
others in three situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Talk about how discussing the 
concerns of investigators helped 
them prepare to make 
commitments. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 


Read 


Find Out 

■ When is it better to help resolve 
concerns than have the 
investigator resolve the concern 
himself? 


Encourage investigators to gain a testimony of the Book of Mormon. This is a Read and Discuss 
powerful way to help them resolve difficult concerns. When they learn that 
the Book of Mormon is true, they can accept other gospel truths, as well. 

The following is an example of using the Book of Mormon to help resolve 
concerns. Take the part of the missionary, and have your companion act as 
investigator. 

Investigator: Elders, you have taught me some interesting things. I must 

tell you, however, that I can't believe this idea that prophets 
are alive today. All these angels visiting Joseph 
Smith — don't you think that's a bit remarkable? 

Missionary: Yes, it is remarkable! That's why we want to tell you about 

it. Of course, you are saying that you find it hard to believe. 

Is that right? 

Investigator: Hard to believe? I find it impossible to believe. 

Missionary: Why? 

Investigator: Prophets alive today with angels visiting them! Things like 

that don't happen any more. 

Missionary: I understand. These things are difficult for some people to 

accept. As you know, we believe that Joseph Smith was a 
prophet and that there is a prophet today. This is important 
to us because it means that we can receive direction from the 
Lord through a living prophet. Do you feel that it would be 
important to know if this is true? 

Investigator: Yes, I suppose so. 

Missionary: Bob, you can know for yourself that these teachings are true. 

Will you put forth the effort to find out? 


134 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Investigator: I . . . I'm willing. What do I have to lose? 

Missionary: You have nothing to lose but everything to gain. A good 

way to find out if Joseph Smith was a prophet, or to know if 
there are prophets today, is to continue reading and praying 
about the Book of Mormon. 


Investigator: 

Missionary: 


Investigator: 

Missionary: 


Investigator: 


Why is that? 

Because when you learn that the Book of Mormon is the 
word of God, then you will also know that Joseph Smith, 
who translated the book by the power of God, was his 
prophet. The Lord will not reveal truth to a false prophet. 

I see. 

Bob, will you continue reading the Book of Mormon and 
praying to know if it is true and if Joseph Smith was a 
prophet? 

Yes, I will. 


Discuss the following questions with your companion: 


■ What did the missionary do to help the investigator resolve his concern? 

■ How will reading the Book of Mormon help this investigator resolve his 
concern? 


The missionary helped the investigator to see that his concern was about 
whether or not the Church had modern revelation. He then helped him to 
understand that reading and praying about the Book of Mormon would help 
him discover that the Church had revelation. If the Book of Mormon is true, 
then Joseph Smith was a true prophet. If Joseph Smith was a true prophet, 
then The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord's Church and 
is guided by God. 

Discuss 

■ Have your companion explain how 
you can help someone resolve a 
concern by using the Book of 
Mormon. 


Some investigators will not immediately understand ideas from the Read and Discuss 

discussions. When this happens, you may want to help them by using 

scriptures and examples contained in the discussions. Your personal 

experience and other scriptures may be helpful, as well. Sometimes 

investigators only need to feel your faith in the Lord to help them make 

decisions. Bear your testimony of the gospel to them. This will help them feel 

the Spirit, and the Spirit can prompt them to make correct decisions. 

Consider the following conversation between a missionary and an 
investigator: 

A baptismal candidate is a little nervous about sharing the gospel message 
with his friends. He knows what he must do but needs a little 
encouragement. 

Missionary: Brother Sinclair, I joined the Church while I was in the 

military. It was challenging to be surrounded by soldiers 
who didn't have much time to go to church, pray, or read 
the scriptures. I was nervous about declaring the gospel to 
my friends. But soon I discovered that I really didn't have to 
do a lot of preaching. They got to know what I believed 
because I didn't drink, didn't take the Lord's name in vain, 
and went to church. After praying for opportunities to share 
my beliefs, I noticed little things began to happen that gave 
me the chance to bring friends to church. Looking back, I 
see that the Lord didn't give me opportunities to share the 


135 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Investigator: 

Missionary: 


Investigator: 

Missionary: 


gospel. Instead, he showed me how to make opportunities. 
Brother Sinclair, would you read this scripture in Romans, 
chapter 1, verse 16? 

"For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the 
power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth." 

Thank you. Brother Sinclair, I know this gospel is the power 
of God unto salvation, and it's for everyone. I hope that we 
can always have the courage to pray for and make 
opportunities to share the gospel. What could you do to give 
your friends a chance to hear the gospel? 

Well, I know that I need to pray more to get the Lord's help. 

Will you kneel with us right now and ask . . . ? 


Discuss 

■ What did the missionary do to 
help the investigator resolve his 
concern? 


The missionary used a personal example to show how the Lord had helped 
him to share the gospel. He then asked the investigator to read a scripture, 
after which he shared his testimony. 


Read and Discuss 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read the response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary effectively resolves the 
concern. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
situations. 


Read each situation, and decide whether the missionary effectively resolves 
the concern. Discuss your answers with your companion. 


Situation 1 

An investigator says, "I'm really not ready to go to church yet." 

Missionary Response 

"Mr. and Mrs. White, I know that if you go to church, you will feel the Spirit 
and understand more about our beliefs." 


Answer: The missionary did not find 
out the real concern. He bore his 
testimony instead. 


Situation 2 

An investigator asks, "It seems kind of odd to me that the gospel is preached 
to the dead; isn't that too late?" 

Missionary Response 

"It certainly would be better if all people had the chance to hear the gospel 
before they died, but that is not always possible. Suppose there was a man 
who was honest and fair in his dealings. He was devoted to his wife and 
good to his children. If he died without hearing the gospel, he would be 
introduced to it in the spirit world. Faithful members of the Church on earth 
could be baptized for him. In this way he would have the chance to accept 
the gospel and receive the ordinances he needs to enter the kingdom of God. 
Does this example help you to understand why the Lord has the gospel 
preached to the dead?" 


Answer: The missionary used an 
appropriate example to help explain 
why the gospel is preached to the 


136 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Situation 3 

A missionary is discussing why children under age eight need no baptism. 
The investigator says, "I've never heard of that before; many churches 
baptize children." 

Missionary Response 

"You're right, they do. Why don't we read from the Book of Mormon what 
the Lord has revealed to us on the subject. Would you read Moroni chapter 
8, verses 10 through 12, please?" 


Answer. The investigator had not 
heard of this doctrine before, so it 
was helpful to show him the 
scripture. 


Situation 4 

An investigator declares, "It says here in John, chapter 4, verse 24, that God 
is a Spirit," 

Missionary Response 

"Yes, but we read in Acts, chapter 7, verses 55 and 56, that God has a body 
because Jesus was seen standing next to him." 


Answer: This missionary did not 
help resolve the concern. He made 
the situation worse by comparing 
scriptures that appear on the surface 
to say different things. 


Situation 5 

An investigator wonders aloud, "I don't really understand how Jesus could 
have suffered for my sins two thousand years before I was even born." 

Missionary Response 

"The Atonement is a hard thing to understand. I don't completely 
understand it, either. However, as I repent of my mistakes, I feel the spirit of 
forgiveness and know that the Lord really has atoned for my sins." 

Listen to the audiotape segments for "Resolve Concerns: Help Resolve the 
Concern." 


Answer: The missionary could not 
easily resolve the concern, but he 
effectively shared his testimony 
about the Atonement. 

Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Take the part of the investigator 
with the concern. 

■ Have your companion respond to 
each situation by using the method 
suggested in parentheses. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Practice using scriptures, examples, your testimony, and the Book of Mormon 

to help resolve concerns in the following situations. The questions are being 

asked by investigators. 

1. "So who exactly is going to be resurrected?" (Use a scripture, for example, 
Alma 11:43-44.) 

2. "Doesn't resurrection just mean that my spirit will live forever?" (Use the 
example from discussion 2, page 2-7.) 

3. "Where does it say that we lived somewhere else before we were born?" 
(Use a scripture, for example, Jeremiah 1:5.) 

4. "I've never really believed that God would actually answer my prayers." 
(Share a personal experience.) 

5. "I don't really see how God can let so much suffering go on in the world 
and still love us." (Share your testimony.) 

6. "Where do you get the idea that baptism is so important? I think that being 
good should be enough to get you to heaven." (Use a scripture, for 
example, John 3:5.) 

7. "I just don't believe that Joseph Smith saw God." (Invite your investigator 
to read the Book of Mormon, particularly Moroni 10:3—5.) 


137 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

8. "I can't believe that God would deny a race of his children the right to 
have the priesthood." (You might respond that you do not completely 
understand, either. Invite your investigator to read the Book of Mormon to 
gain a testimony of living prophets — the critical issue here.) 

Practice 

■ Help your companion resolve 
specific concerns your investigators 
may have. See the instructions on 
the left. 

■ Help your companion understand 
what he did well and what he 
needs to improve. 

With your companion, review the investigators you are now teaching. 

Identify concerns they have or future concerns they may have. Have your 
companion take the part of the investigator. You take the part of the 
missionary and practice helping to resolve your investigator's concerns. 

Find Out 

■ How does helping others resolve 
concerns better help them feel the 
Spirit? 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three specific situations in which 
you could help others resolve concerns. 

■ Write a goal to help people resolve their concerns in these situations. Carry 
this goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 

Invite 

■ Identify three specific situations in 
which your companion could help 
others resolve their concerns 
today. 

■ Invite your companion to write a 
goal to help people resolve their 
concerns in these situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion resolve concerns in 
three situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to resolve concerns. 
Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


Conclusion 

You can use the principles in this chapter to help investigators resolve Read 

concerns that keep them from making and keeping commitments. One of 
your most important responsibilities as a missionary is to help others identify 
and resolve their concerns. As you do, you are preparing them to feel the 
Spirit and accept commitments that lead toward baptism. 


138 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
used in resolving concerns. 


139 


STUDY RECORD 


Date 


Time Spent Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Discover the Concern" 

Discover concerns in three specific 

situations. 


"Discuss the Concern" 
Discuss the concern in three 
specific situations. 


"Help Resolve the Concern" 

Help people resolve their concerns 
in three specific situations. 


140
