INVITE 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The purpose of this chapter is to help you and your companion more 
effectively invite others to make commitments. These commitments will allow 
them to return to our Heavenly Father. Begin your study with prayer, and 
ask the Lord to help you learn and apply the principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used in inviting others to accept 
commitments. This chapter will discuss the following: 

1. Extend the Invitation 143 

2. Confirm the Commitment 149 

Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

3. Extend the invitation using two questions 

4. Rephrase the invitation 


Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in inviting others to make 
commitments. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


Discuss 

■ What are other ways to invite 
investigators and members to 
accept commitments? 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that would help in inviting 
others to accept commitments. Discuss these with your companion and list 
them below: 


Read and Discuss 


141 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 


Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. God has 
given his children agency. When people feel the Spirit and are invited to 
obey, they can use their agency to make the right decision. 

Find Out 

■ How does inviting relate to the 
commitment pattern? 


Investigators must fulfill commitments in order to become converted. Many Read and Discuss 

missionaries do not invite others to make important commitments. They fear 

that others may be offended or may not accept the invitation. As a result, 

many souls are lost. As a servant of the Lord, you must do all you can to 

prepare those you teach. Then with faith and confidence, invite your 

investigators to make commitments that will lead to conversion. It is crucial 

that you know how and when to invite them. 


Scripture Activity 

With your companion, read James 1:22 and answer the following questions: 

■ What does it mean to be a doer of the word? 

■ Why can't you be a hearer of the word only? 

■ How does inviting your investigators to make commitments help them 
become doers of the word? 

With your companion, read Acts 2:37-38 and answer the following questions: 

■ After the people felt the Spirit, what did Peter and the other Apostles do? 

■ What might have happened if Peter had not invited the people to repent 
and be baptized? 


Share Feelings 

■ Share the feelings you had when 
an investigator accepted an 
invitation you offered. 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

This chapter will focus on extending invitations and reviewing commitments. Read 
Study the principles carefully, and apply them in your daily work. They will 
help you more effectively invite people to make commitments. 


142 


EXTEND THE INVITATION 


LEARNER TRAINER 

People must make and keep commitments in order to be converted. Read and Discuss 

Therefore, you must be confident, direct, specific, and clear when you invite 
people to make commitments. 

You should invite people to make commitments because you love and care 
about them, not just because you have a duty to invite them. They should 
feel that you are asking them because you love them. 

Often, missionaries hesitate to invite others to make commitments. They fear 
that the people will not accept or will be offended. Experience has shown 
that in many cases, investigators expect to be asked to make commitments 
and are surprised when they are not asked. 

Some missionaries feel that they should invite only when they have an 
unusual spiritual feeling. However, in normal situations, they should always 
plan to invite unless the Spirit directs otherwise. When missionaries teach 
without inviting people to make commitments, their teaching is generally in 
vain. The first important principle to remember when inviting people to make 
commitments, then, is simply to do it. 

Find Out 

■ Why should you never miss an 
opportunity to invite someone to 
make a commitment? 

When some missionaries invite people, they do it uncertainly and doubtfully. Read 
Then the people may not believe that the missionaries have confidence and 
faith in their message. You must believe that you are acting in the name of 

O the Lord and that he will support your efforts. Have faith in the Lord. Be 
confident, direct, and dear when you invite people to make a commitment. 

Discuss 

■ What commitments have you 
recently asked others to make? 

■ Did you ask them with faith in the 
Lord? 

You should give people invitations that are direct and clear. A direct Read 

invitation is one that requires a "yes" or "no" answer. A question that begins 
with "will you" is usually direct. A dear invitation leaves no doubt about 
what you are asking the other person to do. Consider the following examples 
of invitations: 

Less Effective Effective 

"Have you ever thought about being "Will you be baptized?" 

baptized?" 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 

"Will you help us find people to Read 

teach by asking the Lord which of 
your friends is ready to hear the 
discussions?" 

Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 

"Do you think that perhaps you "Will you obey the Word of Wisdom Read 

( 1 might obey the Word of Wisdom?" by giving up coffee?" 


I know that you are really busy, 
but if you find some time, maybe 
you could help us with missionary 
work." 


143 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


"The law of chastity is important. 
Do you have any questions about 
keeping it?" 


"You can gain a testimony of the 
Prophet Joseph Smith if you will 
pray about it." 


"Will you obey the law of chastity?" 


"Will you pray to know that Joseph 
Smith was a prophet of God?" 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 


The less effective invitations show that the missionaries lack confidence and 
faith. They are not direct, "will you" questions. The effective invitations are 
direct and clear. They show that the missionaries have confidence and faith 
in the Lord. 


Find Out 

■ Why should you be confident, 
direct, and clear when inviting 
others to make commitments? 


Investigators need to know exactly what you are asking them to do. They 
need to know when they should fulfill the commitment. When inviting others 
to make commitments, give specific instructions. If they are uncertain about 
what they should do, they are less likely to fulfill the commitment. Consider 
the following examples: 


Less Effective 

"We'd like you to read this book.' 


"Will you go to church?" 


"Tithing is an important 
commandment of our Heavenly 
Father. He wants all of his children 
to learn to sacrifice. Will you 
sacrifice to our Heavenly Father?" 


Effective 

"The passages I just mentioned are 
also written in this study guide. Will 
you read and pray about these 
passages in the Book of Mormon 
before we meet next Tuesday?" 


"Our sacrament meeting begins at 
11:00 A.M. Will you attend sacrament 
meeting with us this Sunday?" 


"Will you obey the law of tithing by 
giving 10 percent of your income to 
the Lord when you are baptized?" 


Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about the 
importance of being confident, 
direct, and clear when inviting 
others to make commitments. 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 


144 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The less effective examples are vague and do not help the investigator 
understand what he is to do. The effective examples state specifically what 
the investigator should do and when he should do it. 


Extend invitations that show respect and love for investigators. Remember 
that you are not trying to get them to do something for you. You are trying 
to help bring into their lives the blessings that can come only as they obey 
God's commandments. Respect others' free agency when you ask them to 
make commitments. You cannot force or try to push someone into making a 
commitment. Extend invitations in a spirit of love. Consider the following 
examples of invitations: 


Less Effective 

"The Lord has said that we are to 
give 10 percent of our income to 
him as tithing. As you keep this 
commandment, you will receive 
blessings. This is an important 
commandment, isn't it? You should 
have no problem keeping this 
commandment, right?" 


"We would really like to teach you 
the rest of the discussions. I'm sure 
that you are interested in what we 
have to say. Would Tuesday or 
Wednesday night be better for 
you?" 


"The Lord has commanded all 
members of his Church to do 
missionary work. We know that you 
want to keep the commandments. It 
is your duty to help us find people 
to teach." 


Effective 

"Will you obey the law of tithing by 
giving 10 percent of your income to 
the Lord?" 


"We have enjoyed being in your 
home and want to share more of 
our beliefs with your family. We 
mentioned earlier that we have six 
presentations. Will you listen to the 
other five presentations within the 
next three weeks?" 


"We can see that you have deep 
respect for your nonmember friends. 
Will you invite one of these friends 
to hear the discussions by next 
Friday?" 


The less effective invitations are pushy, manipulative, and disrespectful. The 
effective invitations, on the other hand, are direct, "will you" questions that 
show respect and love. 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 

Read 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to be specific 
when inviting people to make 
commitments? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What is the difference between 
these invitations? 

Read 


145 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Read the following situations, and decide which missionaries do the 

following things: 

■ Ask direct, "will you" questions. 

■ Explain what the investigator is to do and when. 

■ Show respect and do not manipulate. 

Discuss your answers with your companion. 

Situation 1 

The Bennetts have just been taught the first discussion. The missionaries are 

going to invite them to read and pray about the Book of Mormon. 

Missionary A: Mr. and Mrs. Bennett, if you find the time, will you read the 
pages we have assigned in the Book of Mormon and pray 
about them? 

Missionary B: Mr. and Mrs. Bennett, will you read and pray about the 
pages we have assigned in the Book of Mormon by 
Thursday? 

Missionary C: Mr. Bennett, will you read the Book of Mormon and find out 
if it is true? 

Missionary D: We know that you will want to find out if this book is true. 

Will you read and pray about the Book of Mormon? 

Situation 2 

You have come to the point in the discussion when it is time to invite Mr. 

Williams to obey the Word of Wisdom. 

Missionary A: Mr. Williams, before your baptism, would you be able to 
obey the Word of Wisdom? 

Missionary B: Mr. Williams, you know that obeying the Word of Wisdom 
is what the Lord wants you to do, don't you? Will you obey 
the Word of Wisdom by giving up your cigarettes right now? 

Missionary C: Mr. Williams, will you obey the Word of Wisdom by giving 
up cigarettes beginning today? 

Missionary D: Because the Word of Wisdom is important, the Lord expects 
the members of his Church to give up harmful things that 
could hurt their bodies. Will you do that? 

Situation 3 

The missionaries are visiting with the Bakers, a member family, to invite 

them to find people to teach. 

Missionary A: Brother Baker, we are sure that you will want to do as the 
Lord has commanded by helping us find people to teach. 

Will you do that? 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary effectively invites 
someone to make a commitment. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses and situations. 


Answers: In "A," the missionary 
asks a direct, "will you" question 
but shows a lack of confidence. "B" 
is a good example of a confident, 
direct, and clear invitation. "C" is a 
direct, "will you" question but does 
not make clear what the investigator 
should do. "D" is pushy and 
manipulative. 


Answers: In "A," the missionary 
does not give a direct invitation and 
shows a lack of confidence. "B" asks 
a specific and direct "will you" 
question but is manipulative and 
shows a lack of respect. "C" asks a 
direct, specific question that is not 
manipulative. "D" is neither specific 
nor clear. 


o 


146 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary B: Brother Baker, most members find missionary work difficult, 
but we think you could probably help us find people to 
teach. 


Missionary C: Brother and Sister Baker, will you help us with missionary 
work? 

Missionary D: Brother and Sister Baker, you mentioned a couple of your 
friends who have talked about the Church and attended 
meetings with you. Will you invite them to hear the first 
discussion next week? 


Answers: "A" is pushy and 
manipulative. It does not show 
respect for the members. "B" is 
negative and shows a lack of faith. 
"C" is not specific or clear. "D" is 
specific, direct, and not 
manipulative. It is an effective 
invitation. 


Listen to the audiotape segments for "Invite: Extend the Invitation." 


Listen and Discuss 


Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him respond by inviting the 
person to make a commitment. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Practice inviting people to make commitments by responding to the following 
situations. Do not spend time trying to resolve concerns. As you practice, 
remember to do the following: 

■ Ask direct, "will you" questions. 

■ Explain what the investigator is to do and when. 

■ Show respect and do not manipulate. 

1. After meeting with an investigator for the first time, you want to invite 
him to hear the rest of the discussions. 

2. You have just discussed the law of tithing with your investigators. Invite 
them to obey this commandment. 

3. You have just talked with some members about their friends. You are 
ready to invite them to ask their friends to hear the discussions. 

4. After teaching the first discussion, you want to invite the investigator 
family to attend church. 

5. After teaching the second discussion, you want to invite your investigator 
to be baptized. 

6. You are talking for the first time with a man who was referred to you by 
his cousin. You want to invite him to hear the first discussion. 

7. You are talking with a family in which the wife is an inactive member and 
the husband is a nonmember. You want to invite them to hear the 
discussions. 

8. You are teaching the first discussion to a non-Christian. You want to 
invite him to read and pray about the assigned passages from the Book of 
Mormon. 

9. You have just discussed the law of chastity and found that the couple is 
living together out of wedlock. Invite them to obey the law of chastity. 

10. You are a district leader, meeting with a companionship. You feel it is 
time to invite them to obey the mission rule of getting up on time. 

Find Out 

■ What are some things to remember 
when inviting others to make 
commitments? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about the 
importance of effectively inviting 
people to make commitments. 


147 


LEARNER TRAINER 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three specific finding or teaching 
situations in which you will be involved. 

■ Write a goal to effectively invite people to make commitments in these 
situations. Carry this goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion effectively invite 
people to make commitments in 
three situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to invite people to 
make commitments. Discuss how 
you and your companion are 
doing. 


Invite 

■ Identify three specific finding or 
teaching situations in which your 
companion can invite people to 
make commitments today. 

■ Invite your companion to 
effectively invite people to make 
commitments in these situations. 


148 


CONFIRM THE COMMITMENT 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to invite people to make 
commitments in three situations. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how effectively inviting 
people to make commitments 
helped them make and keep 
commitments. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

After someone has made a commitment, take time to confirm the Read 

commitment with him. Make sure that he knows exactly what he is to do and 
that he is willing to do it. Express your confidence in him and your faith that 
the Lord will help him to fulfill the commitment. 

Notice how the missionaries confirm commitments with investigators in the 
following examples: 

During the first discussion, Bob accepts the elders' invitation to read and pray 
about the Book of Mormon. As Elder Rusk finishes the discussion, he says, "I 
know that we have asked you to do quite a few things tonight. We 1 asked you 

O to read 3 Nephi 11 and Moroni 10:3-5 in your Book of Mormon. Then we 
invited you to pray about what you read.'' 

"Bob, we would also like you to pray to know if Joseph Smith was a 
prophet," adds Elder Webb. 

"Yes, thanks for the reminder," Bob replies. "As I mentioned earlier, all this 
reading and praying may be difficult, but I'll try." 

Elder Rusk asks, "Do you have any questions about what you are to do 
before our next visit?" 

"No, I know what to do. I promise I'll do my best." 

"We know you will. Bob. And we are confident that you will have a good 
experience reading and praying." 

Discuss 

■ How did these missionaries make 
sure that Bob knew exactly what to 
do? 

■ How did they confirm his 
commitment? 

In the next example, two missionaries have invited a member family, the Read 

Turners, to set a date to have someone ready to hear the gospel. 

"We have enjoyed being in your home tonight. Brother and Sister Turner. 

The Lord will bless you in your efforts to prepare your friends to learn about 
the gospel." 

"I hope you're right." 

"I'm confident that we're right. Sister Turner. Now, could you tell us what 
^ j you understand you are to do?" 

"Sure. As a family we are going to prayerfully set a date by which we will 
have someone prepared to receive the discussions. We are going to ... " 


149 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


In both of these examples, the missionaries confirmed the commitments. 
They reviewed what the people were to do and found out if they were 
willing to keep their commitments. 


Listen to the audiotape segments for "Invite: Confirm the Commitment." 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionaries make 
sure that the Turners knew what 
they were supposed to do? 

■ How will this review help the 
Turners to keep their commitment? 


Read 


Find Out 

■ What are some things you can do 
to confirm commitments? 

■ Why is reviewing commitments 
important? 

Listen and Discuss 


Practice confirming commitments by responding to the following situations. 

Do not spend time trying to resolve concerns. As you practice, remember to 

do the following: 

■ Make sure that the investigators or members know exactly what they are to 
do. 

■ Ask the investigators or members to state that they will fulfill the 
commitment. 

1. You have just finished teaching the first discussion. During the discussion, 
you invited the investigator to read the Book of Mormon and to pray about 
the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith. Also, he has just committed to 
hear the second discussion on Wednesday afternoon at 3:00. Confirm the 
commitment. 

2. You are talking with a nonmember who has agreed to hear the first 
discussion. Confirm the commitment. 

3. Your investigator smokes two packs of cigarettes a day. You have just 
invited him to obey the Word of Wisdom by not smoking any cigarettes for 
a week. Confirm the commitment. 

4. Your investigator family has accepted the invitation to be baptized this 
Saturday evening. Confirm the commitment. 

5. Your investigator, who has never attended any church before, just 
accepted the invitation to attend church with you next Sunday. Confirm 
the commitment. 

6. You have invited your investigators to refer some of their friends to you. 
They have agreed to invite some friends over for the next discussion. 
Confirm the commitment. 

7. You have taught your investigator the fifth discussion and invited him to 
keep the law of tithing. He has agreed to pay his tithing this Sunday. 
Confirm the commitment. 

8. You are meeting with a member family. They have accepted your invitation 
to invite some cousins to hear the discussions next week. Confirm the 
commitment. 


Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him respond by reviewing 
the commitment. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


150 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Find Out 

■ How does confirming the 
commitment help people to keep 
their commitments? 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select two specific situations in which 
you can invite someone to make a commitment. 

■ Write a goal to confirm commitments following these invitations. Carry this 
goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Identify two specific situations in 
which your companion could 
invite someone to make a 
commitment. 

■ Invite your companion to confirm 
the commitments in these 
situations. 


Conclusion 

The principles taught in this chapter will help you effectively invite members, 
investigators, and nonmembers to make and keep commitments. Remember 
that you are giving them the opportunity to choose to become "doers of the 
word" 0ames 1:22). They must accept your invitations and make 
commitments in order to return to a loving Heavenly Father. 

The Savior taught the importance of commitment. A rich young man asked 
him, "Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?" 
The Savior replied, "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and 
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and 
follow me" (Matthew 19:16, 21). 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion confirm commitments 
in two situations today. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to confirm 
commitments. Discuss how you 
and your companion are doing. 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
used in inviting people to make 
commitments. 


151 


STUDY RECORD 


Date Time Spent Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Extend the Invitation” 

Ask people to make commitments in 
three finding or teaching situations. 


" Confirm the Commitment" 
Confirm commitments in two 
situations. 


152
