FOLLOW UP 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in following up. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 

The purpose of this chapter is to help you and your companion improve in Read 

following up on the commitments that others make. By effectively following 
up, you can help others fulfill the commitments they have made and show 
them that you really care. Begin your study with prayer, and ask the Lord to 
help you learn and apply the principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used when following up to help others 
keep commitments. This chapter will discuss the following: 


1. Arrange to Follow Up 155 

2. Make Regular Contacts 159 


Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

3. Coordinate with priesthood leaders 

4. Involve members 

5. Read with investigators 

6. Introduce investigators to the bishop 

Discuss 

■ What are other ways to follow up? 

Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that would help when Read and Discuss 

following up with others. Discuss these with your companion and list them 

below: 

7 

8 

9 


The Commitment Pattern 

Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 

Resolve Concerns 


153 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments and continue 
to feel the Spirit of the Lord. 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ How does following up relate to 
the commitment pattern? 


When people keep their commitments to live the gospel, they are more likely 
to feel the Spirit of the Lord and develop faith. They will want to change 
through repentance and be baptized. Following up means providing support 
and assistance to investigators to help them keep their commitments. If you 
do this, they will be more likely to keep their commitments, continue to feel 
the Spirit of the Lord, and make future commitments. 

A recent convert related the following experience: "The first time i met with 
the missionaries, they asked me to read from the Book of Mormon and pray 
about it. I didn't feel the need to read, but I said I would anyway. The 
missionaries asked if they could stop by the next day to see if I had any 
questions. I thought that would be all right. They came by as planned, but I 
had not had the time to read anything yet. They asked if I had a few minutes 
then to sit down and read some of the Book of Mormon. I recall feeling that 
they really cared for me and the message of the gospel." 


Read 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionaries' 
follow-up help this recent convert? 

■ Why is following up on 
commitments important? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience from your 
mission in which following up 
helped an investigator fulfill a 
commitment. 


In this chapter you will learn how to arrange with an investigator for a Read 

follow-up visit. You will also learn what to do during a follow-up visit. 


154 


ARRANGE TO FOLLOW UP 


LEARNER TRAINER 

You should begin following up immediately after people accept an invitation. Read and Discuss 

When they accept the invitation, tell them that you are going to follow up on 

their commitment. This will help them know that you sincerely want them to 

fulfill it. Consider the following two examples, and discuss the questions that 

follow them: 

"We're pleased that you have made the commitment to live the Word of 
Wisdom. We would like to come by tomorrow to discuss how you feel about 
beginning to live the Word of Wisdom. May we come by at . . . ?" 

"We've found it helpful for others if we come by within a day or two and 
discuss what they have read in the Book of Mormon. May we come by 
tomorrow at . . . ?" 

■ How did the missionaries tell the investigators that they were going to 
follow up? 

■ How will telling others that you are going to follow up help them fulfill 
commitments? 


Find Out 

■ What does it mean to tell someone 
that you want to follow up? 


Follow up with investigators between discussion appointments. After telling 
them that you want to follow up, make specific plans for a follow-up visit. 
Set a specific day and time when you can meet again. Write the appointment 
in a study guide or on a pamphlet, and leave it with the investigator as a 
reminder. Consider the following example. 

Missionary: My companion and I would like to stop by in the next day or 

two to discuss what you have read in the Book of Mormon 
and answer any questions. Would that be all right? 


Investigator: I suppose so. We are busy, though. Will this visit take long? 


Missionary: No, we would just like to see you for about half an hour and 

discuss your reading in the Book of Mormon. We could come 
tomorrow about 6:00 P.M. or Wednesday around 5:30 p.m. 
Which would you prefer? 

Investigator: I'd prefer Wednesday. 


Missionary: Good. I'll write that down on this study guide as a reminder 

and leave it with you. We'll see you on Wednesday. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What specific plans did the 
missionaries make for follow up? 

■ How can planning a follow-up 
visit encourage someone to fulfill a 
commitment? 


The missionaries in the example told the investigator that they were going to Read and Discuss 
follow up — they said that they would like to stop by in the next day or two 
to see how his reading was going. They also made an appointment to return 
at a specific day and time. 

Besides telling investigators that you want to follow up, you should 
encourage them to keep their commitments. This is an important part of 
following up. Consider the following examples: 

f i "We are pleased that you are willing to take time to read the Book of 

v —' y Mormon. If you will take fifteen minutes each morning or evening, I am 
confident you will be glad you did." 


155 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


"We know that the Lord will give you the strength you need to live the Word 
of Wisdom. Living this commandment will bring great blessings into your 
life." 

"We realize that your decision to be baptized is going to be hard for.some of 
your family to accept. We know, however, that what you are doing is right 
and that God will bless you for your decision." 

Find Out 

■ How did the missionaries 
encourage the investigators in 
these examples? 

■ How can encouraging an 
investigator help him keep a 
commitment? 


Telling personal experiences is another excellent way to encourage others. 


Read the following situation. Take the part of the missionary in the 
responses. Your companion will take the part of the investigator. Decide 
whether the missionary did the following things: 

■ Explained that he wanted to follow up. 

■ Planned a follow-up visit. 

■ Encouraged the investigator. 

Do the same for the other responses. 


Read 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read the situation to him. 

■ Have him read the missionary's 
part in a response. You read the 
investigator's part. 

■ Ask your companion to decide 
whether the missionary effectively 
planned to follow up. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Situation 

Mr. Turner accepted an invitation to read the Book of Mormon and pray to 

know if it is true. 

Missionary Response A 

Missionary: When people are reading the Book of Mormon, they often 

come across passages that are hard to understand. We would 
like to stop by tomorrow night around 8:00 and discuss what 
you have read. 

Investigator: That would be fine. 

Missionary: I'll have my companion make a note of our appointment on 

this pamphlet. We'll look forward to seeing you then. 

Missionary Response B 

Missionary: We're glad that you are willing to read the Book of Mormon 

and pray to the Lord to know of its truth. We would like to 
come by tomorrow or Friday and discuss what you have been 
reading and pray with you and your family. Would that be all 
right with you, Mr. Turner? 


156 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


^ ^Investigator: 
Missionary: 
Investigator: 


Yes. I think that Friday would be the best for us. 
Would 7:00 p.m. be ali right? 

Seven will be just fine. 


Missionary: We're grateful that you have shown so much faith and are 

willing to read the Book of Mormon and pray about it. The 
Book of Mormon offers some great insights into many of life's 
problems. I'll write the time for our visit on this pamphlet and 
leave it with you as a reminder. 


Missionary Response C 

Missionary: We would like to come by tomorrow and see how you are 

doing with the reading. Will you be home in the late 
afternoon? 


Investigator: Yes, I should be here. 


Missionary: Well, we'll drop by and just chat with you for a minute. It 

won't take long. 


Answers: In "A," the missionary 
explains that he wants to follow up. 
But he doesn't plan with the 
investigator. Nor does he offer 
encouragement. In "B," the 
missionary explains that he wants to 
follow up, plans a specific day and 
time for a follow-up visit, and 
praises and encourages the 
investigator. In "C," the missionary 
explains that he wants to return, but 
he does not set a specific time or 
encourage the investigator. "B" 
would be the best response. 


Listen to the audiotape segments for "Follow Up: Arrange to Follow Up." 


Listen and Discuss 


Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. Take the part of the 
investigator. 

■ Have your companion respond to 
the situation by planning a 
follow-up visit and offering 
encouragement. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Practice planning to follow up in each of the situations below. Do not spend 

time trying to resolve concerns. While practicing, remember to do the 

following: 

■ Explain that you want to follow up. 

■ Plan a follow-up visit. 

■ Encourage the investigator or member. 

1. When you ask Mr. Adams to live the Word of Wisdom he says, "I feel I 
can live the Word of Wisdom. I figure that I ought to give up drinking 
coffee anyway. Elders." 

2. After you invite Mr. Johnson to read the Book of Mormon, he says, "I'll 
read what I can. I don't really have a lot of time, but I'm sure I can do 
some reading." 

3. You have just invited Mr. and Mrs. Brown to be baptized. Mrs. Brown 
says, "We feel good about what you are teaching and feel that getting 
baptized into the Mormon church is the right thing to do." 

4. You have just invited Brother Jones to prepare his neighbor to hear the 
missionary discussions. Brother Jones says, "I've often thought that Bob 
would be a good member. I'll work on getting him prepared." 


Use this principle with the people in your area by discussing the following Read and Discuss 

with your companion: 

■ Review current investigators and members who have been invited to make 
a commitment. 

U * If you have not arranged follow-up visits with them, plan to arrange these 
visits. 


157 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience in which you 
followed up after a commitment 
and helped the investigator or 
member fulfill the commitment. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for the day, and select three situations in which you 
will be extending invitations. Include any invitation — hearing the first 
discussion, reading the Book of Mormon, praying, giving referrals, or 
asking a friend to hear about the gospel. 

■ Write a goal to plan a follow-up visit after the commitment is made. Carry 
this goal with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Help your companion identify 
three finding or teaching situations 
in which he can extend invitations. 

■ Invite your companion to make 
plans to follow up when the 
commitment is made. 


Follow Up 

■ Write the goal to help your 
companion plan to follow up after 
commitments are made. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to plan to follow up. 
Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


o 


158 


MAKE REGULAR CONTACTS 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to follow up after 
commitments are made. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how following up helps 
others fulfill commitments. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Follow Up 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of contacting 
people after they have made a 
commitment? 

■ How often should you visit people 
who have made commitments? 

Discuss 

■ Discuss a follow-up visit you have 
made in the past. What did you 
do? 

During a follow-up contact with an investigator or member, ask questions to Read and Discuss 
find out how well he is fulfilling the commitment he made. Consider the 
following example. Read the role of the missionary while your companion 
reads the investigator's responses. 

Missionary: How did you enjoy reading in the Book of Mormon? 

Investigator: To tell you the truth, I had a hard time getting to it. It seemed 
like everytime I sat down, something interrupted me. The 
phone would ring or someone would come to the door. I 
finally had to go where I could be by myself. 

Missionary: Were you able to read then? 

Investigator: Well, I wasn't able to read all that you had noted on the study 
guide. I was able to get through 3 Nephi, chapter 11, though. 

Missionary: That's great! What did you think? 

Investigator: Frankly, it sounded a lot like the Bible. It was interesting. I 
had never thought that Christ visited anyone else. 


Make regular contacts with investigators and members after they have made 
a commitment. This is an important part of following up. Make these contacts 
as often as needed to help them feel the Spirit and keep their commitments. 
An investigator who has accepted an invitation to be baptized, for instance, 
may need contact with you or a member of the Church everyday. During 
your visits, be positive and supportive, and encourage people to fulfill their 
commitments. 


o 


159 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Missionary: 

We are glad that you read some of the Book of Mormon. 
Chapter 11 is one of my favorites. Please share with us 
something that impressed you. 

Investigator: 

I liked the part where the people saw Christ. I want to read 
more, though. 

Missionary: 

That's great. Did you pray about the Book of Mormon and the 
things we shared with you? 

Investigator: 

Well, not really. As I told you the other night, prayer has 
never been a part of my life. 

Missionary: 

I can understand your feelings about prayer. I remember it 
was hard for me to . . . 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionary's first 
question help him find out how 
the investigator was doing with his 
commitment? 

■ What other follow-up questions 
did he ask? 


In the example above, the missionary asked questions to find out how the 
investigator was doing with his reading of the Book of Mormon. By doing 
this, the missionary was able to find out that the investigator had read some 
of the Book of Mormon but had not prayed. 


After you find out how well an investigator has fulfilled a commitment, you 
may need to adjust the commitment. Doing this may help the investigator or 
member to fulfill it. Or, you may need to give the original commitment again. 
Consider what the missionary did in the following example: 

Missionary: I can understand your feelings about prayer. I remember that 

it was hard for me to pray when I first joined the Church. 
After a while, though, prayer seemed to come naturally. We 
would like to take a few minutes to read some of the Book of 
Mormon and then pray with you. Do you have some time 
right now? 


Investigator: I've got a little time. [Mr. Spencer and the missionaries take 

turns reading and discussing the assignment for discussion 1.] 


Missionary: Let's kneel down and pray together about what we have read. 

[The missionaries pray, and then Mr. Spencer prays.] Mr. 
Spencer, we would like you to continue reading about the 
visit of Jesus Christ to the Nephites. Will you read 3 Nephi, 
chapters 12 through 15, before we return on Tuesday? 

Investigator: I can do that. 


Missionary: Will you continue to pray about what you read and ask the 

Lord if it is true? 

Investigator: I think I can do that. 


Read and Discuss 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionaries help Mr. 
Spencer fulfill the commitment to 
read the Book of Mormon? 

■ What did the missionaries do with 
the commitment to pray? 

■ Do you feel that Mr. Spencer will 
be more likely to fulfill the 
commitment he made during this 
visit? Why? 


160 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


)In the example above, the missionaries read some of the Book of Mormon 
with Mr. Spencer. They prayed and had Mr. Spencer pray. They also invited 
him to continue reading in 3 Nephi. They then invited him again to pray 
about the Book of Mormon. 

When you follow up, you should also encourage and support investigators. 
Do this by sincerely complimenting them for fulfilling commitments, reading 
the Book of Mormon with them, offering to help in any way, sharing a 
favorite scripture, promising blessings, or bearing your testimony. 

Consider the following example of a missionary giving support to Mr. 
Spencer: 

Missionary: We're pleased that you are willing to continue reading the 

Book of Mormon. We know, Mr. Spencer, that the Lord will 
confirm to you that the things we share with you are true. We 
encourage you to follow the counsel of Moroni to read and 
pray about the Book of Mormon. If there is anything you read 
that you don't understand, make a note of it and we can 
discuss it during our next visit. We would like to have a 
prayer before we leave. 


Read and Discuss 


The missionary explained that he was pleased by Mr. Spencer's willingness to 
read. He encouraged Mr. Spencer to pray and note things that he didn't 
understand so they could discuss them during their next visit. 


Read the following situation and the responses. Read the part of the 
missionary, and have your companion act as investigator. Decide whether the 
missionary did the following things: 

■ Asked questions to find out how well the investigator fulfilled the 
commitment. 

■ Adjusted the commitment or gave the original commitment again. 

■ Encouraged and supported the investigator. 


Find Out 

■ What did this missionary do to 
encourage and support Mr. 
Spencer? 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read the situation to him. 

■ Have him read the missionary's 
part in a response. You read the 
investigator's part. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary followed up effectively. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Situation 

You are returning to the Millers for a follow-up visit. You want to see if they 
are coming to church this Sunday and if they are reading the Book of 
Mormon. 


Missionary Response A 

Missionary: It's good to be with you and your family. Brother Miller. Are 

you still planning to come to church this Sunday? 

Investigator: Yes, I think that we'll be there. Now, you said 11:00 in the 
) morning. Is that for three hours? 

Missionary: That's right. Have you been enjoying your reading in the 

Book of Mormon? 


161 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


o 


Investigator: Oh, the reading is not going as well as it could be. 

Missionary: Why is that? 

Investigator: It's just hard to find the time to do it. 

Answer: The missionaries were not 
concerned about the commitments 
that the Millers had made. They did 
not offer support and only some 
encouragement for continued 
reading. 


Missionary: We understand, but it's important that you try to find the 

time to read the Book of Mormon. If you truly want to find 
out if the message we share with you is true, you will need to 
read and pray. Will you do it? 

Investigator: I'll see if I can get to it before you drop by again. 

Missionary: We look forward to seeing you on Wednesday. 


Missionary Response B 

Missionary: It's good to be with you and your family, Brother Miller. Are 

you still planning to come to church this Sunday? 

Investigator: Yes, I think that we'll be there. Now, you said 11:00 in the 
morning. Is that for three hours? 

Missionary: That's right. I sense that you have a question about that. 

Investigator: Well, you know that I work on Sundays, and my manager has 
agreed to let me off for a little while. I'm just thinking that 
three hours may be pressing my luck. 

Missionary: Would you feel more comfortable about coming to the 

sacrament meeting for the first hour? We don't want you to 
lose your job. 

Investigator: Yes, I would feel more comfortable about coming to the first 

meeting. I would have to slip out afterward. The rest of the 
family could stay if they wanted. 

Missionary: That sounds fine. Brother Miller. My companion and I will 

meet you and your family in the entry of the chapel. We think 
you will really enjoy the meetings. By the way, how has your 
reading in the Book of Mormon been going? 

Investigator: Oh, not as well as it could be, Elders. 

Missionary: Why is that? 

Investigator: It's just hard to find the time to read. 

Missionary: Do you have a few minutes right now so that we could read 

with you? 

Investigator: Yes, I think so. [The missionaries take some time to read and 
discuss parts of the Book of Mormon.] 

Missionary: Brother Miller, will you continue reading 3 Nephi, through 

chapter 18, and pray about what you read? 


Answer: The missionaries followed 
up on previous commitments and 
adjusted the invitation for Brother 
Miller to attend church. They 
encouraged and supported him. 
They took time to read the Book of 
Mormon together and invited 
Brother Miller again to continue 
reading. 


Missionary Response C 

Missionary: It's good to be with you and your family, Brother Miller. Are 

you still planning to come to church this Sunday? 

Investigator: We are going to try a lot harder to make it this Sunday. It's 
just really tough to attend on Sunday. 

Missionary: Try? You really need to attend to see what it's like. Will you 

be there this Sunday? 

Investigator: I will do my best. I understand that you really want us to 
come. I'll just have to see if I can get off work. 


162 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


^~^Missionary: 


Investigator: 

Missionary: 

Investigator: 

Missionary: 


It would be good to see you and your family there on Sunday. 
How has your reading in the Book of Mormon been going? 

Oh, not as well as it could be. Elders. 

Why is that? 

It's just hard to find the time to read. 

We understand. I used to read just before I went to bed. Try 
something like that. 


Listen to the audiotape segments for "Follow Up: Make Regular Contacts." 


Practice what you would say if you were placed in the following situations. 
Your companion will take the part of the investigator. Do not practice . 
resolving concerns. Focus your attention on the following three things: 

o ■ Ask questions to find out how well the investigator fulfilled the 
commitment. 

■ Adjust the commitment or give the original commitment again. 

■ Encourage and support the investigator. 

1. During your first discussion, Mr. Bentley agreed to read the Book of 
Mormon and pray. When you visit him the next day, he welcomes you in 
and says, "Glad you could stop by. Come on in." 


2. During your last discussion, you invited Mr. Smith to live the Word of 
Wisdom. He was very receptive and felt strongly that he should give up 
smoking. At the beginning of your visit he says, "It's good to see you 
again. The past couple of days have been tough." 

3. During your last visit with Mr. Simmons, you invited him to come to 
church. He seemed a bit reluctant but said he could make it. When you see 
him the next day he says, "I have been thinking about church tomorrow, 
and I don't think that I will be able to come." 

4. You have invited Albert and Jenny Dixon to ask some of their friends to 
attend their baptism in one week. When you return to follow up, they say, 
"It's great to see you! Only a few more days until the baptism." 


Jamie accepted the invitation to be baptized next week. He also committed 
to continue reading the Book of Mormon and praying. When you return 
for a follow-up visit, he greets you at the door and says, "Come on in." 


Answer: The missionaries did not 
ask questions to find out how the 
Millers were doing with their 
commitment. They did not try to 
adjust the commitment or encourage 
and help the Millers. "B" is the best 
example of a follow-up contact. 

Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Have your companion cover the 
right column. 

■ Read each situation to him. Take 
the part of the investigator who 
accepted the invitation. 

■ Have your companion respond by 
following up on the commitment, 
adjusting the commitment if 
necessary, and giving 
encouragement. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Responses : 

1. He is very willing to read and 
pray but has not been able to find 
the time. He is starting a new 
business in town. 

2. He tried not to smoke but could 
not quite do without his 
cigarettes. He wants to quit but 
feels that he lacks the strength. 

3. The church is a few miles away 
and Mr. Simmons does not have 
a way to get there. He is a little 
embarrassed to tell you. 

4. They called on a few of their close 
friends. Two said they were 
pleased to be invited. They 
weren't able to find anyone else 
at home. 

5. While reading the Book of 
Mormon last night, he felt an 
assurance that everything was 
going to work out. He has been 
praying but only occasionally. 


163 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

6. You invited Brother and Sister Johnson to make a list of their nonmember 
friends and to prayerfully consider whom to approach about the gospel. 
When you return to visit, Brother Johnson asks, "What can we do for you 
this time. Elders?" 

6. He hasn't had time to develop a 
list with his wife yet. He does feel 
strongly about missionary work, 
though, and wants to help. 


Share Feelings 

■ Share your feelings about how 
important it is to contact 
investigators and members 
regularly. 


Find Out 

■ How can follow-up visits help 
others fulfill commitments? 

End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule from the past few days. Select three investigators or 
members whom you have invited to make commitments. 

■ Write a goal to visit these people and follow up to see how they are doing 
with their commitments. Carry this goal with you during the day as a 
reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 

Invite 

■ Identify three investigators or 
members whom you could visit 
today to follow up on past 
commitments. 

■ Invite your companion to ask 
questions to see how these people 
are doing with their commitments, 
adjust the commitments, or invite 
them again to fulfill the 
commitments. 


Follow Up 

■ Write the goal to help your 
companion ask questions to find 
out how people are doing with 
their commitments, adjust the 
commitments, or invite them again 
to fulfill the commitments. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goals. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, identify 
opportunities to follow up. Discuss 
how you and your companion are 
doing. 


Conclusion 


This chapter on following up has focused on arranging to follow up and Read 

helping others keep commitments by making regular contacts. These contacts 
can be visits from you, visits from members, or other contacts. By following 
up, you will help others fulfill commitments, and they will be better prepared 
to feel the Spirit of the Lord. 


164 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve in his 
ability to follow up on 
commitments. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review the principles 
used in following up on 
commitments. 


165 


STUDY RECORD 


Date Time Spent Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation 

"Arrange to Follow Up" 

In three specific situations in 

which you invite someone to 

make a commitment, make 

plans for how and when you 
will follow up. 

"Make Regular Contacts" 

Visit three people who have 

made commitments and follow 

up to help them keep their 

commitments. 


Signature 


166
