PLAN 


INTRODUCTION 

LEARNER TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in planning. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 

The purpose of your missionary work is to help more people become Read and Discuss 

converted, baptized, and qualified to return to our Heavenly Father. One tool 

that you can use to accomplish this purpose is effective planning. Begin your 

study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply the 

principles you study. 

This chapter will discuss the following topics: 


Planning for Conversion 169 

Planning Resources: the Area Book 172 

Weekly and Daily Planning 179 


This chapter discusses how you can plan effectively in all aspects of 
proselyting — finding, teaching, and baptizing and fellowshipping. Planning 
is the process of mapping out how you will help as many people as possible 
progress toward conversion. 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 


Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. Your plans 
must center on using this pattern to help people make commitments. 


167 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ How does planning tie together 
different missionary activities? 

■ How does planning relate to the 
commitment pattern? 


Planning means to (1) decide how you can help more people progress toward Read and Discuss 
conversion, (2) arrange your daily schedule so that you complete the most 
productive activities, and (3) carry out your plan under the guidance of the 
Spirit and report your progress to leaders. 

Of course, your plans will need to be flexible. Things will not always happen 
the way you planned, and the Spirit will guide you to do things that you had 
not planned. In general, however, planning is part of the process of studying 
out your decisions in your mind (see D&C 9:7-9). You can receive much 
direction and inspiration during the planning process. 

You should usually have a planning session once a week. Then you can 
update your plans for a few minutes each day. Most important is that you are 
always trying to decide how to help people progress toward conversion. 

Find Out 

■ What is planning? 


168 


PLANNING FOR CONVERSION 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Your purpose as a missionary is to help investigators become converted and Read 
be baptized. One way to help you do this is to think of each contact as a 
member of a specific "pool." 

The finding pool includes those who have not yet accepted a commitment to 
hear the second discussion. (A person has not been truly found until he has 
made a serious commitment to investigate the Church.) Your goal is to help 
them make the commitment to hear the second discussion. 

The teaching pool consists of all your investigators. Your goal is to help them 
make and keep the commitment to be baptized. 

The baptizing and fellowshipping pool includes those who are making final 
preparation for baptism and those who have recently been baptized. Your 
goal is to help them keep their commitment to be baptized and then commit 
themselves to remain active in the Church. 

Discuss 

■ What are the names of the people 
in your finding, teaching, and 
baptizing and fellowshipping 
pools? 

■ What commitments should the 
people in each pool be working 
toward? 


In order to baptize regularly, you must add a few families to your teaching Read and Discuss 

pool each week. You must help others make the commitment to be baptized. 

O The key is to keep a steady flow of investigators moving from the finding 
pool to the teaching pool, and from the teaching pool to the baptizing and 
fellowshipping pool. You can do this only as you plan effectively, following 
the steps outlined below. 

1. Plan to meet the needs of those in the baptizing and fellowshipping pool. 

Help them keep the commitment to be baptized. Then help them become 
involved in their new ward or branch. You or the stake missionaries 
should have some contact with these people every day or two. 

2. Help those in the teaching pool make the commitment to be baptized. This 
will make sure that you always have someone in the baptizing and 
fellowshipping pool. Make contact with those in the teaching pool at least 
every two days. 

3. Take advantage of opportunities to find people to teach in all your 

activities. Invite nonmember friends and relatives of converts to baptisms, 
ask for referrals from recent converts and current investigators, and so 
forth. 

You can become much more productive as you plan to accomplish all three 
steps each week and pay enough attention to each pool. 

Find Out 

■ How can you take care of those in 
all three pools during the same 
week? 

■ Why will doing this help you 
become more productive? 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Have him read a situation. 


■ Ask him to decide which pool or 


pools the missionaries are paying 


169 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Below are descriptions of missionary situations. Read them and ask yourself 
these questions: 

■ Are these missionaries paying attention to all three pools? 

■ Which pools do they need to work on in order to help more people become 
converted and baptized? 

Decide what you would suggest to the missionaries. Discuss your answers 
with your companion. 

1. Elders Bastian and Dester have had a great spiritual experience as they 
have watched John Jacobson become converted and be baptized. They have 
worked well with the stake missionaries in fellowshipping John during the 
first week after the baptism. But now that the stake missionaries are doing 
more and more, the elders find that they don't have much to do. 


2. Elders Riding and Malone have a baptism scheduled for this week. They 
have two other baptisms scheduled in the three weeks that follow. This 
week they plan to invite two other investigators to be baptized. They find 
that they spend so much time meeting with these people every two days 
that they don't have time to do much else. 


3. Sisters Robertson and Collins taught three first discussions last week. They 
were able to make only one appointment for a second discussion. Their 
other appointments consisted of two second discussions, one fourth, and 
one fifth. The investigator taking the fourth discussion is the only one who 
has made a commitment to be baptized. 


4. Sisters Reynolds and Turner taught four first discussions last week and 
added two families to their list of investigators. They taught two second 
discussions this week, and one family made the commitment to be 
baptized. During the fifth discussion, Mary Oakes finally made the 
decision to be baptized. The sisters received two referrals from recent 
converts they were visiting. 

5. Elders Smith and Ball work hard on their finding activities. They usually 
add one or two families to their investigator list each week. They try to 
teach each of their investigators at least once a week. They have found that 
many people will commit to be baptized, but very few keep the 
commitment. 


attention to and which they need 
to pay more attention to. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
situations. 


Answers: 

These elders paid so much attention 
to the baptizing and fellowshipping 
pool that they neglected the others. 
Now they must spend all their time 
in finding so that they can have 
someone to teach. 


These elders are doing a good job of 
paying attention to the teaching and 
baptizing and fellowshipping pools. 
However, if they don't find 
investigators while they are 
performing these other activities, 
they will soon be without anyone to 
teach. 


These sisters are doing well in 
finding and teaching. However, too 
few of their investigators have made 
the commitment to be baptized. 
Perhaps the sisters aren't as effective 
as they could be in helping these 
people move into the baptizing and 
fellowshipping pool. 


These sisters are paying attention to 
all three pools. It seems that they 
will continue to have success. 


The elders do not contact those in 
the teaching and baptizing and 
fellowshipping pools often enough. 
Therefore, the investigators can be 
overcome by temptation and 
opposition. The elders could help 
the investigators by contacting them 
more often. 


170 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


6. Elders Hansen and Madsen had several baptisms one month, but they had 
none the next. 


These elders made the mistake of 
focusing on one pool at a time. They 
helped people move through the 
pools but did not keep all the pools 
full. 


Discuss 

■ How can daily and weekly 
planning help you move people 
from one pool to the next? 

■ Why is it important to keep all 
three pools in mind as you 
proselyte? 

You should schedule your time so that you accomplish the most important Read and Discuss 

activities. You can use the following principles to help you do this: 

■ Use the most productive time for the most important activities. This time is 
usually evenings and weekends. 

■ Plan appointments and activities in the same area for the same block of 
time. Then you will not have to travel as much. 

■ After people enter the teaching or baptizing and fellowshipping pool, do 
not let more than two days pass without contact from you. 

■ Include activities for the people in all three pools in your schedule. 

■ Always have an alternative plan, in case an investigator cancels an 
appointment at the last minute, for example. 

■ Schedule necessary time for district meetings, church meetings, baptismal 
services, and preparation for such meetings. 

■ Be present at all appointments, and be prompt. 

Discuss " 

■ How will each of thesb principles 
allow you to help more people 
become converted and be 
baptized? 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by the doing the following: 

■ Make a list of all the investigators and new members you are working with. 
Decide which pool each of them belongs in. 

■ Write down the things you need to do to help investigators move into the 
next pool. 

■ Decide where you most need to improve in helping people move from one 
pool to the next. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to make a 
list of all the people you are 
working with and decide which 
pool each person belongs in. 

■ Ask him to suggest where the two 
of you can improve in your 
planning. 


Follow Up 

■ With your companion, make a list 
of the people you are working 
with. Decide which pool each 
person belongs in. 

■ Together, make plans to help these 
people progress toward 
conversion. 

■ Take these plans with you as you 
proselyte. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 


171 


PLANNING RESOURCES: THE AREA BOOK 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Locate the plans that you and your 
companion wrote to help people in 
each pool progress toward 
conversion. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he carried out his plans. 

■ Discuss what went well in carrying 
out the plans and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how thinking about the 
three pools helped you plan your 
activities. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 


You have good resources to help you plan your missionary activities. These Read and Discuss 
include the following: 

1. The Missionary Weekly Planner/Weekly Record of Proselyting Results 

2. The Investigator Record 

3. The Convert Baptism Checklist 

You should collect these planning resources into one place. You could put 
them into a three-ring binder or file box, for example. This collection is called 
an area book. You should refer to some part of the area book each day as you 
update and adjust your plans. You may also want to take your area book 
with you to your weekly correlation meeting. This book should stay in your 
area after you are transferred so that future missionaries can use it. 

This section will discuss each of these three planning resources. 


The Missionary Weekly Planner/Weekly Record 
of Proselyting Results 

The planning resource you should use most often is the Missionary Weekly 
Planner/Weekly Record of Proselyting Results. The front side of the planner 
(Missionary Weekly Planner) is designed to contain your goals and schedule. 

You should use at least three weekly planners at a time. Then you can 
schedule appointments for the next three weeks. Appointments further away 
than three weeks, such as zone conferences, can be written in your pocket 
calendar. 

Write your weekly goals on the planner. They should be based on the people 
you are working with, and they should show your faith that the Lord will 
continue to help you find new people to teach and baptize. 

For example, missionaries may set a goal to make return appointments with 
the people to whom they teach discussions. The goal would be based on the 
following information: 

■ The people with whom they have scheduled discussions. 

■ The other discussions they will teach those same people. They will try to 
teach each investigator two or three discussions each week. 

■ The people they will find and begin teaching this week. 

Notice that not all of these appointments have been made when the 
missionaries set their goal. But they can exercise faith that people will 
respond as they feel the Spirit. 


172 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


(^^1 Occasionally, missionaries will set goals that deal with numbers instead of 
people. They might just choose a number of baptisms or discussions that 
they think they can reach. This type of goal will not help them bring more 
people to conversion and baptism. You should set goals that center on 
helping our Heavenly Father's children return to live with him. 


Proselyting goals are included on the Missionary Weekly Planner. These will 
help you focus on your most important priorities. As you make your plans 
each week, you should include specific activities to accomplish goals such as 
these: 

■ Adding new families to your teaching pool 

■ Having as many potential converts as possible attend sacrament meeting 

■ Planning a return appointment for each discussion 

■ Scheduling baptismal dates for as many prepared nonmembers as possible 

■ Baptizing those who are scheduled for baptism this week 

■ Making final plans for those scheduled for baptism in the next three weeks 


o 


Find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
setting goals to help people and 
just choosing numbers to include 
in your goals? 

■ How many weekly planners 
should you use at a time? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ Which of the three pools does each 
of these goals relate to? 

■ Why are these goals especially 
important? 

Identify 

■ Locate the sample Missionary 
Weekly Planner on page 185. 

■ Have your companion read the 
first of the following descriptions. 

■ Have him locate on the planner 
the information referred to. Then 
have him proceed to the following 
descriptions. 

■ Help him see the relationship 
between the two sides of the 
planner. 


A sample Missionary Weekly Planner has been prepared for the following 
activity (see page 185). Refer to the sample as you read each of the 
descriptions below. 


■ Notice that these elders set a goal to add four new families to their teaching 
pool. The back of the planner shows that they reached that goal by adding 
the Coxes, Shaws, Pecks, and Bob Johnson to their teaching pool. Their 
efforts to plan with faith were rewarded. 

■ The elders set a goal to have twelve potential converts at sacrament 
meeting. Their list of investigators shows that a total of twelve potential 
converts could have attended church. Nine actually attended. 

■ The elders set a goal to teach sixteen discussions resulting in return 
teaching appointments. They decided on this number by considering the 
appointments they had already set, their plan to teach each investigator 
every two or three days, and their plan to teach the new families they add 
to their teaching pool. (The number does not include follow-up visits 
between discussions.) The back of the planner shows that they taught 


thirteen discussions and made return appointments for eleven of them. 


173 


LEARNER TRAINER 

(Notice the date of the next teaching appointment following the number of 
the discussion taught.) 

■ The elders believed that they could schedule twelve potential converts for 
baptism. (Ideally, every investigator who has had the second discussion will 
have a date scheduled for his baptism.) The back of the planner shows that 
fourteen of their current investigators are scheduled for baptism. We cannot 
tell how many of these were scheduled this week. (To determine if the goal 
had been reached, we would have to look at last week's planner to see how 
many were scheduled for baptism at that time. We would then need to look 
at this week's planner to see how many more were scheduled this week.) 

■ Five people are scheduled to be baptized this week. The back of the planner 
shows that these people are the Rawsons. The front of the planner shows 
that on Friday, April 20, the missionaries conducted the baptismal 
interviews for them. The baptismal service was held on Saturday, April 21. 

■ The elders plan to baptize sixteen people within the following three weeks. 

The list of investigators shows that these people are the Merrills, Danners, 

Rawsons, Coxes, Shaws, Pecks, and Bob Johnson. With the Lord's help, the 
missionaries believe that they can meet — and perhaps exceed — this goal. 

Identify 

■ Read the questions on the left. 
Have your companion find the 
necessary information on the 
sample planner to answer them. 

■ Discuss how well the 
missionaries used the principles 
of effective planning. 


Examine the sample planner. Answer the following questions: 

1. What important activities did the missionaries perform during the 
productive evening and weekend hours? 

2. When did they have the most travel time? When did they have the least? 
How did they reduce their travel time? 

3. How often did they contact those in the teaching and baptizing and 
fellowshipping pools? 

4. How did they include all three pools in their planning? 

5. What alternate plans did they have? 

6. When did they schedule regular meetings and preparation time for those 
meetings? 

The back side of the planner (Weekly Record of Proselyting Results) asks for 

important information about your investigators. It will help you focus on 

important events. The table below describes the reasons for this information. 

Please read the entire table. 


Information 

Why It Is Important 

Number of potential converts in the 
family 

This will help you determine your 
baptismal goals. 

Source of contact 

As you keep track of how people 
are introduced to the missionaries, 
you will be able to identify your 
most productive finding methods. 

If the family consists of new 
investigators 

This is how you keep track of your 
goal for adding new families to your 
teaching pool. 

Number of potential converts who 
attended sacrament meeting 

This is how you keep track of 
people who have fulfilled this 
important commitment. 


174 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


This will help you to keep track of 
the number of discussions resulting 
in return appointments. It will also 
help you schedule next week's 
appointments. Circle the discussion 
number if a personal member friend 
of the investigator is present. This 
will help you focus on the important 
role of the members. 

This will help you keep track of how 
well you are meeting your goals for 
scheduling people for baptism, 
baptisms this week, and baptisms in 
the following three weeks. 

Find Out 

■ Ask your companion to describe 
the purpose of each column on the 
back of the planner. 

Identify 

■ Locate the sample Weekly Record 
of Proselyting Results on page 186. 

■ Have your companion read the 
first of the following descriptions. 

■ Have him locate on the back of the 
planner the information referred 

O to. Then have him proceed to the 

following descriptions. 

Examine the back of the sample planner — the Weekly Record of Proselyting 
Results — on page 186. Consider the progress of the following five 
investigator families. 

■ There are four potential converts in the Merrill family. They were found 
through a member referral. They are not new this week because there is no 
mark in the new family column. The missionaries need to do some 
important follow-up because only two of the four potential converts were in 
sacrament meeting last week. The missionaries are not working as closely as 
they should be with the members. This is evident because even though the 
Merrill family were member referrals, they are not being taught with a close 
member friend present. 

■ Bob Johnson is a single investigator found through tracting. He is a new 
investigator this week because he received the first discussion on Saturday. 

The second discussion is set for the following Monday. He has not yet 
attended sacrament meeting or been scheduled for baptism. 

■ These missionaries seem to need some help with the three potential 
converts in the Danner family. Even though the Danners received the fifth 
discussion on Wednesday, they were not in sacrament meeting. They did 
not have a member present at the discussion and do not have the next 
discussion scheduled until next Wednesday. They have not scheduled a 
date for baptism. It is usually a mistake to proceed to the fifth discussion 
when the investigators have not made these basic commitments. 

■ The Rawsons are well on their way to baptism. They all attended sacrament 
meeting last week. Members were present in both discussions, and the 
Rawsons have a baptismal date set just a few days away. The missionaries 
seem to be doing things right with these investigators. (The record also 
shows that the family indeed was baptized — on April 21.) 

U " The Coxes, like the Rawsons, were introduced to the Church by member 
friends. Members attended two of the three discussions presented to the 
Coxes this week, and the Coxes agreed to a tentative baptismal date of 
April 30. 


^~^The discussion taught and the date 
of the next appointment 


Number of potential converts 
scheduled for baptism and the date 
of the baptism 


175 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Practice 

■ Obtain a blank Missionary Weekly 
Planner/Weekly Record of 
Proselyting Results. 

■ Have your companion read the 
situation. 

■ Ask him to fill out the Weekly 
Record of Proselyting Results 
based on the situation. 


Obtain a blank Missionary Weekly Planner/Weekly Record of Proselyting 
Results. Based on the following situation, fill out the Weekly Record of 
Proselyting Results. 

Situation 

Today is Saturday, June 20. It is 9:30 P.M., and you are sitting with your 
companion in a companion planning meeting. With your companion, fill out 
the Weekly Record of Proselyting Results for the week of June 14th through 
20 th. The following in forma Hon will help you in this task. 

1. As you were tracHng on Wednesday, June 17th, you found Joe Ballif. You 
taught Joe the first discussion that day and set up another appointment 
with him onjune 24th at 11:00 a.m. 

2. You taught Jim Scott three Kmes during the week of June 14th through 
20th in the Palmers' home. The Palmers are good Church members who 
introduced Jim to the gospel. You taught Jim the third discussion on 
Sunday the 14th, the fourth discussion on Tuesday the 16th, and the fifth 
discussion on Friday the 19th at 10:00 A.M. Jim came to church on Sunday 
the 14th and is committed to be baptized on June 22nd at 6:30 P.M. 

3. You taught the Thortenson family the fourth discussion on Sunday, June 
14th, with a member present. You set up another appointment with them 
on Sunday, June 21st, at 7:00 P.M. There are five potential converts in the 
family. Three of them came to church on Sunday, June 14th. All five 
committed to be baptized on June 30th. You found the Thortensons while 
tracHng in their area. 

4. You taught the Jeffrey family the first discussion on Sunday, June 14th, 
and the second discussion on Wednesday the 17th. Your next appointment 
with them is on June 21st at 8:00 P.M. There are four potenHal converts in 
the family. None of them attended church on the 14th. On Wednesday the 
17th, they all committed to be baptized on July 10th. The Jeffreys were a 
visitors' center referral. 

5. You taught Kevin Smith the third discussion on Monday, June 15th. You 
set up another appointment for Tuesday, June 23rd, at 6:00 P.M. Kevin did 
not attend church on June 14th. You found Kevin through a member 
referral. 

6. You taught the Lopez family the third discussion on June 16th, and the 
fourth discussion on June 19th. Both discussions were taught with a 
member present. Your next appointment with them is on June 23rd at 7:30 
P.M. There are two potenHal converts in the family, and both came to 
church on June 14th. They committed to be baptized on July 13th. You 
found this family through a member referral. 

7. As you were tracHng on Tuesday, June 16th, you found the West family. 
There are four potenHal converts in the family. You taught them the first 
discussion on June 16th, and the second discussion on June 18th. Your 
next appointment with them is on June 22nd at 8:30 P.M. Three of the West 
family committed to be baptized on July 18th. 

8. On the evening of Friday, June 19th, you were Hred. But you decided to 
tract for one more hour before quitHng. On the last door of the street, you 
found Rich Strong — a golden contact! You taught Rich the first discussion 
that night, and Hie second discussion Saturday night, June 20th. You 
invited Rich to be baptized, and he committed for July 13th. Your next 
appointment with Rich is June 24th at 8:30 P.M. 


176 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


' The Investigator Record Read and Discuss 

It is impossible to record on the planner all of the information that you need 
to know about an investigator. You can record important information on the 
Investigator Record, however. You begin to complete this form when an 
investigator accepts an appointment for the second discussion. You continue 
to record important information throughout the teaching period. If the 
nonmember decides to stop investigating or if you are transferred, the 
Investigator Record should remain in the area so that other missionaries can 
follow up. 

Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of the 
Investigator Record? 

Identify 

■ Have your companion locate the 
sample Investigator Record on 
pages 187-88. 

■ Ask him the questions in the left 
column. 

■ Help him to locate the answers to 
the questions on the Investigator 
Record. 

Use the sample Investigator Record on pages 187-88 to answer the following 
questions about a former investigator family. 

1. What is the name of this family and where do they live? 

2. How were they contacted? 

0 3. Do they have any member friends? Who are they? 

4. How far have they gone in the discussions? 

5. What commitments have they made? Which have they kept? 

6. Why did the missionaries stop teaching them? 

7. What should the missionaries do about this family? 

Find Out 

■ How will the Investigator Record 
help you plan effectively? 

The Convert Baptism Checklist 

The Convert Baptism Checklist is another tool to help you plan effectively. Read and Discuss 

The checklist outlines the important events that should occur before baptism, 
immediately after baptism, and within one year after baptism. A sample 
Convert Baptism Checklist can be found on page 189. 

The ward mission leader usually fills out this form. You should also keep a 
copy. Use it to discuss with him the progress of all converts and all 
investigators who are close to baptism. Use the results of these discussions to 
help plan for those in the baptizing and fellowshipping pool. 

Find Out 

■ Refer to the Convert Baptism 
Checklist on page 189. How can 
the information on this checklist 
affect your plans? 


177 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Examine your weekly planners from the past three weeks. Decide if you set 
your goals with faith and based them on helping people. Set proselyting 
goals for the next week that do these things. 

■ Update the investigator records of all your current investigators. 

■ In your next meeting with the ward mission leader, use the Convert 
Baptism Checklist to discuss the progress of all potential converts and 
recent converts. 

■ Read "The Proselyting Area Book" on page 183. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to review 
recent weekly planners, update 
investigator records, and prepare 
to discuss the Convert Baptism 
Checklist with the ward mission 
leader. 

■ Ask him to decide how you and 
he can use these planning 
resources more effectively. 

■ Invite him to read "The 
Proselyting Area Book" on page 
183. 


Follow Up 

■ With your companion, plan to 
examine your three most recent 
weekly planners, update 
investigator records, and discuss 
the Convert Baptism Checklist 
with the ward mission leader. 

■ Together, read "The Proselyting 
Area Book" on page 183. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 


178 


WEEKLY AND DAILY PLANNING 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Discuss the plans that you and 
your companion made to use 
planning resources effectively. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he carried out his plans. 

■ Discuss what went well in carrying 
out the plans and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how using planning 
resources helps you use the 
commitment pattern in your work. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

You should have a planning session each week to review the three pools and Read and Discuss 

plan to help investigators progress toward baptism. You should also have 

daily planning sessions to prepare for the next day's proselyting. Pray for 

inspiration as you begin to plan. Follow these priorities, as discussed earlier 

in this section. 

First, plan to meet the needs of those in the baptizing and fellowshipping 
pool. 

Second, help those in the teaching pool make the commitment to be 
baptized. 

Third, take advantage of finding opportunities in all your activities. 

In order to hold a weekly planning session, you will need the following tools: 

■ The Missionary Weekly Planner/Weekly Record of Proselyting Results from 
the previous week and those used for scheduling the next two to three 
weeks 

■ Your area book 

■ Your pocket calendar 

With these tools, you should set your proselyting goals for the coming week 
as follows: 

1. Review all information on the Weekly Record of Proselyting Results from 
the previous week. 

2. Discuss with your companion each goal area described on the Missionary 
Weekly Planner. 

3. Set your goals. 

4. Write your goals in the boxes on next week's Missionary Weekly Planner. 

Discuss 

■ How does the Weekly Record of 
Proselyting Results help when 
setting proselyting goals? 

Find Out 

■ How do you set proselyting goals? 

Once you have set your goals, you are ready to make a plan to accomplish Read and Discuss 

them. You will first plan for those people who are in your baptizing and 
fellowshipping pool. To do this, you should — 


179 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


1. Review baptismal dates on last week's Weekly Record of Proselyting 
Results. Also, review the three copies of the Missionary Weekly Planner for 
baptisms already scheduled. 

2. Write upcoming baptisms on the Missionary Weekly Planner forms for the 
next few weeks. 

3. Review your area book and pocket calendar to find other baptizing and 
fellowshipping activities. These could include baptismal interviews or 
follow-up with nonmembers invited to a baptismal service. 

4. Schedule these other activities on the Missionary Weekly Planner. 

Find Out 

■ How do you plan for those ready 
for baptism? 

Then plan for those you are now teaching. To do this, you should — Read and Discuss 

1. Identify future teaching appointments recorded on the Weekly Record of 
Proselyting Results from the previous week. 

2. Identify teaching appointments or follow-up visits written in your pocket 
calendar. 

3. Schedule these teaching appointments and follow-up visits on the weekly 
planners. 

4. Schedule other teaching activities on the weekly planners. 

Find Out 

■ How should you use the Weekly 
Record of Proselyting Results for 
planning teaching? 

Next, schedule on your Missionary Weekly Planner regular meetings such as Read and Discuss 
church, missionary correlation meetings, and district meetings. 

Then plan specific finding activities. (Remember that you should be finding 
people all the time — while you teach, baptize, and fellowship.) To do this, 
you should — 

1. Review your pocket calendar for appointments scheduled with members, 
recent converts, or previous investigators. 

2. Write these appointments on the weekly planners. 

3. Preview the weekly planners to be used for the next two weeks, looking at 
open time periods. 

4. Select finding activities that best use your time and resources. 

5. Write these activities on the weekly planners. 

Find Out 

■ How do you plan for finding 
activities? 

Finally, schedule in your Missionary Weekly Planner meals, study, and Read 

preparation day activities. When you have finished planning, update your 
investigator records. Transfer the information from the previous Weekly 
Record of Proselyting Results to the one for the current week. 

Your weekly plan will not contain every detail of your schedule. Take time 
each night to complete your plans for the next day. As you do so, use the 
following principles of effective planning, which were discussed earlier: 

■ Use the most productive time for the most important activities. This time is 
usually evenings and weekends. 

■ Plan appointments and activities in the same area for the same block of 
time. Then you will not have to travel as much. 

■ After people enter the teaching or baptizing and fellowshipping pool, do 
not let more than two days pass without contact from you. 

■ Include activities for the people in all three pools in your schedule. 

■ Always have an alternative plan, in case an investigator cancels an 
appointment at the last minute, for example. 


180 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


■ Schedule necessary time for district meetings, church meetings, baptismal 
services, and preparation for such meetings. 


■ Be present at all appointments, and be prompt. 


Discuss 

■ Why should you consider these 
principles in your daily planning 
sessions? 


Th.e following checklist summarizes the information in this section. Read and Discuss 

Planning Checklist 


□ Collect your planning tools (current copies of- the Missionary Weekly 
Planner, area book, pocket calendar). 

□ Transfer the information from the current Weekly Record of Proselyting 
Results to both sides of the Missionary Weekly Planner/Weekly Record of 
Proselyting Results for the coming week. Continually add information to 
future planners. 

□ Review the information from copies of the Investigator Record and Convert 
Baptism Checklist, other items in the area book, and your pocket calendar. 

□ Update copies of the Investigator Record and other planning tools. 

□ Set proselyting goals for the coming week. 

□ Schedule baptisms and other activities for those in the baptizing and 
fellowshipping pool. 


□ Schedule future teaching appointments, follow-up visits, and other activities 
for those in your teaching pool. 

□ Schedule finding activities for open time periods. Be sure to schedule 
enough time to find through members. 


□ Schedule regular meetings such as church services, district meetings, and 
zone conferences. 


□ Schedule meals, preparation day activities, study time, and other necessary 
activities. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ With your companion, schedule a time for your weekly planning session. 

■ Schedule a time each day to finalize your plans for the next day. 

■ Use the principles of effective planning as you schedule your activities. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to schedule 
a time for a weekly planning 
session. 

■ Ask him to discuss and apply the 
principles of effective planning 
identified in this section. 


Follow Up 

■ With your companion, schedule a 
time for your weekly planning 
session. 

■ Together, schedule a time each 
day to finalize your plans for the 
following day. 

■ Decide how you can better plan 
your work. 

■ Complete the study record at the 


181 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

Conclusion 


The principles in this lesson will help you fulfill your purpose as a 
missionary — to help others become converted, baptized, and qualified to 
return to our Heavenly Father. When you use the Missionary Weekly 
Planner/Weekly Record of Proselyting Results well, you show your faith and 
desire to work hard. Use this tool as well as the others in your area book to 
help you organize your activities and keep good records. As you do, you will 
be better able to use the commitment pattern to bring souls to Christ. 

Read 

Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review principles of 
effective planning. 


182 


THE PROSELYTING AREA BOOK 


Introduction 

The proselyting area book is a tool to help you collect, organize, and keep 
important information about a proselyting area. It can help you plan your 
proselyting activities, keep records of investigators, keep track of referrals and 
callbacks, and work with members. It can help you give information to the 
missionaries who take your place when you are transferred. Using it, you 
may be able to find people whom you can reach when previous elders could 
not. 

You should use this book in the following ways: 

1. Daily planning 

2. Weekly planning sessions 

3. Weekly missionary correlation meetings with the ward mission leader 

4. Zone and district meetings 

Do not spend so much time working on your area book that you detract from 
your regular proselyting. Also, do not write negative comments about the 
area, the investigators, or the members in the book. Zone and district leaders 
should regularly check to see that missionaries are keeping their area books 
current. 

Suggested Contents 

The following information will give you ideas about what to include in your 
area book. Some ideas may not apply in your area, or you may think of 
others. 

O Plans and Goals. File copies of your Missionary Weekly Planner/Weekly Record 
of Proselyting Results in this section after the week in which they are used. 
Periodically review them to see what activities have helped you find people 
to teach, what parts of your area have produced the most people to teach, 
and which former investigators could be contacted again. Record all activities 
with investigators on these planners. Remove the planners from the book as 
the information becomes outdated. 

Finding Information. You may want to keep notes on some of the following: 
areas tracted (including dates), good areas to tract again (where many people 
were not at home), members contacted, referrals received and visits made, 
places where you left copies of the Book of Mormon and where you called 
back, and potential future investigators (including nonmembers who are 
being friendshipped by members and other nonmembers who might receive a 
future contact). 

Map of Area. Include the most detailed street map available. Obtain street 
maps from the city or county government and ward maps from the bishop or 
branch president. Note the area and ward boundaries. Mark key locations or 
landmarks and, where appropriate, homes of members. 

Schedule of Meetings. List the dates, times, locations, and purposes of regularly 
scheduled meetings, such as weekly missionary correlation meetings and 
district meetings. Include a list of those who normally attend and a sample 
agenda if possible. 

Investigator Record. Record on this form information about each investigator 
who has been taught. Include personal information (age, marital status, etc.), 
how you found out about him, names of LDS friends or relatives, his 
reactions to each discussion, and the commitments he made. If he stops 
hearing the discussions, include reasons and possible dates for follow-up (for 

O example, the date for a follow-up visit to an investigator who will be away for 
a long time). 


183 


Lists of Members. Get from the bishop or branch president lists of stake and 
ward leaders and ward members. Note part-member families. Include a 
Church organization chart for the area that includes the Area President, 
Regional Representative, stake president(s), bishops or branch presidents, 
and ward or branch mission leaders. Also include a list of members who are 
prominent in the community. 

Public Relations Contacts. If it applies to your area, list names and addresses of 
the local Church public communications director, media representatives, and 
contacts for service dubs, schools, and other community organizations. 

Miscellaneous Information. Include in this section information such as the 
following: 

1. Expenses: amount due, date due, and name and address of person to be 
paid for — 

a. Apartment rent, 

b. Utilities. 

c. Phone. 

d. Other regular payments. 

2. Cash deposits on apartment, utilities, and telephone (include amount). 

3. Inventory of utensils and furnishings that should remain in the apartment. 

4. The best place for — 

a. Banking (include procedures for cashing checks). 

b. Grocery shopping. 

c. Doing laundry. 

d. Barber or beauty shop services. 

e. Other services. 

5. Addresses of post office, meetinghouse, visitors' center, seminary or 
institute buildings, and other important facilities. 

6. Telephone numbers for police, fire department, emergency medical 
assistance, and other emergency services. 

7. Day for garbage pickup. 

Notes. Include blank paper for taking notes. 


o 


I 


184 


o o o 


the CHURCHof 
JESUS CHRIST 
0F LATTER-DAY 
SAINTS 


Missionary Weekly Planner 

Reporting week (day and month) Year 

j- '/S' .0 4 >2/ 

Zone and district Proselyting area 

'Z.077& S Tesnfi/e/or? 


Misstona ry’s name 

19 37 Pypes- 

Compan ions name 

B'/a'eh 


Use this side of the torn at the beginning of each week to set proselyting goals and activities with your companion . Use the reverse side to record all current families in your teaching 
pool and proselyting results as they occur. Carry this form with you each day Include all contacts by you and your companion, whether done separately, as in splits, or together. 


Proselyting Goals for this Week Write the number you plan to achieve lor each goal 


New families you plan Potential converts' you plan Discussions you plan to have resulting in 

to add to your teaching pool. to have at sacrament meeting, return teaching appointments or baptism. 


Nonmembers you plan to schedule Potential converts' you plan to 
lor a firm baptismal date. baptize. 


Calendar Refer to your goats above and plan together daily the appointments and activities necessary to reach your goals. 


Sunday ur 


Monday /(? 

Tuesday 

Wednesday \ 

Thursday / 


s' 


Friday 20 


Potential converts' you plan 
to baptize in the next 3 weeks 


Saturday z/ 


* Potential Converl-(l) any person who will be nine years of age or <*er at the lime of baptism, or 
(2) any person who will be eight years of age at the time of beptism whose parents are both nonmembers. 


31970 9/86 Printed in USA 


00 

Os 


Weekly Record of Proselyting Results 


Carry this form with you and record results as you proselyte. Enter totals for the week on the Missionary Weekly Report to the mission president 


Current families in teaching 
pool (fist the full name of 
each famify you are now 
teaching) 

Number of 
potential 
converts* 

in the 
family 

Source of contact 
N-Nonmember or self referral 
M-Member referral 

L-LDS mass media (T-V-. radio, 
magazines, etc.) referral 

F— Full time missionary contact 
V-Visitors' Center referral 

O-Other referral sources 

Check if 
new family 
this week 
(count only 
if accepted 
return ap- 
pointment 
after first 
discussion) 

Number of 
potential 
converts* 
who 

attended 
sacrament 
meeting 
this week 

Enter the number of the discussion presented and the date of your next teaching appointment. Circle discussion if 
member/friendshipper was present (LDS member who is a personal friend to the nonmember). 

1- The Plan of Our Heavenly Father 4-E(emal Progression 7-Home Teaching Lesson 1 

2- The Gospel of Jesus Christ 5-Living a Christlike Life 8-Other presentations 

3- The Restoration 6-Membership in the Kingdom 

Number of potential 
converts* scheduled 
for baptism and the 
date of the baptism 

Sunday# 

Monday# 

Tuesday/^ 

Wednesday^ 

Thursday^ 

Friday Zo 

Saluiday^ 

Example: Rex Brown 

5 

M 


5 


31 Mai 


3 

3 Apr 


o 

5 Apr 


5 

18 Apr 

1 Mtrr)// 


M 


z 


3 


P 

20A(+ 


-“n 

5 


4 

28Aprit 

2 Jp/mso/? 

/ 

P 

A^ 


2 

KApr 


3 Panned 

3 

P 


5 


4 /?(W/S0/7 

5 

M 


IfW 


mtr 


S 

2/Aptii 

5 Ce/r 

3 

M 

A-" 


0 

fflpr 


2 

2 Mpr 


@L 

Z3*r 

3 

30 April 

6 SriaeeP 

2 

L 

A*" 

Z 


7 Pec/c 

3 

1/ 

A-"" 


2 

riApr 

3 


4 


2 

8Mmj 

8 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


'Potential Convert— (1) any person who will be nine years of ege or over at the time of baptism, or 
(2) any person who will be eight years of age at the time of baptism whose parents are both nonmembers. 


^CHURCHof 
JESUS CHRIST 
0F LATTER-DAY 
SAINTS 


Investigator Record 


Complete this form for all investigators who hear the first discussion and who accept an 
appointment for the second discussion. Keep this form in your area record. 


Proselyting area Date , . 

/o//s/s7 

Missionaries who taught investigator , / 

Ward/Branch ' ' 

Stake/Mission J ,_ i 

Investigator's, name , . , 

pyasrp/rKp- 

Spouse . ^ 

•JeSJrf/t&L' 

Telephone 

SS5-3Z9? 

investigator’s address . *_ . / 

4-275" /~//7Co//7 3M. 

Children j . 

/yyaries 

Age 

// 

Sex 

/= 

oty Tres/fop 

sj 0/70^6 & si/ 

/5 

/M 

s,a,e /yfo. 


/£> 

7= 

Nation or zip code 

22.334 


X 

M 


How did this family or individual first begin meetingwith the missionaries? . * . . 

S'e-ferred 6/ 77 &/g nape's, pop /• A fine lsai//£ 


List the names and telephone numbers ol LDS friends or relatives 

Bot> 555-277? 


Write helpful information about the family or individual (occupation, interests, religion, or beliefs, etc.l * - 

sj//r? ts s<^oo/ \Jr. / 7 /g 4 ); rv/Z-jf/ir/e^ 

/7<9we'/wakef' a*i4 it pa/4- tr/ve^ ■/jhaa/g/sce- u/teZeK 77/ >5 ^ o/cZ^r 

chf/drzrr par/rc/pc/ZtS ac/rVe/y/h /t/yh sd7ao/gc/7i//f/iZ5. 77/e, /a/ri/A/atf/f/aZea 
&>/&! flopaHicd/aK re/'g/cw times'. 77?&/ To 75 fa -/raise/ a//a( &r/-eHn/n. 


Describe the results of each discussion given 


Discussion 

Date given 

Reaction 

Commitments 

Follow*up 

© 

/ 0//5/67 

J/rn /- -JcHn'/fer-uSej-t, 
peasa/tfBu/- "guarded" 

/.) Frag ~ 

2. ) Pead BodcarPotmoti 

M/e-p/an -fa v/sff- aqa/rt 
0*r /o//e/&7 

0 

'0//g/z7 

A7ar/5 u/3sa.bH'di$fant- / 
OHter cfyt/dren no/home 

Attend Sac. Adtg. 

IVe’// ar/trtrqe Zz>/tave £bv/S 
famifa tafoe. -Mem /v cJujrcJt , 

0 

70/25/07 

/-am'/ fa /tad •fo/tarecarfij 

Yvt'sp&rfs cvestj-, 
rrfstui£sj»n nnt- completed. 

Ab/re^ 

fab /reed ft? ca// stem 
farrra/rda/, /0/26/S7. 

4 


5 


6 


Other 


31983 4/87 Printed in USA 


187 


Did the mvestigator(s): 

Read in the Book of Mormon? B'fes □ Np 

Attend church? □ Yes Blto 

Pray individually? E'l'es □ No 

Pray as a family? □ Yes B-ffo 


why did ihe family or individual discontinue investigation? 

jsaid Hia+ Him werts it/si -ho fasti u/Hto 


scJjoo/, a/fd cxH-acumcv/jr' acHWHes. 


How many pages?.. 


Write additional information that could help miossionaries who will contact this investigator in the future. 

A /Mae/#/? Hrtti c/afaeA -fv t>& He Usu -for fatvsHaafa/t, 


-fag, lA/a/fifas H? fa <c- //J/fa afaa/A 

faesr s-foa/y H?e, gespe/. Ph/Aa/ts fa^/ 64 

H/~fa/ra. i* fa 60 * 7 Hfaes faes/- "tfarfa/ti faays. 0 


Investigator recontacted for additional referrals one year (or specified period) later for referrals (or for own interest if not yet baptized) 


Convert Baptism Checklist 


The bishop uses this form in priesthood executive committee and ward council meetings to discuss 
the progress of each new convert during the first year after baptism. Under the direction of the 
bishop, the ward mission leader completes this form for potential converts. He may need to obtain 
necessary information from the full-time missionaries. 


Name ol convert and spouse 

OMar/es c/nJ Cdhj/ PT///M 

Baptism date 

/ O//3/06 

Address 

27/ & OaP /?oaa 

Names of children 

A/iq/C' 

Age 

s~ 


Telephone 

S5’5'67#Z- 

1 

I 

2 . 

Country 

C/SA , 

Postal/zip code 

94536 


Home teachers 

C/yde De/7/7/s, Pobe/J 

1 Visiting teachers 

Manf PM flips, Anne-ms Johnson 

Before Baptism 

Date Completed 

The bishop has met the nonmember(s) 

9/Z8/06 

The missionaries have taught all the discussions 

/0//0/86 

The investigator(s) have attended sacrament meeting 

9/X//06 

The candidate(s) have been interviewed for baptism 

/O//Z/0& 

The Baptism 

Date Completed 

The bishop interviews the new convert(s) 

/0//9/6P 

Eligible male(s) receive the Aaronic Priesthood 

/0/Z6/&6 

) The new convert(s) are enrolled in the Gospel Essentials class 

ZO//9/36 

Stake missionaries begin teaching the discussions tor new member(s) 


The elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies visit the new convert(s) 

/<?//£/ f £ 

The new convert(s) begin regular family home evenings, scripture study, and family prayer 

/P//3/06 

One to Four Months After the Baptism 

Date Completed 

The bishop interviews the convert(s) again 

////&/#£ 

The new convert(s) receive Church callings 

// //£/<?£ 

The new convert(s) bear testimony or speak in church 

/*/*//& 

The discussions for new member(s) are completed 

/////<?7 

The new convert(s) begin a family group sheet for temple sealing 

///*/*? 

As Soon As Appropriate During First Year 

Dale Completed 

Eligible and worthy males receive the Melchizedek Priesthood 


After One Year 

Date Completed 

The family attends the temple 

se/sy/sr 


31974 4/07 Printed in USA 


o 


™ e CHURCHof 
JESUS CHRIST 
OF LATTER-DAY 
SAINTS 


189 


STUDY RECORD 

Date Time Spent 

Pages Studied 

Comments 

c 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Planning for Conversion" 

Make a list of investigators and 

new members, and plan how to 

move them into the next pool. 


"Planning Resources: 

The Area Book" 

Set proselyting goals. 

Use the Convert Baptism Checklist 
with the ward mission leader. 

"Weekly and Daily Planning" 
Schedule weekly and daily 
planning times. 


190
