FIND PEOPLE TO TEACH 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


The purpose of this chapter is to help you learn how to find people to teach. 
You will learn how to choose the best ways of finding people and use them 
in your work. Begin your study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help you 
learn and apply the principles you study. 

Many approaches can be used in finding people to teach. This chapter will 
discuss the following: 

1. Find through Members 193 

2. Find through Investigators 200 

3. Find through Your Own Efforts 204 

V— ^ 4. Choose Productive Ways to Find People 208 

Other approaches not discussed in this chapter might include the following: 

5. Find through media 

6. Find through visitors' centers 

7. Find through the Church headquarters referral system 


Perhaps you thought of other ways to find people to teach. Discuss these 
with your companion and list them below: 


TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in finding people to teach. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


Discuss 

■ What are other ways to find 
people to teach? 

Read and Discuss 


191 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare 

Find People to Teach 

Invite 

Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 

Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. Your main 
goal in finding people to teach is to help nonmembers feel the Spirit and 
accept an invitation to hear the discussions. A person has not been found 
until he makes a commitment to hear the second discussion. 

Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ What is your goal in finding 
people to teach? 


192 


FIND THROUGH MEMBERS 


o LEARNER TRAINER 

Members of the Church are responsible to prepare their nonmember relatives Read and Discuss 
and friends to hear the missionary discussions. You will teach and baptize 
much more if you can help members to fulfill this responsibility. 

Under the direction of the bishop, the ward mission leader coordinates 
member-missionary work in each ward. He is a Melchizedek Priesthood 
holder and a stake missionary. He directs the work of the stake missionaries 
in the ward and coordinates their activities with yours. He is a key to your 
success in working with members. (In areas without a ward or branch mission 
leader, you will coordinate your work with the bishop or branch president.) 

Find Out 

■ Why is the ward mission leader so 
important in member-missionary 
work? 

Plan to meet with the ward mission leader and stake missionaries at least Read and Discuss 

weekly in missionary correlation meeting. Discuss the progress of those in 

the teaching and baptizing and fellowshipping pools. Use a Convert Baptism 

Checklist or an Investigator Record for each person. You should also discuss 

finding efforts. Specifically, you should review — 

■ Referrals from members. 

■ Progress of members who are preparing people to be taught. 

■ Names of member and part-member families to visit. 

■ Other planned finding activities. 

Coordinate with the ward mission leader which members to visit and when 

O to visit them. Families of priesthood leaders, part-member families, and 

recent converts are especially good sources of referrals. Plan to visit them. Be 
sure to record your plans on your weekly planner. 

Find Out 

■ What should be discussed in the 
weekly missionary correlation 
meeting? 

■ Why is weekly contact with the 
ward mission vital to your success? 

A good way to help members do missionary work is to have a full-time and a Read 
stake missionary visit the home of a member together. Ward members are 
usually acquainted with the stake missionary. So, they will usually be more 
trusting and cooperative when he is present. 

Find Out 

■ What is a good way to find people 
to teach? 

Share Feelings 

■ Tell your companion about a 
family that you found through 
members. 

Read 


Discuss 

■ What can you do to earn the 
confidence of members? 

■ What kinds of actions can destroy 
that confidence? 


Members will become better acquainted with you as you visit them. 
Generally, members are unwilling to invite their friends to hear the 
discussions until they have confidence in you as a missionary. They want to 
be sure that you will help their friends understand the gospel and feel the 
Spirit. This kind of trust and confidence must be earned. 


193 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Listed below are some things you can do to earn the confidence of members. Read 

■ Your visits with members should be brief. Focus on helping them do 
member-missionary work. Less successful missionaries spend either too 
little time to gain the confidence of members or too much time in 
unnecessary socializing. 

■ Be positive. Talk about successful experiences. Let members know that you 
enjoy missionary work. 

■ Be dependable. Be on time for appointments with members and Church 
leaders. Do what you say you will do. 

■ Pray with members. Try to make each visit spiritually uplifting. 

■ Be friendly. Try to remember names. 

■ Work hard and set a good example. 

There are, of course, activities and behaviors that will lessen the members' 
confidence in you. Follow these cautions: 

■ Do not drop in to visit members just at mealtime. 

■ Do not watch television or read magazines in members' homes. 

■ Do not use visits to members as an escape from proselyting. 

■ Do not be alone with a Church member of the opposite sex. 

■ Do not tell members that you need referrals because other finding methods 
are more difficult. 

■ Do not use guilt to motivate members to do missionary work. 

Discuss 

m How will following these 
suggestions strengthen members' 
confidence in you? 

As members gain confidence in you, you will be better able to help them do Read and Discuss 

missionary work. You and the stake missionaries can help members by 

inviting them to exercise faith and prayerfully set a date by which they will 

have a family or an individual prepared to hear the discussions. You can then 

help them work to meet that goal. Encourage members to — 

■ Prayerfully set a date by which they will have someone prepared to hear 
the missionary discussions. 

■ Carefully choose a close friend or relative to prepare. 

■ Share with the stake or full-time missionaries the date and the name of the 
person selected. 

■ Prepare the person to hear the discussions and then ask him to do so. 

Find Out 

■ Ask your companion to explain the 
process members should go 
through in setting a date. 

Most likely, you will visit members more than once to help and encourage Read and Discuss 

them. Use the following process to help members apply the four steps just 

outlined. 

1. Prepare and invite members to prayerfully set a date by which they will invite 
someone to hear the discussions. Have them make a list of nonmember relatives and 
friends. 

Consider the following example: A stake missionary arranged to go with 
Elder Davis to help the Bell family continue their member-missionary work. 

The stake missionary shared with the family some recent experiences he had 
had in his missionary activities. Encouraged by these remarks. Brother Bell 
enthusiastically shared an experience from his mission. 

The stake missionary then asked the Bells to describe their successes in 
member-missionary work. "We haven't had any lately," Sister Bell replied. 


194 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


O After the stake missionary explained the idea of setting a date. Elder Davis 
asked, "Brother and Sister Bell, will you pray and ask the Lord to guide you 
in your missionary efforts? Will you talk and pray as a family this week, and 
set a date by which you will invite someone to hear the discussions in your 
home?" 

The Bells accepted the invitation. The missionaries then suggested that the 
Bells make a list of their nonmember family members and friends to help 
them decide whom to invite. Finally, they made an appointment to return the 
next week to learn what the Bell family had decided. 

Find Out 

• What should be the purpose of 
your first visit with members? 

■ How did these missionaries use 
the commitment pattern to 
accomplish their purpose? 

The stake missionary prepared the members to feel the Spirit by sharing some Read and Discuss 
of his recent missionary experiences. Then Elder Davis and the stake 
missionary explained the idea of setting a date. Elder Davis used a direct, 

"will you" question to invite the Bells to prayerfully set a date. They made an 
appointment to follow up on the invitation. 

2. Review with members their list of nonmember relatives and friends. 

3. Set, confirm, and reset dates. 

These steps are illustrated in the following example: At the next visit, the 
Bells announced that they had set a date — about a month away. They had 
considered several names but couldn't decide whom to invite. The stake 
missionary asked Brother Bell to describe each person on the list. He asked 

O questions such as, "How did you meet this person?" "Does he know that you 
are a member of the Church?" "How much do you discuss religion?" "What 
religious activities have you participated in together?" 

After discussing each person on the list, the Bells decided to invite their 
neighbors, the Halls. The Halls had attended a family home evening at their 
home several months earlier. 

Find Out 

■ What does it mean to review a list 
of friends and to set and confirm a 
date? 

■ What did the missionaries do to 
review the list and confirm the 
date? 


The missionaries confirmed that the Bells had set a date. They then asked the 
Bells about each name on the list. When they visit the Bells again, they will 
confirm the date and names. They will follow up to make sure that the plans 
are proceeding on schedule. They may need to help the Bells reset the date. 

4. Help members to make plans. 

Often, a nonmember will not make a serious commitment to investigate the 
Church unless members have prepared him to do so. During your visits with 
members, help them decide specifically what they will do to prepare the 
nonmember, and when they will do it. For example, members could — 


■ Discuss the gospel informally. 

■ Share Church literature. 

■ Show and discuss an audiovisual presentation about some aspect of the 
Church. 

■ Invite the nonmember to attend church meetings or a family home evening. 

Following is what the stake missionary and Elder Davis did to help the Bells 
make plans: After Brother and Sister Bell selected a family. Elder Davis asked. 


Read and Discuss 


195 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


"What do you feel is the best thing to do to help your neighbors begin to feel 
the Spirit and prepare to hear the discussions?" 

"Good question," Sister Bell replied. "I'd feel uncomfortable just asking them 
to come over to listen to the missionaries." 

The missionaries then talked about several activities that the Bells could use 
to help prepare the Halls. 

"Many times, just talking with them about the gospel, inviting them to 
church, or having them in for a family home evening is the best way to 
start," the stake missionary explained. 

Elder Davis added, "You could read some Church literature or the Book of 
Mormon with them or show them a videocassette about the gospel." 

The stake missionary then asked, "Which activity do you feel would best 
prepare the Halls to feel the Spirit?" 

The Bells decided that they would invite the Halls to another family home 
evening. The missionaries responded enthusiastically and encouraged them 
to choose a topic for the home evening and decide when they would conduct 
it. A tentative date for the activity was set before the missionaries left. 

Find Out 

■ What can members do to help 
their nonmember friends feel the 
Spirit? 

5. Help members to practice what they will say and do. Read and Discuss 

Notice how the missionaries did this as the story continues: Brother Bell had 
agreed to approach his neighbor, Mr, Hall, the following Thursday. On 
Friday evening, Elder Davis called to find out how Mr. Hall had received the 
invitation. "I just didn't get around to it," sighed Brother Bell. "I thought 
about it all day, but I guess I just don't know how to start." 

"Could we drop by to see if we can help?" Brother Bell agreed, and an 
appointment was set for Saturday afternoon. 

On Saturday, Brother Bell said, "I'm still not sure what I would say. How 
would you start if you were me?" 

"Let's practice some things that you could say," the missionaries offered. 

"First, where do you think you will talk to Mr. Hall? How do you usually 
begin a conversation with him?" 

He answered the questions, and the practice began. "I'll be Mr. Hall," the 
stake missionary volunteered. "What will you say as you approach me?" 

"How about, 'Hi, Dave how are you doing?' " ventured Brother Bell. 

"Good start," said the stake missionary with a grin. "Let's go on." 

Discuss 

■ How can practice help members 
talk to others about the gospel? 

■ What did these missionaries do 
well? 

■ What might you have done 
differently? 

6. Support the members in their missionary work. Read 

Notice how the missionaries supported the Bells as their appointment with 
the Halls drew closer: Brother Bell kept his new commitment, and the Halls 
accepted an invitation to attend home evening. Within the next two weeks, 
the missionaries met several times with the Bells to talk and pray. Whenever 
possible, the full-time and stake missionaries went together. Within a week of 


196 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


the original date, the Halls were in the Bells' home listening to Elder Davis 
and his companion present the first discussion. 

Discuss 

■ What did the missionaries do to 
support the Bells? 

When members are working toward commitments to share the gospel, the Read 

stake or full-time missionaries should visit them every few days. Find out 
how the members are doing with their commitments and encourage them. 

Repeat the previous steps as needed to help members introduce others to the 
gospel. Help the members discuss their successes as well as their failures. 

Encourage them to share ideas and experiences with other members. 

Discuss 

■ What are the benefits of visiting 
members more than once to help 
them succeed in their missionary 
efforts? 


Find Out 

■ Ask your companion to explain the 
process of helping members set a 
date and prepare their friends to 
hear the first discussion. 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionaries effectively use the 
steps in helping members 
introduce others to the gospel. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
situations. 

Read each situation, and decide whether the missionaries effectively use the 
steps in helping members introduce others to the gospel. Discuss your 
answers with your companion. 

2. Prepare and invite members to prayerfully set a date by which they will invite 
someone to hear the discussions. Have them make a list of nonmember relatives and 
friends. 

Answers: 

■ The elders assume that the stake missionaries will meet with members and Ineffective. The full-time missionaries 
then tell them when someone is ready to teach. should work directly with the stake 

missionaries and members. 


■ The missionary says to a member, "Will you give us the name and date 
right now?" 

■ The missionary says to a member, "Will you prayerfully select a date by 
which you will prepare someone to hear the discussions?" 

2. Review with members their list of nonmember relatives and friends. 

■ The members' list contains the gas station attendant, the clerk at the grocery 
store, and the travel agent. 


3. Set, confirm, and reset dates. 

■ The elders find out the date and name selected by the members. Then they 
encourage the members and promise to drop by to see how things are 
going. 


Ineffective. Members need time to 
pray about the name and date. 

Effective, assuming that the members 
are prepared. 


Ineffective. Missionaries should 
encourage members to choose those 
with whom they have a close 
relationship. 


Effective, but the elders need to do 
more. They should help the 
members make plans and then 
practice what they will say and do. 


197 


LEARNER 

■ When the members did not accomplish their plans by the date they had set, 
the missionaries moved on to work with other members. 


4. Help members to make plans. 

■ The missionaries tell the members that they must do at least three things to 
prepare their friends before inviting them to hear the discussions. 

■ The members feel that they can invite their friends directly to hear the 
discussions. 


5. Help members to practice what they will say and do. 

■ The missionaries offer to show the member what he might say to his 
nonmember friends. 


■ The missionaries ask the member to practice what he might say to start a 
gospel conversation with his friend. 

6. Support the members in their missionary work. 

■ The stake and full-time missionaries make a schedule of follow-up visits and 
phone calls to members. 


■ The missionaries encourage members to share their missionary experiences 
with other members. They ask them to share their frustrations as well as 
their successes. 


TRAINER 

Ineffective. The missionaries should 
continue to help the members. This 
will show that they care and want to 
help the members succeed. 


Ineffective. The members should do 
what is necessary to help 
nonmembers feel the Spirit. 

Effective. If the members feel that 
their friends are ready, there is no 
need to wait. Few nonmembers are 
offended by such an invitation. 


Effective. This will give the member 
some good ideas and more 
confidence in his ability to talk to 
his friends. 

Effective . Practice is usually very 
helpful. 


Effective. The missionaries need to 
follow up. This may be the most 
important thing they do to help the 
members succeed. 

Effective. When members talk 
honestly and openly about 
missionary work, they motivate each 
other to keep trying. 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him take the part of the 
missionary. You take the part of 
the member. 

■ Ask your companion to use the 
commitment pattern to help you 
do member-missionary work. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


In each of the following situations, practice using the appropriate step from 
the list below. Take the part of the missionary, and have your companion act 
as the member. 

■ Prepare and invite members to prayerfully set a date by which they will 
invite someone to hear the discussions. Have them make a list of 
nonmember relatives and friends. 

■ Review with members their list of nonmember relatives and friends. 

■ Set, confirm, and reset dates. 

■ Help members to make plans. 

■ Help members to practice what they will say and do. 

■ Support the members in their missionary work. 


198 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


1. You are meeting with Brother and Sister Brown to talk about member- 
missionary work. Brother Brown says, "You know. Elders, I have always 
enjoyed missionary work." You feel that he is prepared. Invite him to set a 
date. 

2. On your second visit. Brother Brown tells you, "This week has been really 
hectic. We haven't had time to talk about whom to invite." Help him make 
a list and begin thinking about the people he knows. 

3. The Browns have selected a date and a name. Brother Brown says, "Well, 
we want to prepare the Phillips family, but I'm not sure just what to do 
next." Help them make plans to continue to prepare their friends. 

4. Sister Williams was planning to talk with her friend at work on Friday. 

When you follow up on Saturday, she says, "I meant to talk with Judy, but 
I'm not used to this sort of thing. Maybe I could just show her a Church 
video presentation." Practice with Sister Williams the things she could say 
and do to prepare her friend. 

5. The Bradfords can't decide whom to prepare for the discussions. They are 
acquainted with several nonmembers, but they don't know any very well. 

Help them select a nonmember to prepare. 

6. Brother and Sister Anderson invited their friends to attend church. Their 
friends accepted the invitation but didn't go. As a missionary, what will 
you do next? 

7. Brother and Sister Jenkins are frustrated. They have tried to do 
member-missionary work but haven't had much success. They appreciate 
your help, but they need more support. What will you do to help them? 

Discuss 

■ Identify ways in which you can 
better use the commitment pattern 
in working with members. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Visit a member family (with a stake missionary, if possible). Invite the 
family to set a date and choose someone to prepare to hear the discussions. 
Follow up to help them be successful. 

■ Write a goal to do these things. Carry it with you during the day as a 
reminder. 

■ After you do these things, ask your companion to tell you how you did. 
Discuss what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to visit a 
member family and take the lead 
in inviting them to set a date. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion visit a member family 
with a stake missionary and invite 
them to set a date. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to find people to 
teach through members. Discuss 
how you and your companion are 
doing. 


199 


FIND THROUGH INVESTIGATORS 


LEARNER 


You can also find people to teach among the friends and relatives of your 
former and current investigators. Doing this will allow you to increase your 
finding pool at the same time you are working with your teaching and 
baptizing and fellowshipping pools. 


TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to help a member family set a 
date. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss the importance of finding 
through members. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Why should you find people to 
teach through investigators? 

Share Feelings 

■ Tell your companion about 
someone you found through an 
investigator. 


Visit Former Investigators 

Former investigators are those who heard some of the discussions but then 
stopped investigating the Church. People may stop investigating because of 
family vacations, illnesses, work conflicts, missionary transfers, and 
missionaries' failure to keep proper records. One study showed that over half 
of the former investigators surveyed were willing to meet with missionaries 
again when they were invited. 

Discuss 

■ What are some reasons 
investigators stop taking the 
discussions? 

Copies of the Investigator Record in your area book contain information on Read 

former investigators (see example on pages 211-12). The record instructs you 

to visit former investigators after a few months. You should invite them to 

hear the discussions again and ask them for referrals. After you do this, write 

their response on the Investigator Record. Keep this information in the area 

book for at least one year after the investigators stop meeting with you or 

other missionaries. 

Find Out 

■ Why are former investigators a 
good resource for finding new 
investigators? 

■ How can you get information 
about former investigators? 


200 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Consider the following example of missionaries talking to a former investigator. 
Missionary: Hello, are you Mr. Richards? 

Investigator: That's me. 

Missionary: I'm Elder Jensen, and this is my companion. Elder Newman. 

We're from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 

We understand that you're somewhat familiar with the 
Church. How long ago did the missionaries visit you? 

Investigator: Oh, let's see, about six months ago, I guess. 

Missionary: Do you remember why they stopped coming? 

Investigator: It seems to me that one of them was moving to another city. 
After that I didn't hear from them anymore. 

Missionary: Would you be interested in hearing more about the Church? 

Investigator: I think so. 


Read 


Discuss 

■ What questions did the 
missionaries ask the former 
investigator? 

■ What did the missionaries find 
out? 


Mr. Richards had not asked the missionaries to stop coming. The new 
missionaries asked questions and learned that Brother Richards had simply 
been forgotten during a missionary transfer. They gladly returned and 
continued to teach him. 


Read 


Discuss 

■ Locate the Investigator Record on 
pages 211-12. Identify the 
information that will help you 
when you visit former 
investigators. 


Use the Referral Dialogue 

Another good way to find people to teach is to use the "Referral Invitation" Read 
from the booklet Instructions for the Discussions, page 14. Make it a common 
practice to ask your investigators to invite their friends and relatives to hear 
the discussions. 

Discuss 

■ Why are current investigators a 
good source of referrals? 

■ Read the "Referral Invitation" with 
your companion, and discuss how 
you could use it more often. 


Invite Friends and Relatives of Investigators 
to Baptismal Services 

Well-organized, spiritual baptismal services are an excellent introduction to Read and Discuss 

the Church. Nonmembers will feel the members' friendship and the new 
converts' enthusiasm and love for the gospel. The new converts can begin 
immediately to friendship their friends and relatives. 

O The following steps show one way to invite the relatives and friends of 
investigators to baptismal services: 

Prepare. After an investigator has accepted your invitation to be baptized, 
suggest that he will want to share his sacred baptismal service with his 
friends and relatives. Nonmember friends will often come to a baptism 


201 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


because they feel it is similar to a wedding or christening. Ask the 
investigator to make a list of those he would like to invite to his baptism. 
Plan together which ones he will invite and which ones you will invite. The 
investigator should invite as many of the people as possible. 


Find Out 

■ How can you prepare an 
investigator to invite his friends 
and relatives to his baptismal 
service? 


Invite. As you have planned, you and your investigator should personally 
invite his friends and relatives to the baptism. 

Follow up. After nonmembers have accepted the invitation to attend the 
service, follow up with them to begin building relationships of trust. 
Regardless of who invited them, you should plan to meet each nonmember at 
least once before the baptism. Consider the following example of missionaries 
who used the commitment pattern to find people to teach through one of 
their investigators. 

The missionaries have been teaching Tim Hopkins, a college student. At the 
end of the third discussion, they say, "Tim, we're excited that you have 
accepted our invitation to join the Church of Jesus Christ through baptism. 
Baptism is a sacred ordinance. When you are baptized, you are cleansed from 
your sins. You begin a new life. How do you feel about your baptism?" 

"This is a big step for me," Tim replies slowly. "I can feel that what I'm 
doing is the right thing. I guess you could say that I'm excited, too." 

"We're glad that you feel that way," one of the elders says. "Your baptism 
will be one of the greatest events in your life. Which of your relatives and 
friends would you like to attend?" 

Tim leans back and thinks for a moment. "Well, I have a couple of friends at 
school. I've mentioned to them a few times that I was meeting with you 
guys. I'm not so sure just how my parents would react. My dad is not a very 
religious person, but my mom occasionally goes to church." 

"Can you think of anyone else?" 

"No, I kind of keep to myself and my schoolbooks." 

"Will you invite your friends at school and your parents to your baptism?" 

"Yes, I'll talk to them." 

"Good. We'll ask you how things went at the beginning of our next 
discussion. Is that all right, Tim?" 


Read 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionaries use the 
commitment pattern to find new 
people to teach? 


The missionaries prepared Tim by explaining the sacred nature of baptism. Read 

They then asked Tim to identify relatives and friends he could invite to the 
baptismal service. Finally, the missionaries explained that they would follow 
up during the next discussion. 

Find Out 

■ Describe how you can use the 
commitment pattern to invite 
people to a baptismal service. 

After the baptismal service, a simple reception in the convert's home provides Read 
an opportunity to meet his relatives and friends. During the reception, 
arrange to have some of the guests visit the convert's home during the next 
week to hear the first discussion. 


202 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Practice using the commitment pattern to find people to teach through 

investigators by responding to each of the following situations. 

1. Jerry Grant is a former investigator whose name you found in your area 
book. He had two discussions but did not hear more because of school 
obligations. He seemed interested in the gospel but was genuinely busy. 
What will you say as you meet him at the door? 

2. The Allreds just received the first discussion and have made an 
appointment to hear the second. How will you ask them to invite their 
friends to hear the discussions? 

3. John Warner and his family are scheduled to be baptized this Saturday. 
How will you ask them to invite their nonmember friends and relatives to 
the baptism? 

4. John asked the missionaries to invite his neighbor to the baptism. What 
will you say to the neighbor? 

5. You have no idea why the Campbell family stopped meeting with the 
missionaries. The record in your area book is incomplete. They seemed 
interested and had kept several commitments. What will you say to them 
as you meet them at the door? 

6. The Bradleys, a former investigator family, do not want to meet with the 
missionaries. How will you ask for a referral from this family? 


Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him use the commitment 
pattern to help the investigator 
make the appropriate commitment. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Discuss 

■ Identify ways to better use the 
commitment pattern in working 
with investigators. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Visit a former investigator and invite him to hear the discussions again. Ask 
him to refer friends and relatives as well. 

■ Extend a referral invitation to the next investigator you teach. 

■ Identify which of your investigators will be baptized next. Help him invite 
friends and relatives to the baptism. 

■ Write a goal to do these things. Carry it with you during the day as a 
reminder. 

■ After doing each of these things, ask your companion to tell you how you 
did. Discuss what went well and what could be improved. 


Invite 

■ Plan times to find new 
investigators through nonmembers 
you know. 

■ Invite your companion to take the 
lead in these situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write the goal to help your 
companion find people to teach 
through investigators. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to find people to 
teach through investigators. 

Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


203 


FIND THROUGH YOUR OWN EFFORTS 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

• Ask your companion to locate the 
goals to find people to teach 
through investigators. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goals. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goals and what could 
be improved. 

■ Discuss the importance of finding 
through investigators. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

You will usually find the most people to teach through members and Read and Discuss 

investigators. But you should also plan to find new contacts through your 

own efforts. Take every opportunity to prepare nonmembers to feel the 

Spirit, to invite them to make a commitment to take part in the discussions, 

and to help them keep that commitment. When you find people through 

your own efforts, you show your faith that the Lord will lead you to his elect. 


Scripture Activity 

Read the following passages, and discuss the answers to the questions: 

Doctrine and Covenants 19:29, 37 Among whom are you to publish glad 

tidings? 

Doctrine and Covenants 60:2 How does the Lord feel about those who 

will not open their mouths? 

Doctrine and Covenants 61:3 What principle of finding did the Lord 

teach these missionaries? 


Find Out 

■ Why should you spend time in 
finding people to teach through 
your own efforts? 

You can seek new investigators in many ways. You can find people among Read 

those who have just moved to your area or among special interest clubs or 
groups (genealogy, music, and fitness, for example). You can find people 
through door-to-door contacting, through street contacting, on the bus, or at 
the store. The main point is to be finding people to teach wherever you go. 

Share Feelings 

■ Tell your companion about 
someone you found to teach 
through your own efforts. 

However you find people, the principles and skills of the commitment Read 

pattern will help you. Your most important task is to help people feel the 
Spirit so that they will accept your invitation to hear the discussions. 

Identify 

■ Take the part of the nonmember in 
each situation, and have your 
companion take the part of the 
missionary. 

■ After reading each situation, 
discuss the differences between 
the effective and less effective 
examples. 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The following are effective and less effective examples of missionaries finding 
through their own efforts. Read each situation and both examples. Discuss 
the differences between the examples. 

Situation 1 

While contacting people door to door, the missionaries (M) approach the 
small, well-kept home of a nonmember. They notice that the name on the 
mailbox is Johnson 0). In the driveway are two tricycles and an old car. 

Less Effective 

M: Hi. We're missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day 
Saints. We have an important message for you and your family. May 
we come in? 

J: I'm really busy right now — maybe some other time. 

M: We'd be happy to come back later in the evening if that would be all 
right. 

J: Well, I don't know if tonight is good — another evening, perhaps. 

M: Okay, we'll come by sometime. We'd like to leave you this pamphlet. It 
tells a little about our Church. 

J: Thanks. 

M: Thank you. Oh, by the way, your yard sure looks nice. 

J: Oh. Thanks. 

M: We'll see you later sometime. 

J: Okay. Bye. 

Effective 

M: Hello, Mr. Johnson. We noticed your name on the mailbox. You must 
enjoy working in the yard. [Mr. Johnson agrees.] My name is Elder 
Ross and this is my companion. Elder Allen. We are missionaries for 
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We'd like to share a 
brief message with you. May we come in? 

J: I'm really busy right now — maybe some other time. 

M: We couldn't help noticing the tricycles in the carport. Do you have 
small children? 

J: Yes. We have a boy and a girl, four and two. 

M: That's great. I have a niece and nephew about the same age. Kids that 
age are wonderful. 

J: They can be a handful, too. 

M: I suppose they can. Mr. Johnson, we would really like to share our 

message with you and your family. What we have to share will make all 
the difference in raising your beautiful children. May we share our 
message with you? 

J: Like I said, I'm busy right now, but . . . how long will it take? 

M: May we take five minutes now and then set up another appointment 
for later? 

J: Sure. Come on in. 

Discuss 

■ What are the differences between 
the two examples? 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The missionaries in the effective example showed genuine interest in Mr. Read 

Johnson. They noticed the children and the yard, and this helped to build a 
relationship of trust. They were persistent — and courteous — in their 
invitation. 

Situation 2 

On the way to an appointment, two missionaries (M) board a bus and sit 
next to a man (I) who is reading a newspaper. As they sit down, the man 
glances up and then goes back to his paper. 

Less Effective 

M: [The missionary thinks] I don't want to be rude. I'd better not interrupt 
this man. 

or 

M: Excuse me, sir. We are missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of 
Latter-day Saints. What do you know about our Church? 

Effective 

M: Excuse me, does this bus stop near Circleton Mall? 

I: Yes. 

M: We're new in this area. Have you lived here long? 

I: Oh, I guess about eight or nine years now. 

M: I'm from Omaha, Nebraska, and my companion is from Seattle, 

Washington. 

I: What brings you here? 

M: We are missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 

Are you familiar with our Church? 

Discuss 

■ What are the differences between 
these examples? 

In the first less effective example, the missionary was too self-conscious and Read 
hesitant. In the second, the missionary could have been more personal and 
friendly. In the effective example, the missionary was more friendly. 

Situation 3 

The man on the bus in the previous situation replied that he had heard of the 
Church and enjoyed the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. The missionaries could 
continue to prepare him (see example A) or invite him to hear a discussion 
(see example B). 

Example A 

M: I enjoy the choir too. Listening to them sing helps me feel closer to 
God. How do you feel as you listen to the choir? (This would give the 
man an opportunity to share spiritual feelings, and the missionaries 
could then invite him to hear a discussion.) 

Example B 

M: That's great. Will you allow us to visit you this week and tell you more 
about the Church? May we come by on Tuesday or Wednesday evening 
around 7:30? 

Discuss 

■ What advantages are there to each 
approach? 


206 


LEARNER 

o 


TRAINER 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him use the commitment 
pattern to help the investigator 
make the appropriate commitment. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he could improve. 


Practice using the commitment pattern to find people to teach through your 

own efforts. Respond to each of the following situations. 

1. A door in the apartment complex in which you are trading has the name 
of Anderson on it. There are no signs of children, but many young families 
live in this complex. A man opens the door and says, "Hi, what can I do 
for you?" 

2. While riding the bus to a teaching appointment, you sit next to an older 
man. After looking at your name tags, the man asks, "Where do you 
fellows work?" 

3. While you are street contacting, you see a man who appears to be in his 
early thirties. You feel good about approaching him. Begin a gospel 
conversation with the man. 

4. Your nonmember neighbor has been friendly to you as he has seen you 
come and go. As you come home for a quick lunch, you see him just 
getting out of his car with two bags of groceries. Begin a gospel 
conversation with him. 

5. You are sitting on a crowded bus on your way home. A businessman sits 
down next to you. What would you say to start a gospel conversation? 

o 


Discuss 

■ Identify ways in which you can 
better use the commitment pattern 
in finding people to teach through 
your own efforts. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Take the lead in at least five opportunities to find people through your own 
efforts. 

■ Write a goal to do this. Carry it with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Plan with your companion how 
you can find people to teach 
through your own efforts. 

■ Invite your companion to take the 
lead in these situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion find people to teach 
through his own efforts. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to find people to 
teach through your own efforts. 
Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


207 


CHOOSE PRODUCTIVE WAYS TO FIND PEOPLE 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to find people to teach 
through his own efforts. 

■ Ask your companion if he feels 
that he accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss the importance of finding 
people to teach through your own 
efforts. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 


You should choose the most productive ways to find people to teach. 

Usually, the following people and situations will help you the most. They are 
listed in order of helpfulness. 

■ Recent converts 

■ Baptismal services 

■ Stake missionaries 

■ Part-member families 

■ Members in general 

■ Former investigators 

■ Current investigators (using the "Referral Invitation") 

You will also spend time finding people to teach through your own efforts. 
Usually, you will not find as many people in this way as you will by working 
with the people listed above. But your own efforts are still important. Take 
advantage of every opportunity to find people to teach. 

Some methods of finding will usually help you find more people to teach 
than others. But you should not spend all of your time using one method. 
You will be more productive if you plan time to find through members, 
through investigators, and through your own efforts. But make sure that you 
spend enough time using the most productive ways. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Which methods of finding people 
to teach are the most productive? 

■ Why should you find people to 
teach in a variety of ways? 


Review the following examples of how missionaries chose to find people to Read 
teach. 

A companionship's area covered one ward. On a particular week, they had 
thirty hours in their schedule to find people to teach. 


208 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Example A 


Example B 


The missionaries could have 

The missionaries could have 

planned to spend time doing the 

planned to spend time doing the 

following: 


following: 


Tracting 

20 hours 

Visiting members 

8 hours 

Checking on referrals 


Follow-up visits with 


from headquarters 

4 hours 

members 

4 hours 

Visiting the ward 


Inviting nonmember 


mission leader 

2 hours 

friends to baptisms 

2 hours 

Meeting with an 


Checking on former 


investigator referral 

2 hours 

investigators 

2 hours 

Contacting while on 
the bus 

2 hours 

Tracting 

6 hours 

Checking on referrals 
from headquarters 

4 hours 


Meeting with an 
investigator referral 

2 hours 


Contacting while on 
the bus 

2 hours 


The missionaries in example B planned to find people in a greater variety of 
productive ways. They did not neglect finding through their own efforts. But 

O they planned to find people to teach through members and nonmembers they 
knew. 


The following situations show different ways in which missionaries could use 
the time they have to find people to teach. How are they doing? Where can 
they improve? 

1. The missionaries spend 20 hours a week with members and receive about 2 
referrals a month. 

2. The missionaries spend about 12 hours a week tracting, 10 hours calling 
back on interested people they met while tracting or were referred to from 
headquarters, and 2 hours with members. 

3. The missionaries spend 6 hours a week visiting members with stake 
missionaries, 4 hours following up on previous visits with members, 4 
hours inviting people to baptismal services, 2 hours looking up former 
investigators, and 8 hours tracting. 

4. The missionaries spend 3 hours a week contacting people on the street, 4 
hours working on public displays, 4 hours meeting people who have just 
moved in, 2 hours with a local civic club, 3 hours working with minorities, 

0 3 hours looking up referrals from headquarters, 2 hours contacting people 

on the bus, and 3 hours in an open house at the chapel. 


Discuss 

■ What are the differences between 
these two examples? 

Read 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionaries have made a good 
plan for finding people to teach. 

■ Ask him how the plan could be 
improved. 

■ Do the same for the following 
situations. 


Answers: (1) These missionaries are 
probably not working hard enough 
on obtaining referrals. They are 
possibly visiting members to avoid 
proselyting. (2) These missionaries 
are probably not spending enough 
time with members. (3) These 
missionaries are trying to find 
people in a variety of productive 
ways. They have good balance in 
their finding activities. (4) These 
missionaries are trying to find 
people in a variety of productive 
ways. But they are relying mostly 
on their own efforts. They will be 
more productive if they also work 
with members and investigators. 


209 


LEARNER 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Determine how many hours you will spend in finding people during the 
coming week. 

■ Determine how many hours you should spend in finding through members, 
through investigators, and through your own efforts. 

■ Decide when you will work on finding people in each way. Write your 
plans in your weekly planner. 


TRAINER 


Invite 

■ Locate your weekly planner for the 
next week. 

■ Invite your companion to decide 
how to use the hours you have for 
finding people to teach. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion carry out his plans to 
find people to teach. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion fulfill his plans for the 
week. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your planning and 
proselyting, point out 
opportunities to find people to 
teach. Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


Conclusion 

Finding people to teach must be a regular, constant part of your work. To do Read and Discuss 
this effectively, use the commitment pattern, and use a variety of methods. 

The most productive way to find people is to work through Church 
members. Remember to coordinate your efforts with the ward mission leader. 

You can also find people through current and former investigators, through 
inviting nonmember relatives and friends to a convert's baptismal service, 
and through your own efforts. 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review principles used 
in finding people to teach. 


210 


™ e CHURCHof 
JESUS CHRIST 
OF LATTER-DAY 
SAIISTIS 


Investigator Record 


Complete this form for all investigators who hear the first discussion and who accept an 
appointment for the second discussion. Keep this form in your area record. 


Proselyting area Date . . 

'7Perf7^?ts /oM/%7 

Missionaries who taught investigator , / 

Ward/Branch * ' 

Stake/Mission / 

rirertfriis ft/eafr 

Investigator's name / y • 

Spouse . 

rienrifwri 

1 Telephone 

SS£'3Z99 

Investigator's address , j 

4-275’/~"7co/h /3/i/a. 

Children * ^ 

Maries 

Age 

/7 

Sex 

f= 

Trenfon? 

dor/aft/ srz/ 

/* 

M 

s,ate Mo. 


/0 

/= 

Nation or zip code 

2Z334- 

Andrews 

jr 

M 


How did this family or individual first begin meetinowith the missionaries? . j • « . - _ . 

~7%sm ref erred oy pop r/tsjne l/ai//e 


List the names and telephone numbers of LOS friends or relatives 

£o/> +A/?ne> Paris, srS- 277 ? 


Write helpful information about the family or individual (occupation, interests, religion, or beliefs, elc.l . - 

\J//y? is w schoo/ )s Jri/oi/er/sw ris//- fries 
//eme/rakew and & part- trrie^ free/wce- usfrtvK 77 ?e^ z o/c/er~ 
cJif/dreri parA'c/po/-^ acf/Ve/y//? 6/fhscfr0o/gcfiwfyig£. ‘fari/A/atf/t/aTes 
/js/ris sroparifhs/aK re/fq/as? at f tv's -fames. 77?&/ /oi/e ri> trai/ri a/jet entertain. 


Describe the results of each discussion given 


Discussion 

Date given 

Reaction 

Commitments 

Follow-up 

0 

/ 0 //S -/67 

Jf/n +■ •Jenrt'tfer'u/cre 

pfeosastT/but- "guarded " 

/) Prat) 

2.) Pead Booker women 

M/ep/on -fv v/St'p aqabn 

0* /o//e/07 

© 

' 0 // 8/27 

A 7 ar/£s 

Other cbi/dren nob heme 

Attend Sac. Wlty. 

We'// artwttqc So Stave Ctovtz 
f ami fa take /Stem Sv CJujrcSt, 

0 

/O/2S-/07 

rant) fa bad To /eaveeatfy 

cvcstj-, , . , 

rffletLuesnn nnt- tOMPicted. 

/rin£> 

We need Zz> can s*enr 
fv/netswus, /0/26/S7. 

4 


5 


6 


Other 


319B3 4/87 Printed in USA 


Did the investigator(s): 

Read in the Book of Mormon? 
Attend church? 

Pray individually? 

Pray as a family? 


B'S'es □ Np 

□ Yes B-tfo 

E'fes □ No 

□ Yes B-flo 


Why did the family or individual discontinue investigation? 

Hia/ Him u>er€s it/sf -/vo be/stf uti/h uvt-M, 


ScJjoo/, atfd ejr/t-g&tfy'/cv/ar- acffy/fylcs. 


How many pages? /Z? 


Write additional information that could help miossionaries who will contact this investigator in the future. 

A/Mexs?/? c/a/'/ved -fz> 6& /z>o /wy -for cest/z/ti/ed /*fveg/-/#afrbjt, 
/-/?£. (Mr/A/sts Z^et/rt//^ seeded /g?6e. a . p //&/& a/ra/d 

s-foaft/ &f //?& gajpe/. //??(/&// /># 
f l /-/€rrc& "U/wMAf UJae/?. " 


Investigator contacted for referrals 

/Vo 


Investigator recontacted for additional referrals one year {or specified period) later for referrals (or for own interest if not yet baptized) 


O 


O 


212 


STUDY RECORD 


Date 


Time Spent 


Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Find through Members" 

Visit a member (preferably with 

a stake missionary). Invite him 

to set a date and choose someone 

to prepare to hear the discussions. 

“Find through Investigators" 

O Visit a former investigator and 

invite him to hear the 

discussions again. Also seek 

referrals from him. 

Extend the "Referral Invitation" 

to an investigator. 

Invite a baptismal candidate 

to bring friends and relatives 
to his baptism. 


"Find through Your Own Efforts” 
Take the lead in five 
opportunities to find people 
through your own efforts. 

"Choose Productive Ways to 
Find People" 

Include productive ways to 
find people in your plans. 


213
