TEACH 


o 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in teaching. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


This chapter will help you and your companion to more effectively teach the Read 
gospel and to help your investigators keep the commitments that will qualify 
them for baptism. Begin your study with prayer, and ask the Lord to help 
you learn and apply the principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used in teaching people the gospel of Jesus 
Christ. This chapter will discuss the following: 


1. Use Scriptures 217 

2. Use the Book of Mormon 221 

3. Retain Investigators 225 


Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

4. Use audio and visual support 

5. Use examples and analogies 

Discuss 

■ What other principles and skills 
could you use when teaching? 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that would help you in Read and Discuss 

your teaching. Discuss these with your companion and list them below: 


7. 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare 

Teach 

Invite 

Follow Up 


Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 

Resolve Concerns 


o 


214 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. All the 
elements of the commitment pattern are used as you teach others the gospel 
of Jesus Christ. 


The teaching phase of your work begins when a nonmember makes a 
commitment to hear the discussions. Teaching is more than just presenting 
the discussions. It includes all you do to help others understand the gospel of 
Jesus Christ, feel the Spirit, and keep the commitments that will prepare 
them for baptism. It is usually during the teaching phase that the Spirit 
changes hearts and testimonies begin to grow. 


Several things help nonmembers become converted and want to be baptized. 
Some are more powerful than others. By identifying and using the more 
powerful influences, you can be more effective in your teaching. 


The following seven items help nonmembers become converted. Investigators 
identified the three that made the most difference in their conversion. Try to 
identify those three items. 

1. The investigator feels that the missionaries have strong testimonies. 


2. The investigator feels that the meetings with missionaries teach him and 
uplift him spiritually. 


3. The investigator believes that he is earnest and seeking for the truth. 


4. The investigator has certain characteristics, such as high self-esteem, 
confidence, and sociability. 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

Read and Discuss 


Share Feelings 

■ Tell your companion about 
changes you have seen people 
make during the teaching process. 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read the items to him. 

■ Have him identify the three items 
that make the most difference in 
conversion. 


Not one of the most significant factors . 

It is not enough for investigators to 
think that the missionaries have 
strong testimonies. They must feel 
the Spirit through the missionaries' 
testimonies. 

One of the factors that makes the most 
difference. Doctrine and Covenants 
50:22 explains that when you teach 
by the Spirit, you and the hearer are 
edified, and both rejoice. 

Not one of the most significant factors. 
Most people believe that they are 
earnest and seeking for the truth. 

Not one of the most significant factors . 
You cannot tell by outward 
appearance who will respond to 
your message. 


215 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


5. The investigator keeps the commitments missionaries have invited him to 
make, such as studying the Book of Mormon, praying, and attending 
church meetings. He feels good about these experiences. 


6. The investigator feels that he tries to act as God would have him act. 


7. The investigator has a good, spiritual relationship with the missionaries 
that is more than casual friendship. 


One of the factors that makes the most 
difference. Investigators must actually 
live the gospel in order to gain and 
strengthen their testimonies. 


Not one of the most significant factors. 
Most of those who become 
investigators believe that they are 
trying to do what is right. 


One of the factors that makes the most 
difference . Building relationships of 
trust is an important part of 
preparing people to feel the Spirit. 


Discuss 

■ In relation to items 2, 5, and 7, 
what do you do with 
investigators? 

■ How could you improve in these 
areas? 


This activity Shows that as you teach the gospel, the most important things 
you can do are the following: prepare people to feel the Spirit (factors 2 and 
7), invite them to make commitments (factor 5), and follow up to help them 
keep their commitments (factor 5). 

The principles of the commitment pattern are important because they help 
investigators become involved in daily activities such as reading, praying, 
attending church, and changing habits. The involvement of the investigator 
during the teaching process is an important factor leading to conversion. 

While teaching the Jews, Jesus emphasized the importance of living gospel 
principles: "Jesus answered them, and said. My doctrine is not mine, but his 
that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, 
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:16-17). 

Your responsibility during the teaching process is to help your investigators 
apply the teachings of the gospel in their lives. Your challenge is to help 
them make and keep the commitments that will allow them to grow 
spiritually, be baptized, and become active members of the Church. 


This chapter will teach you principles that you can use to help others feel the 
Spirit and make commitments. These principles are (1) use the scriptures, (2) 
use the Book of Mormon, and (3) retain investigators. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Why should you focus on 
commitments during the teaching 
process? 

Read 


216 


USE SCRIPTURES 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


The Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Read 

Price are the standard works of the Church. When they are used effectively, 
they will help investigators, members, and other missionaries understand the 
gospel and feel the Spirit. 


Scripture Activity 

Read the following scriptures and discuss the answers to the questions. 

Doctrine and Covenants 18:34-38 

■ What benefits come from reading the scriptures? 

Doctrine and Covenants 42:12 

■ What has the Lord commanded missionaries to do? 


Discuss 

■ When you have used the 
scriptures while teaching, what 
specific things did you do? 

■ Do you explain the background of 
the scriptures? 

■ Do you have the investigator read 
from the scriptures? 

When you use a scripture, be sure to explain its background. Explain who is Read 
speaking, to whom he is speaking, and the time period in which he' is 

O speaking. Also describe the situation. Do not give too many details, but give 
people enough information so that they can understand the scripture. 

Read the following examples of how to explain the background of a scripture. 

To help you understand the examples, read the scriptures as well. 


Less Effective 

In John 3:5, Jesus answers a 
question by saying, [missionary 
reads verse], 

John 3:5 is about baptism. Would 
you read this verse? 


Effective 

In John, chapter 3, we read that 
Nicodemus, a Pharisee, came to 
Jesus at night. He believed in 
Christ. Jesus taught him that 
everyone must be baptized, or bom 
again, in order to enter heaven. 
Would you please read verse 5? 


Find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 


In the less effective examples, the missionaries did not explain the Read 

background of the scripture. In the effective example, however, the 
missionary helped the investigator understand why Christ spoke these words 
and told him that the scripture was about baptism. 

Discuss 

■ How will explaining the 
background of scriptures help 
those you teach? 

Most people have not read the scriptures very much. To help them Read and Discuss 

understand and appreciate the scriptures, you can share your feelings and , 

insights. In addition, you can show how the scriptures apply to their lives. 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Consider the following examples of missionaries sharing their feelings about a 
passage. Read the scripture used in the examples. 

Effective 

As I read 3 Nephi, chapter 9, verses 
12 and 13, I felt the love Christ has 
for all of us. I could picture Jesus 
pleading with me to repent and 
draw closer to him. 

find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 

In the less effective example, the missionary did not share his feelings about Read and Discuss 
the passage. In the effective example, however, the missionary told how he 
felt as he read the passage. 

Make sure that your investigators understand each passage by asking 
find-out questions. Involve investigators and members by asking them to 
read passages aloud. Ask them to explain how they feel about the passages. 

Let them hold and refer to the scriptures. 

Consider the following examples. Read Alma 11:42-44 to help you 
understand them. 


less Effective 

In 3 Nephi 9:12—13, Christ is asking 
all of us to come to him — to repent. 
This passage means a lot to me. 


Less Effective 

There is a scripture that wiil help 
you understand the 
resurrection — Alma 11:44. 
[Missionary reads the verse.] You 
can see that the resurrection will 
come to everyone. 


Effective 

A scripture in the Book of Mormon 
helps us to understand the 
resurrection. A prophet named 
Amulek is defending Christ's 
teachings before a group of people. 

Would you please read verses 42 
through 44, marked in red? 

[Investigator reads the verses.] What 
did Amulek teach about the 
resurrection? 

Find Out 

■ What is the difference between 
these examples? 


In the less effective example, the missionary' read the scripture to the Read 

investigator and did not ask a find-out question. In the effective example, the 
missionary explained the background of the scripture, had the investigator 
read the scripture, and asked the investigator a find-out question. 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionary used the scriptures 
effectively. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Read the following situations and scriptures. Decide which missionaries do 
the following: 

■ Explain the background of the scripture. 

■ Share feelings and insights. 

■Ask find-out questions. 


218 


LEARNER 


Situation 1 

The missionaries are teaching about the plan of salvation. While discussing 

temple work for the dead, they refer to 1 Corinthians 15:29. 

Missionary A: This scripture in the Bible proves that baptism for the dead 
is a true commandment. Would you please read 
1 Corinthians, chapter 15, verse 29? 

Missionary B: In 1 Corinthians, chapter 15, Paul the Apostle wrote about 
the resurrection of the dead. To help the Sadducees 
understand that all mankind will be resurrected, he 
mentioned the ordinance of baptism for the dead. He 
explained that baptism for the dead would be of no benefit if 
there were no resurrection. Please read 1 Corinthians 15:29. 


Missionary C: Thank you for reading that scripture. What did Paul mean 
when he wrote, "Why are they then baptized for the dead?" 


Situation 2 

The missionaries are teaching an investigator about prayer and use Matthew 
7:7-8 as support. 


Missionary A: Thank you for reading those verses. I read this passage once 
when I was trying to gain a testimony of my own. I had 
been taught all my life to pray, but it wasn't until I read 
these verses that I felt that God would answer my prayers. 
How do you feel about this scripture? 


Missionary B: 


Thank you for reading that passage. Before I came on my 
mission, I had the opportunity to introduce a friend to the 
missionaries. He took the first two discussions but didn't 
really know how he felt about our beliefs. He asked me how 
I knew the Church was true. I told him that I had to do just 
as the missionaries were asking him to do. I prayed and 
studied for myself. I shared with him the same passage you 
just read, and it really helped him. He decided to pray and 
ask God for himself — and he received an answer. 


Missionary C: Thank you for reading that passage. What did you learn 
about prayer from reading these verses? 


TRAINER 


Answers: "A" is not effective because 
the missionary does not explain the 
background of the scripture. "B" is 
effective because the missionary 
does explain the background. "C" is 
effective because the missionary 
allows the investigator to read the 
scripture and then asks a question 
to find out what he understands. 


Answers : "A" is effective because the 
missionary shares his feelings about 
the scripture. "B" is also correct 
because the missionary shares an 
experience of a close friend. "C" 
may also be correct. In some 
situations all you may need to do is 
ask the investigator a find-out 
question. 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Take the part of the investigator or 
member in each situation, 

■ Have your companion respond to 
the situation. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Practice using the scriptures by completing the following tasks. Your 
companion will take the part of the investigator or member. Learn the 
background of each scripture by using the chapter headings, Bible Dictionary, 
and section headings. As you practice, remember the following points: 


Explain who is speaking, who is being spoken to, and what the situation is. 
Have the investigator or member read the scripture aloud. 

Share your feelings and insights. 

Ask find-out questions about the scripture. 


219 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


1. You are teaching principle 2 of the first discussion, Use John 14:6 to help 
the investigator understand Christ's role in the plan of salvation. 

2. You are teaching the Word of Wisdom to an investigator couple. Use 
Doctrine and Covenants 69:18-21 to help them understand the promises 
associated with this commandment. 

3. Use Malachi 3:8-11 to help your investigator understand the law of tithing. 

4. After your investigator family commits to read the Book of Mormon, you 
ask them to read Moroni 10:3-5. 

5. Your investigator is a faithful Christian. He asks you how you define faith 
in your religion. Have him read Alma 32:21. Cross-reference this verse with 
Hebrews 11:1, 

6. You are working with a missionary who seems discouraged by his small 
teaching pool. You feel impressed to share Ether 12:6. 

7. You are working with a member family, preparing them to help you find 
people to teach. Share your favorite scripture about missionary work. 


Share Feelings 

■ Relate an experience in which the 
scriptures helped you or an 
investigator to belter understand a 
gospel principle. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three situations in which you 
will be using the scriptures. 

■ Write a goal to explain the background of the scriptures, share feelings and 
insights, and ask find-out questions in each situation. Carry this goal with 
you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ invite your companion to write a 
goal to use the scriptures with 
investigators. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion use the scriptures with 
investigators. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■During your work today, point out 
opportunities to use the scriptures 
with investigators. Discuss how 
you and your companion are 
doing. 


220 


USE THE BOOK OF MORMON 


o LEARNER 


TRAINER 


President Ezra Taft Benson has declared that the Book of Mormon is “the 
instrument which God has given to the missionaries to convince the Jew and 
Gentile and Lamanite of the truthfulness of our message" (in Conference 
Report, Apr. 1975, p. 96; or Ensign, May 1975, p. 65). Use the Book of Mormon 
in your proselyting. 

According to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "people get a testimony out of the 
Book of Mormon, and the whole thrust of our proselyting program is to do 
whatever we need to do in wisdom, intelligently and honorably, to get 
people to ponder and read and pray about the book so that they'll come to 
know that it's true" (mission presidents' seminar, 23 June 1983). 

o 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to use the scriptures with 
investigators in three situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

» Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved . 

■ Discuss how using the scriptures 
with investigators helped them to 
feel the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ How can understanding the 
purpose of the Book of Mormon 
help you in your proselyting? 


Discuss 

■ When have you read the Book of 
Mormon with investigators? 

■ How did doing this help the 
investigators? 

Read the Book of Mormon with investigators. This will help them understand Read 
it and gain a testimony of it. As they read it, study it, and pray with intent, 
they will obtain a witness that it is true. 


Scripture Activity 

Read the following verses and discuss the answers to the questions. 

Doctrine and Covenants 84:54-58 

■ Why was the Church under condemnation? 

■ What were the elders to do in order to escape this condemnation? 

■ How does this scripture apply to your missionary work? 

Discuss 

■ How can you use the Book of 
Mormon in your proselyting? 

President Ezra Taft Benson has stressed the importance of reading the Book Read and Discuss 

O of Mormon. You should read daily from the Book of Mormon and help your 
investigators to do the same. Read with your investigators during follow-up 
appointments, between discussions, and when they need help and 
encouragement to read. This will help them gain testimonies and begin to 
read on their own. 


221 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Find Out 

■ When can you read the Book of 
Mormon with investigators? 

■ How will investigators benefit 
from reading the Book of Mormon 
with you? 


When you study the Book of Mormon with investigators, members, or even 
your companion, you can do the following: 

■ Share favorite passages from the Book of Mormon. 

■ Share passages that will help investigators with their concerns. 

■ Take turns reading aloud. 

■ Stop to discuss verses. 

■ Share feelings. 

■ Invite the investigators to share feelings. 


Read the following example of missionaries reading the Book of Mormon 
with an investigator. Take the port of the missionary, and have your 
companion act as investigator. 


Elder Jones: 


John: 


Elder Evans: 
Elder Jones: 


John: 


John, it's good to be with you tonight. We would like to take 
some time to read the Book of Mormon with you. In order 
to understand the scriptures, we should invite the Lord's 
Spirit to be with us. May we begin with a word of prayer? 

That would be fine. Elder Evans, would you offer the 
prayer? 

I'd be glad to. [Elder Evans prays.] 

Let's read 3 Nephi, chapter 11, taking turns reading. If you 
have any questions or comments, let's stop and talk. John, 
would you begin by reading verse 1? 

Sure. "And now it came to pass that there were a great 
multitude ..." 


Read 


Discuss 

■ How did the missionaries 
introduce Book of Mormon reading 
to the investigator? 


The missionaries began their study with prayer. They then suggested that 
each person take a turn reading, thus involving the investigator. 

Consider the following example of a missionary reading and discussing 
3 Nephi 11 with Brother and Sister Jones. Take the part of the missionary, 
and have your companion act as investigator. 


Elder Tew: Brother and Sister Jones, for about four hundred years, 

prophets in the Americas had testified of Jesus Christ. Many 
of the prophets in the Book of Mormon had promised that 
the Savior would visit the people after his resurrection. 
Brother Jones, would you please read, beginning with verses 
1 through 5? 


Brother Jones: [Reads verses 1 through 5,] 

Elder Tew: Let's take a moment to summarize what is happening here. 

What did you learn from these verses? 


Brother Jones; Well, people were gathered around a temple. They heard a 
voice from heaven but didn't understand it. 


Elder Tew: Yes, that's right. Did you notice what verse 3 said about the 

voice? 


Read and Discuss 


222 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


(Brother Jones: 

Let me look again. Let's see, the verse says that it was not 
harsh or loud, but that it was small, and it pierced them to 
the heart. 

Sister Jones: 

It also says that the voice caused the people to quake. I'm 
not quite sure what all of this means. 

Elder Benton: 

What do you think it means. Brother Jones? 

Brother Jones: 

I would think that these people had a great experience — 
they heard the voice of God from heaven! That would be 
enough to make me quake. 

Elder Tew: 

I agree. Can you imagine what it must have been like to 
have survived a terrible earthquake and darkness and then 
to have heard a voice out of the sky? 

Brother Jones: 

Pretty scary, I'd say. 

Elder Tew: 

I'm sure it would have gotten my attention. Let's continue 
reading. Sister Jones, will you begin with verse 6? 


In the preceding example, the missionaries invited their investigators to read 

O verses from the Book of Mormon. They took time to discuss what some of 
the verses meant and how the investigators felt about them. 

Listen to the audiotape segments for "Teach: Use the Book of Mormon." 


Discuss 

■ What questions did the 
missionaries ask to help the 
investigators express their feelings? 

■ How will reading and discussing 
the Book of Mormon with others 
encourage them to study the 
scriptures? 

Read 


Listen and Discuss 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Take the part of the investigator in 
each situation. 

■ Have your companion respond to 
the situation. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Practice reading the Book of Mormon with investigators by responding to the 
following situations. Do not try to resolve concerns. Have your companion 
act as the investigator. During your practice, remember to do the following 
things: 

■ Take turns reading aloud and discussing what you read. 

■ Ask the investigator questions to see what he has learned and understood. 

■ Allow the investigator to ask questions and share his feelings. 

■ Share your feelings about what you read. 

1. While teaching an investigator family, you discuss faith and use Alma 
32:26-34. 

2. You return for the second discussion with an investigator family. You feel 
impressed to emphasize prayer and decide to read the story of Enos with 
them. Read Enos 1:1-8 with your investigators. 


223 


LEARNER TRAINER 

3. You invite your companion to read the Book of Mormon with you. Share 
one of your favorite passages with him. 

4. Your investigator has accepted the commitment to read the Book of 
Mormon. Begin reading 3 Nephi 11 with him. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Review your schedule for today, and select three situations in which you 
can read the Book of Mormon with investigators. 

■ Write a goal to read the Book of Mormon in these situations. Carry this goal 
with you during the day as a reminder. 

■ After each situation, ask your companion to tell you how you did. Discuss 
what went well and how you could improve. 


Invite 

■ Identify three situations in which 
your companion could read the 
Book of Mormon with 
investigators today. 

■ Invite him to write a goal to read 
the Book of Mormon in these 
situations. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion read the Book of 
Mormon with investigators. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to read the Book of 
Mormon with others. Discuss how 
you and your companion are 
doing. 


224 


RETAIN INVESTIGATORS 


o LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to read the Book of Mormon 
with investigators in three 
situations. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how reading the Book of 
Mormon with others helped them 
to feel the Spirit. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Two things help nonmembers to continue investigating the Church: making Read 
commitments during the investigation process and being taught by 
missionaries who effectively teach, resolve concerns, and have Christlike 
attributes. 

People who are investigating the Church will usually continue investigating 
when they feel the Spirit of the Lord. They are most likely to feel this Spirit 
when they keep commitments to read the Book of Mormon, pray, and attend 
church. 

The Book of Mormon plays a central role in helping nonmembers love' and 

O accept Jesus Christ and his Church. Do all you can to help them read and 
understand the Book of Mormon. It is not the number of pages read, but the 
quality of the reading experience that will help investigators feel the spirit of 
the Book of Mormon. 

Discuss 

■ How can investigators benefit from 
reading the Book of Mormon? 

■ How will investigators benefit if 
you read the Book of Mormon 
with them? 


Teach investigators to have meaningful personal prayer. This is another way Read 
in which you can help them want to learn more about the Church. When 
nonmembers pray with purpose and real intent, they are more likely to feel 
the Spirit and want to investigate further. 

Discuss 

■ How can prayer help a 
nonmember want to learn more 
about the Church? 


Do all you can to encourage nonmembers to attend church. This will help Read 

them in several ways to want to continue learning about the Church. First, 
they learn that church services help them grow spiritually. Second, they 
make friends with ward members. Third, they will have experiences that will 
help them better understand your teachings. 

Discuss 

■ How can attending church services 
help nonmembers want to learn 
more about the gospel? 


225 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Some people will have to change their beliefs and life-styles greatly when 
they join the Church. Be patient with these people. Continue to help them 
make and keep commitments. 


Read 


Discuss 

■ How does keeping commitments 
help nonmembers want to learn 
more about the Church? 


You can also help investigators want to keep learning about the Church by Read and Discuss 

being the best missionary you can be. Do all you can to develop the 

Christlike attributes of charity, faith, gospel knowledge, and spirituality. Then 

you will be able to teach with conviction and help others feel the Spirit of the 

Lord. 

You can also help investigators by learning to use the principles and skills of 
the commitment pattern. You may already be able to use some commitment 
pattern skills effectively. Others you may need to improve upon through 
study, practice, and daily use. 

Discuss 

■ How can you help investigators 
want to learn more about the 
Church by developing Christlike 
attributes and by correctly using 
the commitment pattern? 


Helping nonmembers make and keep commitments that lead them to 
conversion takes time and patience. In many cases, missionaries stop 
teaching because the investigators have difficulty keeping commitments. They 
may also stop teaching because of investigators' schedules, illnesses, or 
vacations. 

The investigators should always be the ones who decide to stop the 
discussions — not the missionaries. Some investigators have reported that 
they did not know the missionaries had decided to stop teaching them. In 
many cases, they were still interested in learning about the Church and 
preparing for baptism. 


Read 


Discuss 

■ Is there someone you have 
recently stopped teaching who 
may still be interested in learning 
about the Church? 


Sometimes your investigators want to continue to meet with you but are not Read and Discuss 
ready to be baptized, or they lose interest in the discussions. When these 
things happen, discuss the following questions together: 

■ Is the investigator interested in learning about the gospel so he can prepare 
to be a member of the Church? 

■ If so, what can you do to help him resolve his concerns and keep the 
commitments that will prepare him for baptism? 

Many investigators sincerely want to continue learning about the Church. 

Once you know this, you can prayerfully select activities that will help them 
feel the Spirit, become involved in gospel activities, and make and keep 
commitments. Consider the following suggestions. 

■ Ask members to friendship the investigators. Invite a member to have the 
investigators over for a family home evening or some other activity. 

■ Invite investigators to ward functions. 

■ Whenever possible, invite members to accompany you as you visit 
investigators. 


226 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


■ Take time to read the Book of Mormon with them. Help them pray to know 
of its truth. 

■ Use the Book of Mormon to study basic gospel doctrines with them, such as 
faith, repentance, or authority. 

■ Present mini-lessons on a specific doctrine they have questions about. 

■ Show a Church video presentation. 

■ Arrange for the investigators to meet other members who have had 
challenges similar to theirs while investigating the Church. 

Discuss 

■ How will doing some of these 
things help investigators continue 
to prepare for baptism? 

When an investigator is not interested in preparing for membership in the Read 

Church, have an honest, open discussion with him about whether he wants 
to continue investigating the Church. He should decide whether to continue 
or not. A frank discussion about investigation has at least four benefits: 

■ You allow the investigator to choose for himself whether or not to accept 
the gospel. 

■ You may find out that he really does want to continue investigating. 

■ You will show the person that you care about him. 

■ You may be able to help resolve his concern. 

In the following examples, notice how the missionaries help an investigator 
decide to keep learning about the Church. 


Situation 

At the end of the first discussion, Mr. Streeter says, "We've enjoyed your 
message tonight, but I don't think another visit is necessary." 


Less Effective 

M: I see. Well, do you mind if we 
stop by to say hello? 

S: Not at all. You're welcome 
anytime. 

As the missionaries leave, the senior 
companion remarks, "Well, that's 
too bad. I guess we'd better remove 
them from our list. To go back 
would be wasting our time." 


Effective 

M: Do you have a reason for not 
wanting to hear more? 

S: You guys are moving too fast. 
After one visit you want to 
come back two or three times a 
week. I need time to read this 
Book of Mormon and think 
about it. Let me call you when 
I'm ready. 

M: Thank you for sharing your 
feelings with us. We don't 
want you to feel too pressured. 
We'd like to answer any 
questions you have and keep in 
touch. Would it be better if we 
returned in a few days to 
discuss what you've read? 

S: That would be better. 


In the less effective example, the missionaries did not ask the family why 
they didn't want another visit. Also, they did not tell the family that they 
weren't going to come back. They didn't know that the family simply needed time 
to think about what they had heard. In the effective example, the missionaries 
discovered the concern, made arrangements that were acceptable to the 
family, and got permission to see them again. 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Read the following situations and identify which missionaries best help the 
investigators to continue learning about the Church. 

Situation 1 

After the third discussion, the Graham family has not yet begun to read or 
pray about the Book of Mormon, nor have they committed to a baptismal 
date. 

Response A: . The missionaries decide not to go back for a fourth discussion. 

Response B: The missionaries discuss the situation with the Grahams. They 
emphasize that the family must fulfill their commitments in 
order to find out if the Church is true. 

Response C: The missionaries explain that they will not call back because 
the Grahams haven't shown much interest. 

Situation 2 

The Jacobs have received all the discussions and have a baptism date set for 
the next week. However, they have not made much effort to obey the Word 
of Wisdom. 

Response A: The missionaries explain that the Jacobs must obey the Word 
of Wisdom before they can be baptized. Then they ask the 
Jacobs if they would like the missionaries to keep visiting to 
help them keep the Word of Wisdom commitment. 

Response B: The missionaries decide to continue teaching the Jacobs for 

another month. If there is still a Word of Wisdom problem at 
that point, they will stop their visits. 


Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Read a situation to him. 

■ Have him read a response. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionaries effectively help the 
investigators to continue learning 
about the Church. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
responses. 


Answer: In "A," the missionaries did 
not discuss their decision with the 
investigators. "B" is the best 
response because the missionaries 
discussed the problem with the 
investigators and gave them a 
chance to reconsider. In “C," the 
missionaries discussed their decision 
with the investigators but did not 
allow them to reconsider. 

o 


Answer: "A" is effective because the 
missionaries include the Jacobs 
family in the decision. "B" is not 
effective because the missionaries 
make their decision without 
involving the Jacobs family. 


Situation 3 

The Smith family is interested in learning about the Church. After five 

discussions, however, they still have made no effort to pray. 

Response A: The missionaries explain to the family that they will never 

gain testimonies unless they pray. Then they tell the Smiths 
that they must begin to pray or the missionaries will have to 
stop teaching them. 

Response B: The missionaries explain that the family needs to begin 

praying daily or it may be necessary to stop teaching them. 
They ask the Smiths how they feel about prayer and why it 
has been difficult to pray. Mr. Smith says that it has been 
hard to find the time. The missionaries make arrangements 
to visit more often to pray with them and read the Book of 
Mormon. 


Answer: "A" is ineffective because 
the missionaries decide to stop 
visiting without consulting the 
Smiths. "B" is effective because the 
missionaries discuss the decision 
with the family. Their suggestion 
will allow the Smiths to decide 
whether they are serious about 
continuing to investigate. 


228 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 

Practice 

■ Read each situation to your 
companion. 

■ Have him respond by explaining 
what the missionaries should do. 

■ Help him understand what he did 
well and what he needs to 
improve. 


Practice helping investigators want to continue investigating by responding to 

the following situations: 

1. The Porters have been meeting with missionaries for several months, but 
they have never come to church. 

2. The Wrights have received missionary visits for over a year. They are very 
friendly and would like the missionaries to keep coming as friends. But 
they have little interest when gospel discussions begin. 

3. Sister Dupont has received all the discussions and is keeping her 
commitments. She doesn't feel like she can commit to live the law of 
tithing until she makes more money, though. 

4. The Rogers seem to be more interested in arguing with you than in 
learning from you. Before you leave each time, however, they thank you 
for coming and ask you to return. 

5. Rita wants to be baptized, but her husband is having trouble with the 
Joseph Smith story. 

6. You are teaching a non-Christian teenager who is interested in learning 
about the Church. However, he refuses to read the Book of Mormon 
because he feels that doing so would displease God. 


O End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Identify your investigators who are having trouble keeping commitments 
or who have had all of the discussions but are unwilling to be baptized. 

■ Plan with your companion how to help each one progress toward 
conversion. 

■ Write a goal to follow your plans. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to identify 
those investigators who are having 
trouble keeping commitments and 
plan with you how to help them. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion identify and help those 
investigators who are having 
trouble keeping commitments. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to help investigators 
keep commitments. Discuss how 
you and your companion are 
doing. 


229 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

Conclusion 


This chapter has focused on the importance of using the scriptures, especially 
the Book of Mormon, in your teaching. It has also focused on helping people 
want to continue investigating the Church. As you teach by the Spirit, people 
will have the opportunity to develop faith, repent, and prepare to receive the 
ordinances of baptism and confirmation. 

Read 

Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review principles used 
in teaching. 


230 


STUDY RECORD 


Date 


Time Spent 


Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

"Use Scriptures" 

Use the scriptures effectively in 
three situations by explaining the 

background of scriptures, sharing 

feelings and insights, and asking 
find-out questions. 

0 "Use the Book of Mormon" 

Read the Book of Mormon with 
investigators in three situations. 


"Retain Investigators" 

Help investigators who are having 
trouble keeping discussion 
commitments progress toward 
baptism. 


231
