BAPTIZE AND FELLOWSHIP 


o 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Prepare 

■ Identify areas in which your 
companion may need to improve 
in baptizing and fellowshipping. 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 


This chapter will teach you how to more effectively help investigators become Read 
active members of the Church. Begin your study with prayer, and ask the 
Lord to help you learn and apply the principles you study. 

Many principles and skills can be used in baptizing and fellowshipping new 
converts. This chapter will discuss the following: 


1. Help Investigators Qualify for Baptism 234 

2. Prepare Spiritually Uplifting Baptismal Services 237 

3. Assist Stake Missionaries in Fellowshipping 239 


Other principles and skills not discussed in this chapter might include the 
following: 

4. Perform the baptism 

5. Complete the Baptism Recommend/Temporary Membership Record 

Discuss 

■ What are other ways to bring 
about successful baptisms? 

■ What are other ways to 
fellowship? 


Perhaps you thought of other principles and skills that could be used in 
baptizing and fellowshipping new converts. Discuss these with your 
companion and list them below: 


6 . 

7. 

8 . 


Read and Discuss 


232 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


^ The Commitment Pattern 

Baptizing and Fellowshipping 

Prepare Invite Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 

Resolve Concerns 


The commitment pattern is the process of (1) preparing people to feel the 
Spirit of the Lord, (2) inviting them to make commitments when they feel the 
Spirit, and (3) following up to help them keep their commitments. When you 
are preparing people for baptism and fellowshipping them, you should focus 
on helping them make the commitment to remain active in the Church. You 
will apply the principles and skills of the commitment pattern to help people 
take this step. 


You will begin baptizing and fellowshipping activities when people make a 
firm commitment to be baptized. Ideally, people will make this commitment 
as part of the second discussion. The commitments in the discussions will 
help them qualify for baptism and will prepare them for membership in the 
Church. After baptism, you will work with stake missionaries to continue 
supporting the new members. When you help investigators become active 
members, you show them that you care about their spiritual growth. 


Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ How will you use the commitment 
pattern in baptizing and 
fellowshipping activities? 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Ask your companion to briefly 
describe what baptizing and 
fellowshipping mean. 


Generally, new members are committed to the doctrines and programs of the Read and Discuss 

gospel. Unfortunately, some become inactive shortly after their baptisms. You 

can do much during the baptizing and fellowshipping period to help them 

strengthen their testimonies and receive the blessings of full activity in the 

Church. 


Scripture Activity 

Read Ephesians 2:19, and discuss the following question with your 
companion. 

■ How do new converts learn to feel that they are "fellowcitizens with the 
saints"? 


233 


HELP INVESTIGATORS QUALIFY FOR BAPTISM 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Before investigators can be baptized, they must meet certain qualifications. Read and Discuss 

The Lord has outlined what he expects of those who wish to join his Church. 


Scripture Activity 

Many of the qualifications for baptism are found in Doctrine and Covenants 
20:37 and Mosiah 18:8-10. Read these verses and discuss the following 
question with your companion. 

■ What does the Lord require of those who want to be baptized? 


In addition to these requirements, the First Presidency has emphasized that 

those who want to be baptized should do the following: 

■ Be taught all of the standard missionary discussions before baptism and 
have a testimony of the Savior. 

■ Attend regular Sunday church meetings and feel unified with Church 
members. 

■ Be introduced to the bishop or branch president. 

■ Repent and commit to love and serve God with all their hearts by keeping 
his commandments. 


Find Out 

■ What must a person do to qualify 
for baptism? 


You are responsible to help potential converts qualify for baptism. To do this, 
use the commitment pattern to help them make and keep the commitments 
in the discussions. 

The Convert Baptism Checklist contains a summary of the important events 
that should occur during the baptizing and fellowshipping period. The ward 
mission leader keeps this checklist and uses it to track the progress of new 
converts. He refers to it during the ward weekly priesthood executive 
committee meeting to make sure that each new convert is being 
fellowshipped. You should also keep copies of the checklist. Find a sample 
checklist on page 243 and read it with your companion. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ According to the Convert Baptism 
Checklist, what events should 
occur during the baptizing and 
fellowshipping period? 


The district leader is responsible to interview the baptismal candidate to make Read 
sure that he meets all requirements. (The zone leader interviews candidates 
taught by the district leader.) The guidelines for conducting the baptismal 
interview are found in the Mission President's Handbook and are listed below. If 
necessary, briefly discuss each item with your companion. 


Guidelines for Conducting Baptismal Interviews 

"1. Hold the interview in a comfortable, private place where it will be easy for 
people to feel the Spirit of the Lord. [You may choose to begin with 
prayer.] Interview each candidate individually, starting with the family 
head. Be warm and friendly toward the candidate, who may be nervous 
and uneasy. Show genuine love and concern. 

"2. Read together Doctrine and Covenants 20:37 to explain the purpose of the 
interview. You may also want to read Mosiah 18:8-10 and Moroni 6:1-4. 


234 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


"3. Ask the necessary questions to determine whether the candidate is ready 
for baptism. For example, you might ask questions such as these: 

"a. Have you prayed about the gospel? Have your prayers been 
answered? 

"b. Do you accept Jesus Christ as the literal Son of God? 

"c. What are your reasons for knowing (or believing) that Joseph Smith 
was a prophet of God? 

"d. Will you sustain the President of the Church as a prophet, seer, and 
revelator and as the Lord's representative on earth? 

"e. Are you now living each of the Ten Commandments? 

"f. What is your understanding of the law of tithing? Will you live this 
law? 

"g. What is your understanding of the Word of Wisdom? Will you live 
this law by abstaining from tea, coffee, alcohol, tobacco [or other 
harmful drugs]? 

"h. What is your understanding of the law of chastity? Will you obey this 
law? 

"i. Have you repented of all past transgressions? 

"Let the Spirit direct you at all times. Avoid the tendency to lecture; use 
the discussion that follows each question as an opportunity to teach and 
inspire. 

"It is not necessary to ask for details of past transgressions. The candidate 
should demonstrate that he has repented and is willing to keep the 
commandments. If the candidate is living in an illegal marriage 
relationship [ask your mission president for the definition of this in your 
country] or if he has been involved in a serious crime, abortion, or a 
homosexual or lesbian transgression, he should also be interviewed by the 
stake or mission president, who may authorize the baptism. . . . 

"4. Tell the candidate whether you feel he is prepared for baptism. If he is, 
congratulate him on his diligence and on his desire to do what is right. 
Reassure him that his decision is right. Fill out the baptismal recommend, 
and review with him the arrangements for the baptismal service. Describe 
what will take place at the baptismal service and how the baptism and 
confirmation will be performed. 

"If you feel the baptismal date should be postponed, share your concerns 
with the candidate. If a postponement is advisable to resolve questions 
that arose in your interview, you should discuss another date so that the 
candidate can still have a specific goal. 

"5. Bear your testimony and, if it seems appropriate, invite the candidate to 
share his feelings also" (Mission President's Handbook, pp. 11-12). 


To prepare your investigators for the baptismal interview, you might do the 
following: 

1. Talk to them about the purpose of the interview. Let them know that the 
interviewer will be asking questions to see if they are ready for baptism. 

2. Discuss with them the questions in item 3 of the guidelines above, or 
similar questions. 

3. Read and discuss the scriptures in item 2 of the guidelines above. 

Find Out 

■ How can you prepare your 
investigators for the baptismal 
interview? 


235 


LEARNER 

At the end of the baptismal interview, the district leader (or zone leader) 
should complete the Baptism Recommend/Temporary Membership Record. 
This form provides information for a permanent membership record for the 
new member. Many members are lost because records are filled out 
improperly or incompletely. Be certain that you complete this form properly. 


Specific guidelines for filling out the Baptism Recommend/Temporary 
Membership Record are included on page 244, with an example of a 
completed form. 


TRAINER 

Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ Why is it important to correctly fill 
out the Baptism Recommend/ 
Temporary Membership Record? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ Locate the sample form on page 
244. Discuss why each piece of 
information is important. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Review each of your investigators. Decide what needs to be done to help 
each one qualify for baptism. 

■ Write a goal to carry out your plans. 

■ Read the information under "Baptism" in the Bible Dictionaiy of the LDS 
edition of the King James Bible. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to decide 
what needs to be done to help 
each of your investigators qualify 
for baptism. 


Follow Up 

■ Write the goal to help your 
companion prepare your 
investigators for baptism. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work this week, point 
out opportunities to help 
investigators prepare for baptism. 
Discuss how you and your 
companion are doing. 


236 


PREPARE SPIRITUALLY UPLIFTING BAPTISMAL SERVICES 


o 

v LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to help your investigators 
qualify for baptism. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how helping investigators 
qualify for baptism helped them 
feel the Spirit and keep their 
commitments. 

* Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 


The baptismal service should be a spiritual highlight for a new convert. Do 
everything you can to make the baptismal service well organized, inspiring, 
and memorable. 

The main purpose of a baptismal service is to perform the sacred ordinance of 
salvation for the new member. The service should help the new convert feel 
the Spirit and strengthen his commitment to remain active. 

Another important purpose of the service is to help nonmembers feel the 
Spirit so that they will accept an invitation to hear the discussions. A 
properly conducted service can be an excellent way to prepare them for this 
invitation. 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ What are the purposes of a 
baptismal service? 


Discuss 

« How can you use the baptismal 
service to find people to teach? 


The ward mission leader will usually conduct the baptismal service. Work Read 

with him to make sure that all the necessary arrangements are made. The 
following questions will help you prepare for each baptismal service. 

■ Are member and nonmember relatives and friends invited to the service? 

■ Is the building scheduled? Will the font be filled with warm water, if 
possible, and the baptismal clothes available? 

■ Are the talks assigned? 

■ Are ward members and leaders invited? 

Discuss 

■ How can you help the ward 
mission leader prepare for the 
baptismal service? 


Below is a sample agenda for a baptismal service. Read 

1. Welcome by the person conducting 

2. Opening hymn and prayer 

3. Short talk on a gospel subject, for example, faith, repentance, baptism, gift 
of the Holy Ghost 

4. Baptism(s) 

5. Testimony bearing, special music. Church films, or other appropriate 
l J activities while those who have been baptized are changing clothes 


237 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


6. Confirmations, unless performed in fast and testimony meeting 

7. Welcome by the bishop 

8. Closing hymn and prayer 


Discuss 

■ How can using this agenda help 
make a baptismal service 
spiritually uplifting? 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Memorize the baptismal prayer. 

■ Identify two families who will be baptized in the next month. 

■ Write a goal to meet with the ward mission leader to outline the agendas 
for the baptismal services. 


Invite 

■ Identify two families who will be 
baptized in the next month. 

■ Invite your companion to meet 
with the ward mission leader to 
outline the agendas for the 
baptismal services. 


Follow Up 

■ Write a goal to help your 
companion meet with the ward 
mission leader to outline the 
agendas for upcoming baptismal 
services. 


238 


ASSIST STAKE MISSIONARIES IN FELLOWSHIPPING 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to locate the 
goal to prepare suggested agendas 
for baptismal services. 

■ Ask him if he feels that he 
accomplished his goal. 

■ Discuss what went well in working 
toward the goal and what could be 
improved. 

■ Discuss how uplifting baptismal 
services can spiritually strengthen 
a new convert. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Baptism is the gate to the path leading to eternal life. After investigators have Read and Discuss 

been baptized, you should continue to visit them for a few weeks. Your 

purpose is to help place them firmly on the path leading to eternal life so that 

they can return to our Heavenly Father's presence. One immediate goal is to 

help them prepare to attend the temple. 

Scripture Activity 

Read 2 Nephi 31:19-20 with your companion and discuss the following 
question. 

^ ■ What must a new member do after his baptism? 

Find Out 

■ What should be your purpose 
when you are fellowshipping new 
members? 

Read 


Discuss 

■ How does your role change when 
your investigator is baptized? 

■ How important is your role in 
fellowshipping? 

Stake missionaries and home teachers are responsible to fellowship new Read and Discuss 

members and help them feel accepted and welcome in the Church. One of 
their main tasks is to teach the Discussions for New Members. These discussions 
teach the new member more about the doctrines and mission of the Church. 

New converts begin receiving these discussions within a week after baptism. 

They complete them two or three months after baptism. 

The Discussions for Neiu Members are arranged in the same format as the 
missionary discussions. Each discussion contains teaching helps and 
commitments to help new members become fully active in the Church. 

You should go with the stake missionaries who teach the first two or three 
discussions to new members. Your role is to support the stake missionaries in 

U these discussions. As they request, bear testimony, give examples, and 
otherwise support their teaching. 


After the new convert is baptized, the stake missionaries and the home 
teachers have major responsibility for his progress. You work with the stake 
missionaries to help new converts become fully active in the Church. In order 
to help stake missionaries, you must understand their role. 


239 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


Find Out 

■ How will the Discussions for New 
Members help converts remain 
active? 

■ Who teaches the Discussions for 
New Members? 


The stake missionaries will use the Convert Baptism Checklist as a resource Read 

to help the new members feel the Spirit as they continue to learn and apply 
gospel principles. They should encourage the bishop to give the new converts 
Church callings and ordain the male members to the priesthood. 

Discuss 

■ Why it is so important for new 
converts to receive a calling and 
for male members to be ordained 
to the priesthood? 


Stake missionaries will also introduce home teachers to the new member. The 
home teachers may be present when the stake missionaries teach the 
Discussions for New Members, and they can help with the teaching. 

Stake missionaries will encourage the new convert to continue reading the 
Book of Mormon, have personal and family prayer, and have family home 
evening. They will help him prepare to enter the temple. The responsibility 
of the stake missionaries does not end until the new member is fully involved 
in the Church. 


After your investigators are baptized, you should help the stake missionaries 
and home teachers work with them until they have done the following: 

■ Received at least two or three of the Discussions for New Members 

■ Become acquainted with the bishop and other ward leaders 

■ Received a Church calling 

■ Been ordained to the priesthood if they are males 

■ Begun to participate in ward activities and assignments 

Continue to pray for new converts. Visit new members regularly for a few 
weeks after their baptisms to strengthen them spiritually. Correlate your 
visits with the stake missionaries. During these visits, you can read the Book 
of Mormon with the new members, pray with them, and encourage them to 
keep their commitments. 

New converts can also refer many people to you to be taught. You can help 
them invite their friends and relatives to hear the gospel. Doing these things 
will help the new convert continue to grow spiritually. 


Read 


Discuss 

■ How do stake missionaries help 
the new member make and keep 
the commitment to remain fully 
active? 


Read and Discuss 


Find Out 

■ How can full-time missionaries 
help to fellowship new members? 

■ What benefits will come from 
involving stake missionaries with 
each investigator before his 
baptism? 


Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience you had with 
fellowshipping a new member 
who is still active. 


240 


LEARNER 


The following are examples of missionaries fellowshipping investigators and 
new members. In each situation, decide if the missionary is effective. Discuss 
your answers with your companion. 

1. Immediately before the baptismal interview, the elders make a note to tell 
the ward mission leader about the baptism. 


2. The elders bring the stake missionaries to help teach the fourth missionary 
discussion. 


3. The stake missionary calls Elder Snyder, a full-time missionary, and asks 
him to help teach the first discussion for new members. 


4. The elders feel that they should not contact the Becks after their baptism. 
They think that this will keep the Becks from developing friendships on 
their own and will cause them to rely too much on the missionaries. 


5. While the stake missionaries are teaching the Discussions for New Members, 
Elder Snyder follows their lead and adds his testimony. 

6. A week after the baptism. Elders Snyder and Callis drop by to read the 
Book of Mormon with the Becks. 


7. Six weeks after the baptism, Elders Snyder and Callis still drop by the 
Becks' home each day to visit briefly. 


8. Two months after the baptism. Elders Snyder and Callis drop by the Becks 
to seek referrals. 


TRAINER 

Identify 

■ Have your companion cover the 
answers in the right column. 

■ Have him read a situation. 

■ Ask him to decide whether the 
missionaries are effectively 
fellowshipping the investigators 
and new members. 

■ Ask him to explain his decision. 

■ Do the same for the following 
situations. 


Answers: 

Ineffective. The missionaries should 
have told the ward mission leader 
about the investigator's progress 
long before the interview. 

Effective. The stake missionaries 
need to be involved-with the 
investigator long before the baptism. 
They may have helped to find the 
investigator. 

Effective. Missionaries should attend 
the first two or three discussions for 
new members. 

Ineffective. New members need to 
learn to stand on their own. But 
full-time missionaries can greatly 
help them become active members 
of the ward. 

Effective. Stake missionaries lead out 
in these discussions. 

Effective. For a few weeks after the 
baptism, the missionaries should 
continue to strengthen the 
investigators. 

Ineffective. Missionaries should be 
visiting much less frequently by 
now. Stake missionaries should be 
doing most of the fellowshipping. 

Effective . This is a good way to 
fellowship the Becks and find new 
people to teach. 


241 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 

section by doing the following: 

■ Do one of the following today: (1) Visit your most recent convert and 
strengthen him. Help him invite a friend or relative to hear the first 
discussion. (2) Help the stake missionaries teach one of the Discussions for 
New Members. 

■ Write a goal to do one of these things. Carry the goal with you during the 
day as a reminder. 

■ After you complete the goal, ask your companion to tell you how you did. 
Discuss what went well and how you can improve. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to choose 
one of the suggested activities. 

■ Invite him to write a goal to 
complete the activity he chose. 


Follow Up 

■ Write the goal to help your 
companion complete the activity 
he chose. 

■ Take this goal with you as you 
proselyte. Use it to help your 
companion accomplish his goal. 

■ Complete the study record at the 
end of the chapter. 

■ During your work today, point out 
opportunities to fellowship new 
members. Discuss how you and 
your companion are doing. 


Conclusion 

You have the opportunity and responsibility to help investigators qualify for Read 
baptism. After you do this, you should make sure that the baptismal service 
is spiritually uplifting for all in attendance. In addition, you should help stake 
missionaries to fellowship new converts for several weeks after the baptism. 

In these ways, you can help new members become fully involved in their 
new wards and lives. As they prepare to receive other ordinances, they will 
continue to progress along the path leading to eternal life. 


Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review principles used 
in preparing people for baptism 
and fellowshipping them. 


242 


Convert Baptism Checklist 


The bishop uses this form in priesthood executive committee and ward council meetings to discuss 
the progress of each new convert during the first year after baptism. Under the direction of the 
bishop, the ward mission leader completes this form for potential converts. He may need to obtain 
necessary information from the full-time missionaries. 


Name of convert and spouse 

O/ar/ss ar// Caro/ PP///S 

Baptism date 

7O//3/06 

Address 

27/6 OaP/poacf 

Names of children ' 

Am'Z' 

Age 

S~ 

"'Mr/#*- C*ee* 

Telephone 

SSS'6742- 

Jeseph 

2 

Country 

C/SA 

Posiavzip code 

94S36 


Home teachers 

C/t/de P&7/7/S, Potest £0 strew 

Visiting teachers . 

Mary PP flips ,/hin£fh6 'Johnson 

Before Baptism 

Date Completed 

The bishop has met the nonmember(s) 

9/28/66 

The missionaries have taught all the discussions 

70/70/86 

The investigator(s) have attended sacrament meeting 

9/27/06 

The candidate(s) have been interviewed for baptism 

70//X/06 

The Baptism 

Date Completed 

The bishop interviews the new convert(s) 

70/79/66 

1 

Eligible male(s) receive the Aaronic Priesthood 

/S/2.6/S6 

The new convert(s) are enrolled in the Gospel Essentials class 

70/79/06 

Stake missionaries begin teaching the discussions for new member(s) 

7S//S/S6 

The elders quorum and Relief Society presidencies visit the new convert(s) 

72//6/S6 

The new convert(s) begin regular family home evenings, scripture study, and family prayer 

/O/73/06 

One to Four Months After the 8aptism 

Date Completed 

The bishop interviews the convert(s) again 

77//6/P6 

The new convert(s) receive Church callings 

77/76/06 

The new convert(s) bear testimony or speak in church 

72/2Z//g£ 

The discussions for new members) are completed 

7////0P 

The new convert(s) begin a family group sheet for temple sealing 

Z/76/8/ 

As Soon As Appropriate During First Year 

Date Completed 

Eligible and worthy males receive the Melchizedek Priesthood 

S//0/Zf 

After One Year 

Date Completed 

The family attends the temple 

76/7Y/?f 


31974 4/B7 Printed [n USA 


™ e CHURCHof 
JESUS CHRIST 
OF LATTER-DAY 
SAINTS 


243 


Converts 


The mission office will forward the white copies to Church 
headquarters or the area office. Membership records will be 
prepared and sent to the appropriate ward or branch. 

When all white and pink copies are used and detached from 
the Baptism Recommend/Temporary Membership Record 
book, send the book containing yellow copies to the mission 
office. The mission office should keep it on file for two years, 
after which it should be destroyed. 

Clerk responsibilities: When' the pink copy of the Baptism 
Recommend/Temporary Membership Record is given to the 
new member's bishop or branch president, he should — 

1. Put the pink copy of the recommend in the membership 
record binder or file box to use as a temporary 
membership record. 


2. Make sure the baptism and confirmation information is 
recorded in the Ordinance and Action Record. 

3. Prepare a Certificate of Baptism and Confirmation to 
present to the member. 

4. Compare the pink copy of the form to the new 
membership record when it is received from Church 
headquarters or the area office. If the membership record 
is inaccurate or incomplete, update the record according 
to instructions in the Church Membership Records booklet 
(automated, 32319; nonautomated, 33477), Then destroy 
the pink copy. 

When preparing a membership record for a child of convert 
parents, the clerk should follow instructions in the Church 
Membership Records booklet. 


Converts 

A convert baptism is the baptism of any person (1) nine 
years of age or older who has never been baptized, or 
(2) eight years of age whose parents are not members. 
Baptisms of excommunicated persons who are readmitted to 
the Church are not convert baptisms. Missionaries and ward 
mission leaders should not interview a former member of the 
Church who is authorized for readmission. Such interviews 
are conducted by bishops and branch presidents. 

The Interview 

An authorized full-time missionary or the ward mission leader 
should interview each candidate before baptism and 
complete the Baptism Recommend/Temporary Membership 
Record (forms in this book). 

1. Enter information in all the applicable areas, except the 
baptism and confirmation dates. Be sure to include any 
prior marriage information on the back side of the Baptism 
Recommend/Temporary Membership Record. 

2. Enter the names of the persons who are going to perform 
the ordinances. (Inform the candidate that if a person from 
another ward or branch, other than a full-time or stake 
missionary, will be performing the baptism and/or 
confirmation ordinances, he must have a current temple 
recommend or a Recommend to Perform an Ordinance 
[32595].) 

3. Sign the Baptism Recommend/Temporary Membership 
Record. 

4. Distribute the copies of the Baptism Recommend/ 
Temporary Membership Record: White copy— to the 
missionary responsible for the baptism. The missionary is 
to present it to the person conducting the baptismal 
service. Pink copy— to the candidate for baptism to 
present to the person conducting the baptismal service. 
Yellow copy — keep in the Baptism Recommend/ 
Temporary Membership Record book. 


The Baptism and Confirmation 

The ward, branch, or mission leader conducting the 

baptismal sen/ice should— 

1 . Obtain the white copy of the Baptism Recommend/ 
Temporary Membership Record from the missionary 
responsible for the baptism. 

2. Obtain the pink copy of the Baptism Recommend/ 
Temporary Membership Record from the candidate for 
baptism. 

3. Enter the baptism and confirmation dates in the 
appropriate spaces on the white and pink copies after the 
ordinances are performed. 

(Note: Change the names under “Performed by" if 
different persons performed the ordinances.) 

4. Present the pink copy to the new member's bishop or 
branch president. 

5. Give the white copy to the missionary responsible for the 
baptism. 

Record-keeping Responsibilities 

The missionary responsible for the baptism should — 

1. Make sure the baptism and confirmation dates have been 
entered on the white, pink, and yellow copies of the 
Baptism Recommend/Temporary Membership Record 
immediately after the baptism and confirmation occur. 

2. Group together the white copies of the Baptism 
Recommend/Temporary Membership Record for family 
members baptized at the same time. 

3. Send the white copy of the Baptism Recommend/ 
Temporary Membership Record to the mission office. The 
baptism will not be counted on the mission reports until 
the copy is received by the mission. 


244 


STUDY RECORD 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

" Help Investigators Qualify 

for Baptism" 

Help your investigators qualify 

for baptism. 


"Prepare Spiritually Uplifting 
Baptismal Services" 

O Prepare spiritually uplifting 

baptismal services by memorizing 
the baptismal prayer and meeting 
with the ward mission leader to 


plan upcoming baptismal services. 


"Assist Stake Missionaries in 
Telloivshipping” 

Visit your most recent convert and 
strengthen him, or help the stake 
missionaries teach one of the 


Discussions for New Members. 


245
