LEADERSHIP 


o 


INTRODUCTION 


LEARNER TRAINER 

Prepare 

■ Review this chapter before you 
begin studying it. 

■ Before each companion study 
period, review the section that you 
are going to study. 

The purpose of this chapter is to help you and your companion use the Read 

commitment pattern with each other and with other missionaries. The 
principles taught in the chapter will help you prepare others to feel the Spirit, 
invite them to improve, and follow up to help them grow. Begin your study 
with prayer, and ask the Lord to help you learn and apply the principles you 
study. 


The Commitment Pattern 


Prepare 

Leadership 

Invite 

Follow Up 

Build Relationships 
of Trust 

Help Others Feel and 
Recognize the Spirit 

Present the Message 

Find Out 

Resolve Concerns 


As shown here, the commitment pattern applies in all areas of your work, 
including working with other missionaries. To use the commitment pattern in 
leadership, (1) prepare missionaries to feel the Spirit of the Lord, (2) invite 
them to make commitments to learn and apply Christlike attributes and skills, 
and (3) follow up to help them grow. 

The Savior explained the true meaning of leadership: "He that is ordained of 
God and sent forth, the same is appointed to be the greatest, 
notwithstanding he is the least and the servant of all" (D&C 50:26). While 
serving a mission, you will have the opportunity to lead others and thus to 
serve them. 

Find Out 

■ What is the purpose of this 
chapter? 

■ How can you use the commitment 
pattern in leadership? 


Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience in which a 
mission leader helped you to 
improve. 


246 


LEARNER 


TRAINER 


f ) A mission leader is responsible to help missionaries succeed in bringing souls Read and Discuss 
unto Christ through baptism. He can do this by teaching missionaries to 
develop Christlike attributes and to more effectively use the commitment 
pattern to bring about conversion. 

In companionships, one missionary is usually assigned to function as the 
senior companion. Sometimes a more experienced missionary is assigned as 
the junior companion of another missionary who has not served as long or 
who has not had as much leadership experience. This practice teaches several 
important principles. 

■ Being called to be a leader or a senior companion does not mean that a 
missionary is more capable or worthy than others. Rather, such a calling 
becomes an opportunity to serve. 

■ In Church service, people do not move up through leadership callings. A 
district leader or zone leader may be called as a junior companion after his 
release. 

■ A release is a part of a Church call and does not mean that a missionary has 
served unfaithfully or has failed. 

■ In Church service, one is always appointed to lead, so that there is order. 

Members should not use leadership positions to satisfy their own ambitions. 

■ The leader is not a dictator. He makes final decisions but counsels with his 
companion to reach a decision on which they can both agree. 

Find Out 

■ Why is the senior companion not 
always more experienced than the 
junior? 

It is very important for you to feel charity for your companion. Investigators Read 

O can feel the love that you radiate as a companionship. One investigator 
family was just about to stop learning about the Church after the third 
discussion. They just couldn't believe the Joseph Smith story. As the 
discussion was ending, however, the mother of the family said: 

"Elders, we really are having a hard time believing what you have taught us. 

We were about to tell you that we were not interested in hearing any more 
discussions. But I want you both to know that I can feel the love you have 
for one another as you teach your lessons. If you can have such a powerful 
feeling between yourselves, your message must be important for us." 

Discuss 

■ Why is love between companions 
so important? 

Share Feelings 

■ Share an experience in which your 
relationship with a companion 
helped an investigator. 

One of the best ways to promote unity and love in your companionship is Read 

through the companion planning session (sometimes called the companion 
inventory). In this meeting, you can discuss and set goals for your work, 
your relationship as companions, and your personal lives. Hold these 
sessions each week, and hold other meetings during the week as needed. 

The best place for these meetings is your own apartment. 

Your companion planning sessions should include the following (not 
necessarily in order of priority): 

■ Pray (include opening and closing prayers). 

■ Discuss and review personal goals. 

C « Discuss the progress of your investigators. 

,■ Evaluate the previous week's proselyting goals and plans. 


247 


LEARNER 

■ Discuss and set proselyting goals. 

■ Share testimony with each other. 

■ Discuss companionship conflicts, if any. 

■ Finalize plans for the coming week. 


TRAINER 

o 


Discuss 

■ How do companion planning 
sessions help a companionship? 


Always begin your planning sessions with prayer. Then individually seek the 
Lord's help as you review your past goals and set personal goals for the 
coming week. After setting your personal goals, read them to your 
companion, and ask for his help in attaining them. 

Together, review the past week's performance and the progress of your 
investigators. Then set proselyting goals together. Use the calendar portion of 
the Missionary Weekly Planner to plan your activities for the week. 

As you finish your goal setting and planning, bear your testimony to your 
companion and express your appreciation for him. This will help maintain a 
spiritual atmosphere in which you can discuss any conflicts or concerns that 
may have arisen in your companionship. 

Conclude your companion planning session by kneeling in prayer, 
committing yourselves to the goals you have set, and asking for the Lord's 
help. The companion planning session will be one of your greatest tools for 
effective missionary service. It will bring your companionship closer together 
as you strive to serve the Lord. The companion planning session should be 
held even when everything is going well in your companionship. 


Read 


Find Out 

■ How can companion planning 
sessions help you proselyte more 
effectively? 


Discuss 

■ How can you make your 
companion planning sessions 
better? 


In order to serve the Lord well, missionary companions must have the Read 

constant companionship of the Spirit of the Lord. You need the Spirit so that 
(1) together you can be receptive to the will of the Lord and do what he 
would have you do, and (2) the Spirit can confirm your teachings and 
testimony. The document "Companions," which accompanies this lesson, 
contains nine guidelines to help companions bring the blessings of the Spirit 
more fully into their lives. Discuss these principles during each companion 
planning session. 

Share Feelings 

■ Share your positive feelings about 
the relationship you have with 
your companion. 


End your study session now, and apply what you have learned in this 
section by doing the following: 

■ Read the document "Companions," and discuss it with your companion. 

■ After reading it, discuss how following the guidelines mentioned can bless 
your companionship. 


Invite 

■ Invite your companion to read and 
discuss the document 
"Companions" with you. 


o 


248 


LEARNER 

TRAINER 

) 

Follow Up 

■ Help your companion apply the 
guidelines in the document 
"Companions." 

■ Discuss with him how following 
the guidelines mentioned can bless 
your companionship. 

■ Complete the assignment log at 
the end of the chapter. 

Conclusion 


Leadership is helping others to succeed. An effective way to be a good leader 
is to use the commitment pattern in working with others. Leaders also teach 
others to use the commitment pattern. Companion planning sessions help 
you become more effective missionaries and leaders, and they promote unity 
and love between companions. 

Read 

Using the information in this chapter, identify areas in which you need to 
improve. Write your goals for improvement in these areas. Refer to this 
chapter often for suggestions and help. 

Invite 

■ Invite your companion to write 
goals to help him improve. 


Follow Up 

■ Ask your companion to share his 
goals with you. Find out how you 
can help him achieve his goals. 

■ Compliment him on the progress 
he makes. 

■ Periodically review principles of 
leadership. 


COMPANIONS 

The preaching of the gospel two by two is a pattern that the Lord established 
during his mortal ministry. In Mark, we read that Jesus "called unto him the 
twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two" (Mark 6:70). When he 
appointed the seventy, he "sent them two and two" to prepare the way 
before him (Luke 10:1). In our own dispensation, the Lord has reemphasized 
this principle: "And ye shall go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my 
gospel, two by two, in my name" (D&C 42:6). 

The Lord has established this pattern for his missionaries for a number of 
reasons. In the first place, he has repeatedly taught that "in the mouth of two 
or three witnesses shall every word be established" (D&C 6:28; see also 
Deuteronomy 17:6; Matthew 18:16; 2 Corinthians 13:1; Ether 5:4; D&C 128:3). 
The testimonies of two missionary companions support each other and can 
have a greater effect on investigators, especially if the love and brotherhood 
of the missionaries are evident. 

In the same way, missionary companions are able to support each other in 
other phases of their work. They help each other in the process of learning 
and growing and strengthen each other in times of difficulty. 

The companion relationship also provides missionaries with an invaluable 
protection in the face of danger, whether physical danger, false accusation, or 
temptation. For example, if a missionary is accused of misbehavior, the word 

C of his companion is an important verification of the truth. And a companion 
yean serve as a voice of warning to a missionary who is facing temptation. He 
can even call upon the help of the mission president when needed. 


249 


Missionaries who develop and maintain an appropriate relationship and stay 
together seldom encounter problems that they cannot solve. 

In order to serve the Lord as effectively as possible, you and your companion must 
have the constant guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. You need this Spirit (1) so that 
you can know what the Lord wants you to do, and (2) so that the Spirit can confirm 
your teachings and testimony and lead your investigators toward conversion. 

The following guidelines are suggested as ways in which you can bring the blessings 
of the Spirit more fully into your companionship: 

1. You and your companion should emphasize your roles as part of a team. Make 
sure that you work together in a spirit of unity. At a conference of the Church 
early in this dispensation, the Lord proclaimed to his servants, "I say unto you, be 
one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). 

When you and your companion have different opinions about what to do, you 
must honor the roles that you each have. The senior companion should ask for his 
companion's counsel and consider it carefully. The junior companion, after 
offering his counsel, must be willing to accept his companion's righteous 
decisions. He should accept them with his whole heart, without doubtful feelings. 
The senior companion must make sure that his junior companion feels like a full 
partner. He must include his junior companion in the planning process and show 
sincere trust in him. 

2. You and your companion should love and respect each other. This bond of 
brotherly love creates an atmosphere in which the Spirit can influence you. In 
1 John we read: 

"Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is 
bom of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is 
love. ... If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that 
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath 
not seen? And this commandment have we from him. That he who loveth God 
love his brother also" (1 John 4:7-8, 20-21). 

When you love your companion, you show that you love God. You and your 
companion also help each other learn to love your investigators. To develop love 
for each other, you should do the following things: 

a. Find ways to serve each other. When you serve someone, you show that you love 
him, and you also develop love for him. King Benjamin referred to the 
relationship between love and service when he counseled parents to teach 
their children "to love one another, and to serve one another" (Mosiah 4:15). 

b. Study together each day and pray together frequently throughout each day. When you 
study with your companion, you increase your knowledge and skill. But you 
also open the door for even more intimate experiences with the Spirit. Through 
these experiences, you can become more unified and cooperative and develop 
greater love and respect for each other. The same blessings come from 
frequently praying together. You will find that many of your obstacles are 
broken down when you join in sincere prayer to your Father in Heaven. 

c. Do not become preoccupied with negative thoughts. The Savior explained to the 
Nephites, "He that hath the spirit of corttention is not of me, but is of the devil, 
who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to 
contend with anger, one with another" {3 Nephi 11:29). When irritations arise, 
companions need to remember "temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, 
godliness, charity, humility" (D&C 4:6). 

Irritations, frustrations, and complaints can quickly begin to divide you if you 
do not disregard them or respectfully resolve them. In any relationship, 
different habits can cause conflict. But most of these frictions are not 


250 


important and should be completely ignored. The best way to eliminate 
negative thoughts is to concentrate on positive ones. Focus on the good things 

•| in your companion, 

d. Give necessary correction constructively and respectfully. The Lord taught that the 
effective priesthood bearer influences others "by persuasion, by long-suffering, 
by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned" (D&C 121:41). 

When you feel the need to correct a fault in your companion, make sure that 
you are motivated by a sincere concern for his welfare, not by a need to satisfy 
your own feelings. 

3. You and your companion should communicate with each other openly and 
frequently. Regularly evaluate your relationship, and respectfully express your 
feelings to each other. This can keep negative feelings and problems from growing 
and build a foundation of mutual respect and trust 

4. Be loyal to each other. Completely support everything that your companion does 
in righteousness, and never criticize him behind his back. 

5. Obey the standards of missionary conduct and the rules of the mission. One of 
the ways in which you can most help your companion is to help him overcome 
any temptations that face him, Do not compromise on rules even if they seem 
unimportant, for example, the policy that companions should sleep in the same 
room, but not in the same bed. The rules that missionaries are asked to obey are 
based on years of experience with many missionaries and on the direction of the 
Lord's inspired servants. 

When someone has a serious problem, he has almost always developed it by 
foolishly disobeying principles that seem unimportant. The adversary works hard 
against missionaries. He especially tries to make a transgression seem innocent or 
insignificant. 

6. Be sensitive to your companion's needs and challenges, and get help when 
needed. Be aware of your companion's health problems. Also, be aware of his 
feelings so that you can help him avoid transgression and complete a full and 
memorable mission. 

For example, your companion may break the rule that says not to touch members 
of the opposite sex or be too friendly with them. Or, he may have fears that keep 
him from working effectively and that could make him want to return home. You 
should be aware of these problems and seek advice from your mission president. 

Do not let your companion's problems become so bad that he transgresses or has 
to leave the mission. You should have enough courage and love for your companion to 
ask the mission president for help before a problem becomes a crisis. 

7. Always stay together. Staying together means staying dose together, not merely 
within sight of one another or in the same house. Any exceptions to this rule 
would be very rare and obvious. Do not make exceptions for seemingly innocent 
activities that take companions away from each other, such as shopping, doing 
laundry, or even jogging. For example, do not assume that it is harmless for you 
to continue jogging around a park while your companion rests under a tree, or for 
you to be in one room with an investigator or member while your companion is in 
a different room. Such situations may seem harmless at the beginning, but they 
can quickly get out of control. Also, be careful not to be left alone when working 
with stake missionaries. 

8. Avoid situations that could lead to problems. It is less painful to prevent a problem 
than to cure it. Be humble, and realize that everyone can be tempted. For example, 
avoid teaching members of the opposite sex alone, especially divorcees or those 
who are having marriage problems. Do not counsel members, but encourage them 
to talk with their priesthood leaders. Although such situations will not always lead 
to problems, you should eliminate any possibility of such problems. 

9. Do not borrow money from your companion. If you are having financial 

j problems, discuss your situation with your mission president. Never make your 
companion, other missionaries, or anyone else feel that they ought to lend you 
money. Financial problems can hurt any relationship. 


STUDY RECORD 


Date Time Spent Pages Studied 


Comments 


ASSIGNMENT LOG 


Invitation Date Situation Signature 

Read and discuss the document 

"Companions." 


252 


THE CHURCH OF 

JESUS CHRIST 

OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS
