Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: Missouri ( 1994)

Missouri Era: Residue of Wisdom

Elder John K. Carmack

It is hard to find a winner in the tragic events which comprise the Missouri era of Church history. Looking back we seem to see an old movie in which the speeding locomotive pulling dozens of cars behind it is approaching a country intersection towards which an automobile is speeding on the highway, each unaware of the other, with no warning signal to alert either the train conductor or the automobile driver. The spectators see it all unfolding before their eyes with a sense of impending doom. Looking back on the events and assessing negligence, blame, and proximate cause does not lessen the toll in life, property and carnage.

There was enough blame to go around and plenty of losers. The big loser was Governor Lilburn W. Boggs of Missouri, who became known nationally as the author of an order to exterminate a whole segment of his state's population-the Mormons. Repeated attempts to get Governor Boggs to go to the scene to ascertain the true situation reached deaf ears. He preferred, it seems, to act on rumors and dubious accusations. [^1] The state of Missouri became tarred with the brushes of prejudice, lawlessness, and brutality for its treatment of the Mormons. The residue of that brutal and lawless era remains a part of Missouri's heritage, although present day Missourians are in no way responsible for the events of the 1830s.

The reputations of Generals John B. Clark and Samuel D. Lucas were tarnished by a combination of pettiness, ego, and prejudice during the Mormon War. Their unseemly management of the roles assigned during the skirmish with the Mormons was noised abroad and thus did little to enhance their places in history.

On the other side of the fence were the Mormons, fighting for their lives and property. Missouri citizens and officials seemed to have believed that they had the right to expel a large group of men and women because they disliked and feared them. Although the Saints were clearly the injured party, some among them hurt their cause. Sampson Avard was perhaps the leading loser for his part in leading a small secretive organization to engage in activities of fanatical zeal. Avard successfully escaped blame and prosecution for his excesses by pointing the finger at Joseph Smith. By making the Prophet responsible for his own complicity, Avard besmirched his own reputation, although it probably saved his life in the short run.

Avard's self-serving and unreliable testimony at the preliminary court hearing involving charges against Joseph Smith and his companions in arms has raised questions of what Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon knew. [^2] Similar questions are still raised by writers unsympathetic to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in modern-day attempts to discredit both Joseph Smith and the Church. Even today the label "Danites" is recklessly pinned on the Church when attempts are made to discredit it by tying it in with foul play of one kind or another.

Other Latter-day Saints whose reputations were tainted for their involvement in Missouri affairs include William W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, David and John Whitmer, Lyman Johnson, George Hinkle, John Corrill, and Reed Peck. The disunity they caused by their disloyalty to Joseph Smith and the Church remains a murky part of their past. Sidney Rigdon is remembered for his so-called "salt sermon" of 19 June, and for the inflammatory conclusion to his 4 July 1838 Independence Day oration at Far West.

It is, however, easier to find tragedy than joy on either side of the monumental eruption caused by the clash of social and religious forces in Missouri during the decade of the 1830's. It was especially costly in lives and property for the great body of Mormons who were the victims of the events and suffered greatly.

There were also a few winners who emerged from the squalor of the era. Brigham Young's powerful and energetic leadership ability emerged intact. Supported by Heber C. Kimball, the rest of the Quorum of the Twelve and others, he and his companions gathered the resources of the bruised and beaten Latter-day Saints. And in behalf of the families of the men embroiled in what they saw as the defense of their wives, children, property, and principles of freedom under the law and Constitutions of Missouri and the , they rescued them from the mobocracy and tyranny that existed in Missouri during that time. Brigham Young's future role as an outstanding leader of the Mormon pioneers and as a colonizer of the inter-mountain area was foreshadowed in the dark events of Missouri. [^3]

General Alexander Doniphan's personal integrity and fairness together with his powerful understanding and advocacy of constitutional and legal principles which should have governed even angry and combative men left him, already an imposing figure in Missouri society, with an even greater reputation among men, which continues to this day. He was a lawyer and served three terms in the Missouri State legislature. [^4]

The death of Elder David W. Patten of the Council of the Twelve in the Battle of Crooked River carved for him a place in history as a martyr for a cause he believed in and acted to serve. [^5]

The question I desire to address now is whether out of the human misery and angry civil war which erupted in Missouri there are any residual benefits from the experience. Did any good thing come out of it? Can we reap the benefit of some wisdom and insight as a result of the tragic events starting in Jackson County and culminating in the exodus to the generous community of Quincy, Illinois? In the general epistle to the Saints dictated by Joseph Smith from Liberty Jail during his six months of incarceration, Joseph was told by revelation and inspiration that "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7). Can we find the evidence of such experience and benefits?

One of the most important things remaining from the Missouri experience is a general epistle dictated by Joseph Smith. It may be worth the whole tragic episode. We have the original and a copy preserved in the church archives. It was written down by Alexander McRae in a beautiful handwriting style. More important, of course, than the physical preservation of the letter are the inspired utterances found in it. Fortunately for the worldwide Church and others interested in what Joseph Smith said when moved by the Spirit, we have extracts from that letter known as Doctrine and Covenants sections 121, 122, and 123, which are considered a treasure by the Church. [^6] If one looks at the revelations and writings of Joseph which came after he escaped his Missouri imprisonment, one will see some additional revelations, but not many for the last five years of Joseph's life. These and other Missouri writings constitute a great residue of wisdom. Hardly a day goes by without some Church leader or member referring to or quoting from them.

In effect, Joseph established a constitution for the individual in exercising the priesthood in D&C 121. It was to be done only on the principles of righteousness, in gentleness, meekness, love unfeigned, kindness, pure knowledge, with a mind and heart garnished with virtue. Even reproof was to be tempered with love. The content of D&C 121, coming from the furnace fueled by prejudice, mobocracy, and injustice is an astonishing and ironic legacy of the tragic Missouri period. In the years following we have been guided in part by those words. There is a moderating Christian influence in the Liberty Jail letter. The strains of adversity were to be tempered by the peace of Christ and hope of triumph over adversity. The brethren in jail seemed to take strength and glory in their trials. They felt themselves in league with the ancient prophets in experiencing prison deprivation, harsh treatment, wrongful charges, physical suffering, and absence from families.

Other letters written from jail by Joseph and the autobiography of Parley P. Pratt are also literary treasures. They grew out of the dark days of Missouri. Parley P. Pratt's autobiographical account reads like a thrilling novel as he tells us of the daring dash for freedom by him and his companions before the eyes of the astonished citizenry of Columbia, Missouri, celebrating the Fourth of July in 1839. [^7]

We can look back on that Missouri experience, moreover, and glean wisdom as we harvest kernels of truth and principles of organization that yet carry the Church and its people forward. A few of these will be mentioned now.

A struggle to obtain and administer financing for the Church with its ambitious temple building and costs of administration entangled the brethren in controversy, conflicts of interest, and hard feelings. Living the law of consecration had proved difficult at best, given the imperfection of men and women, and the necessity of living among those not involved with the Church, operating under a free economic society.

It was at Far West, Missouri, on 8 July 1838, that the concept of a standing law to finance the Church by having members "pay one-tenth of all [their] interest annually" (D&C 119:4) was revealed through Joseph the Prophet. When the Saints have lived that financial law, the benefits have been great for the Church and its ambitious missionary program, meetinghouse and temple building operations, and general financial burdens. Its strength is its utter simplicity. Observers marvel at its success and benefits.

In addition to revealing the source of needed funds, the Lord made clear at that date (1838) who was to have the authority and responsibility to administer them (D&C 119). There is still in full operation a Council on the Disposition of Tithing Funds which makes final decisions on major financial matters for the Church. The previous confusion as to the ownership and authority to manage funds, which was partly responsible for finger pointing and disunity in Missouri, has given way to order, clarity, and authority in these matters. The Church's financially sound administration, then, comes in part as a legacy from the terror-filled days of Missouri (See D&C 119 and 120).

Excommunication of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, etc.HCThe dark days of disunity and competition for position and power which started in Kirtland continued in Missouri. This disunity led to the disfellowshipment and excommunication of some of the leaders. With some of the leading brethren unwilling to support the policies and leadership of Joseph Smith, the fledgling Church had to use a disciplinary structure with as yet unclarified lines of authority and untested procedures for handling dissent, apostasy, conspiracy, and disloyalty. The necessity of survival, when under attack from within and without, led the Church to clarify and create procedures to cleanse itself from internal quarrels and save the growing body of the Saints from extermination, starvation, and the other horrors of mob rule and militia attack.

Excommunication of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, etc.HCChurch leaders firmed up procedures to excommunicate such luminaries as Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer who, though arguments could be stated for the logic of their viewpoint, had become disloyal to the Church and its prophet. [^8] These cleansing actions benefitted the Church and perhaps made possible its survival as a unified institution, even with Joseph, Hyrum, and Sidney in prison. Of necessity the Church learned it could only survive as an institution if strong measures were taken to cleanse the inner vessel. In spite of these grave trials in Missouri, the great body of the Saints stayed with the good ship Zion and lived to gather again in Illinois.

Excommunication of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, etc.HCThe lessons learned from this period are not far from our institutional memory today, and the benefits persist. We still have dissent. Honest statements of differences can be beneficial if not based on anger, hate, pride, or a destructive agenda. Ever since Missouri, our local and general leaders have grappled with such problems, and have developed policy and procedures to both cleanse the Church and assist the individual caught up in such things. We are continuing to learn to survive as a viable institution by dealing with such problems as those with which we were forced to deal in Missouri.

Many Missouri citizens during this period were guilty of radical and angry response to their fears. Basically these citizens feared being outvoted at the ballot box, squeezed out by the economic exclusivity of the Saints, overwhelmed in sheer numbers by the Saints who were considered to be largely northerners, diluted by what was perceived as an anti-slavery sentiment among the Saints, and having among them Indian sympathizers. [^9] While acknowledging the challenges the Mormons posed for Missouri citizens, I suspect that those in the country who generally knew what happened to the Mormons condemned the rise of lawlessness, prejudice, and radicalism in Missouri. It seems that there is a general recognition that simple, unabashed hatred of Mormons and the concept that "might makes right" prevailed in Missouri at the time.

One of the sad and destructive footnotes of the Missouri melee was the rise of a small element of overzealous, even fanatical members and former members of the Church. It is clear that on the whole the Church's participation in the violent scenes of Missouri was defensive in response to mob action from Missouri citizens and the officially sanctioned militia, which rose only slightly above mob rule.

The activities of a few Saints who turned to acts of plunder and terror against the Missourians marred in some measure the largely sympathetic reaction of the rest of the nation. While their motives may have been sincere and good, zeal was taken to excess by Sampson Avard and those who joined with him. In a recent article published in BYU Studies in the winter of 1988, Dean Jessee and David Whittaker argue convincingly that the concept behind the Danites was taken from the symbolism and prophecies of the Old Testament regarding God's children establishing God's kingdom as prophesied by Daniel. [^10] Under Avard's leadership, some of our defenders took on extremism, lawlessness, and secretive procedures. We do not believe that Avard's testimony in the pre-trial hearings in Richmond, Missouri, against Joseph can be relied on to establish the truth of Joseph's sanction of and leadership over Avard's secret activities. Joseph, and others more reliable than Avard, denied his claim. Attempts to involve Joseph as the major leader of a reckless and secret society have been relied on by his enemies and are still being talked about in ways that have never been corroborated by reliable evidence. Today the term "Danites" would hardly be remembered, and then only in a healthy way, had it not been for the extremist activities of a few associated with the name and the false testimony of Avard which those unsympathetic to the Saints were and are only too willing to believe.

Such radical elements caused a painful sub-chapter to the Missouri plot. We have learned that members of the Church as well as undisciplined Missourians committed acts of disloyalty, extremism, and foolishness. We have fanatical and unbalanced members and former members today as we did in Missouri. They need to be taught and dealt with fairly, but firmly. Today, for example, we have those who would outdo the prophet in "super-religiosity," going far beyond reason and revelation, advocating and teaching extreme doctrines and practices. Some have become tax evaders whose tight logic leads them to break the laws of the state and nation and causes them and their disciples to take a radical and lawless path. As a Church we need to be on the watch for extremism and pride on the part of those who believe they know more than the prophets and who seek to correct our prophets. They lead themselves and others into dangerous paths. Many are sincere, but unteachable and destructive in their behavior. That particular legacy of the Missouri era is one from which we still suffer but of which we have learned to be wary. Our fanatical and radical elements need to be carefully handled.

We also learned from Missouri that Church leaders need to keep entirely separate their personal property and Church property. Church money and other property is held by Church officers in a sacred trust for the mission and functions of the Church and its members.

The Church needs to have clear lines of authority so that we know who is responsible for particular duties and functions. This will help avoid misunderstanding and confusion. Missouri helped teach us that. Our church disciplinary councils likewise need to be kept fair, merciful, workable and with clearly designated responsibility. Abuse of such process needs to have a way of being checked through a process of appeal. The muddy waters of the Missouri era helped us understand and move forward with such clarification of Church government.

Both Kirtland and Missouri remind us constantly of the need to avoid speculation and get-rich schemes, both as an institution and as individual members. We still have a tiny element among our membership with the misguided notion that getting rich by using the money and time of others is pleasing to God. The opposite is true. The official Church has long used sound and conservative practices and policies, perhaps in part as a result of the early mistakes of inexperienced leaders from the Kirtland-Missouri era. [^11] Church members can benefit by following the example of the Church in these matters.

A more difficult problem still plagues us to some extent-block voting. In most places the Saints are just a fraction of the population and are not looked upon with fear or suspicion at election time. Occasionally, however, and constantly in Utah and a few surrounding states, there is a tendency to fear the Mormon vote or to blame the Mormons for the political climate, specific legislation, and nearly every public and private problem. Joseph Smith understood well the fears of the citizens in those communities where the Saints gathered. He explained that block voting was not the result of Church policy, but rather a natural phenomenon of people voting together because of beliefs which tended to be parallel to one party, one candidate, or one legislative issue. Scrupulous separation in politics and voting and in the administration of government is essential. This is something we learned in part from Missouri, as well as Ohio, Illinois, and our early Utah experience. We must guard against the misuse of the Church organization by the ambitious, and the temptation to abuse the official church machinery. The First Presidency is constantly on guard against such abuse. Great care is taken to distinguish between actions and rights exercised by members as citizens and actions dictated or even suggested by the Church as an institution. There is little doubt that this concern was the greatest fear of Missouri's citizens regarding the Church. Even with that residue of Missouri wisdom, we are constantly accused of dictating policy in Utah. There is little foundation for such accusations, but we do assert the right to have influence in a state in which over 70% of the population are members of the Church.

Some would strip the Church of any influence on moral questions and would remove its right to let its position be known on questions involving the moral climate of our communities. We must be wise and communicate clearly our belief in the separation of church and state, yet not be stripped of our power and duty to be a righteous force in our communities. Rumors and accusations making the Church the scapegoat for every ill are read and heard often. This Missouri problem is still with us, yet our experiences of the past have left us with wisdom in confronting this issue.

Let me add just a few additional lessons of wisdom coming from the Missouri era. As a people, Missouri has taught us to solve problems, not just point the finger of blame at people within and without the Church.

We have learned to keep our economic life separate from our spiritual life in most aspects when living in a diverse community. Early in Missouri we raised fears with our tendency to be a closed economic society within the larger Missouri communities of Jackson, Clay, Ray, Caldwell, and Daviess counties. We caused genuine concern based upon our economic policies and practices.

Some of those concerns still persist where we have a large gathering of Saints, but not to such a great extent. We need, however, to be on guard even today against economic boycotting of neighbors whose religions differ from ours.

Without being overly critical of our noble and embattled predecessors in Missouri, we suggest they could have had more patience and persistence in following legal and constitutional procedures during the conflict. The unlawful and ugly prejudice and aggression against them was almost more than they could bear, and at times they reacted with impatience outside the law, especially when the more fanatic and extreme elements among them were given opportunity to act. We must always obey the law, except when an emergency requires immediate self-defense which would itself be a lawful and understandable response to the fair-minded. We have been more careful in the years following Missouri, although we continued to be provoked during certain periods of Utah history.

I think it is safe to say we have been more alert since Missouri to individual and institutional preparation for times of tribulation, more committed to our safety and security, and have learned to stand up in legal and proper ways for our rights. We need always to state our side of a controversial issue clearly, and accommodate the rights of others, but avoid strident rhetoric.

I hope we have learned not to boast of our revelations and spiritual gifts, although sometimes our letters to the editors make us wonder if we have learned that Missouri lesson well enough. Some of our people gave Jackson County residents concern and seeming justification for their unlawful acts against the Saints by boasting that God would give the Saints the properties of Jackson County no matter what those residents did. [^12] The intervention of God is best left quietly in God's own hands and with trust in his ways. His ways and thoughts are always higher than ours.

Missouri was a somewhat tragic period. It was a somewhat lawless period. The constitutions of both Missouri and the United States were trampled by mobs, militia, and governors. Not all Missouri citizens agreed with the lawlessness and hostility. There were living in Missouri during that time many men and women of good will, and certainly the people who live there today are not in any way responsible for the tragic events of the 1830s.

In summary, then, we see the following benefits coming from the Missouri experience:

Â We constantly draw inspiration from D&C 121, 122 and 123 of the Doctrine and Covenants, extracted from the Joseph Smith epistle dictated in Liberty Jail.

Â Our system of tithing and its administration has kept us on sound ground ever since the Missouri revelation established that inspired means of financing the Church.

Â The orderly procedures and lodging of responsibility for disciplining members, even those in high and holy callings, were refined in the Kirtland/Missouri era as some of our early leaders were caught up in a spirit of disaffection.

Â We have learned to be on the watch for the doctrines and practices of those who would harm the Church and its members through pride, fanaticism, radicalism, poor balance, and poor judgment. Our ability to handle the problems is a matter of experience and wisdom, of which a part is the residue of our Missouri era.

Â Establishing clear lines of authority was another legacy from the period.

Â We have learned to be careful as a Church concerning get-rich-quick schemes. A small element among us seems still to be affected with that injurious mentality.

Â We are wiser than we were in political matters due to our Missouri experience. Block voting is still an accusation heard in the land. Undue influence in government policy is a repeated and tiring accusation today. Finding the balance between showing responsibility and concern on the one hand, and keeping church and state separate on the other, is a problem we are dealing with much more effectively.

Â Our tendency to exclude other citizens in economic practices in Missouri caused some of the fear in the hearts of citizens. We are more careful to separate economic commerce from Church practices today.

Â Patience with legal procedures, addressing problems which arise head-on, being cautious to be prepared for emergencies and safety issues, learning to stand up for our rights in kinder and gentler tones, trying to quell boastfulness and pride, and having greater faith and trust in God are additional Missouri lessons.

Yes, "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" Joseph dictated under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost (D&C 122:7). Those lessons and benefits I have mentioned are but a few of the gains resulting from our Missouri experiences. Wisdom comes from such experience and often is the residue of an otherwise tragic period of history. May we study our history, understand its lessons, and use the lessons available to us.

---
Notas:
[^1] Vital Records of Acton, Massachusetts, to the Year 1850 (Boston: New England Historical Genealogical Society at the Robert Henry Eddy Memorial Rooms at the charge of the Eddy Town-Record Fund, Boston, MA, 1923), 77-81. (His personal history lists his year of birth as 1799 which disagrees with official records).
[^2] Articles of Correspondence, 97-108.
[^3] History of the Church 3:250-51; hereafter HC.
[^4] B. H. Roberts, History of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965) 2:508; hereafter HC.
[^5] HC 3:171.
[^6] HC 2:511.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Ibid., 2:522-25.
[^9] HTBM.
[^10] 10. Dean C. Jessee and David J. Whittaker, "The Last Months of Mormonism in Missouri: The Albert Perry Rockwood Journal," BYU Studies 28 (Win 1988): 5-41.
[^11] Thomas B. Marsh to Joseph Smith (15 Feb 1838) Elders Journal 1 (July 1838): 45.
[^12] Far West Record (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983) 137-41.
