Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 1

Dreams Are Never Destroyed by Circumstances

Our dreams, hopes, and aspirations are the essence of life. They give us courage and will. They feed, motivate, and inspire us to take risks, move forward, and meet our daily challenges. Our dreams are life preservers when the storms rage.

In his book Man's Search for Meaning (New York: Washington Square Press, 1985), Viktor Frankl describes the horrors he endured while imprisoned in a Nazi concentration camp during World War II. He suffered through atrocities that you and I could not even imagine. Because he was Jewish, they tortured his body, murdered his wife, and slaughtered his children. After enduring years of mental, physical, and emotional torture, he was finally liberated.

While suffering under those dire conditions, Victor Frankl, a psychologist with years of training, observed the difference between those who survived and those who did not. Perhaps his most profound discovery was that those who continued to hold tightly to their hopes and dreams, despite their circumstances, were able to find purpose in their suffering. By so doing, they tapped into hidden reservoirs of strength and developed increased capacity to endure.

It is a natural response, when faced with discouraging circumstances, to conclude that we will never realize our dreams. We sometimes feel overwhelmed by hopelessness. When I was struggling to find meaning during those first few hours and days after my accident, I was repeatedly cautioned by my doctor to keep my expectations low. I was warned against the alleged dangers of harboring a sense of false hope.

I do not believe in false hope. I only believe in false hopelessness. For all medicine knows today, I believe there is more we do not know. Hope is the fuel of dreams. Hope is the brother of faith and the strength for tomorrow. Dreams are born in the heart and mind, and only there can they ever die.

Tomorrow Will Be Better

Lying in that hospital bed in Las Vegas, I wondered where all my hopes and dreams had gone. I wondered if I would ever be made whole again. I wondered if I would work, get married, have a family, and enjoy any of the activities of life that had previously brought me such joy.

During this critical time of natural doubts and fears, when my whole world seemed so dark, my mother came to my bedside and whispered in my ear, "Art, while the difficult takes time, the impossible just takes a little longer." Suddenly a once-darkened room filled with the light of hope and faith that tomorrow would be better.

I have since become president of my own company. I am a professional speaker and a published author. I travel more than two hundred thousand miles a year to share the message of The Impossible Just Takes a Little LongerÂ with Fortune 500 companies, national associations, sales organizations, and youth groups with some audiences exceeding sixty thousand people. In 1992, I was named the Young Entrepreneur of the Year for a six-state region by the Small Business Administration. In 1994, Success magazine honored me as one of the Great Comebacks of the Year. These are dreams that have come true for me. They came true, not in spite of my circumstances, but, perhaps, because of them.

I have learned to drive again—a dangerous thing for a quadriplegic. I go where I want to go; I do what I want to do. I am completely independent, and I take care of myself. Since that day, some feeling has returned to my body, and I have received back some of the use of my right triceps.

A year and a half after that fateful day, I was married to the same beautiful and wonderful young woman I had originally planned to marry. In 1992, Dallas, my wife, was named Mrs. Utah and was third runner-up to Mrs. USA. (We didn't win the boat!) And we have two children—a daughter named McKenzie Raeanne and a son named Dalton Arthur—who are the joys of our lives.

I have also returned to the world of sports. I have learned to swim, scuba dive, and parasail. (I believe I am the first quadriplegic of record to parasail.) I have learned to snow ski. I have also learned to play full-contact rugby. (How could I get hurt any worse?) I also race wheelchairs in 10Ks and marathons. On 10 July 1993, I became the first quadriplegic in the world to race 325 miles in seven days between Salt Lake City and St. George, Utah—probably not one of the brightest things I have ever done, but certainly one of the most difficult.

Why have I done all of these things? Because a long time ago I chose to listen to the voice of my mother and to my heart rather than to the cascading chorus of dissenting voices around me that included skeptical medical professionals. I decided that my then current circumstances did not mean I had to let go of my dreams. I found a reason to hope again.

Adversity Draws Us Closer to Our Dreams

I went through some particularly difficult times when I was sixteen and seventeen. It was as though I was living two lives. One side of me attended early-morning seminary for four years, rarely missing a day. I was among the fastest scripture-chasers in the region. I attended all of my church meetings on Sunday and activities during the week. I dressed for Sunday in a three-piece black suit, trying to set a higher standard for other young priesthood holders. I anticipated and eagerly looked forward to serving a two-year mission for the Lord. My hair was always cut short, and I dressed well. I never experimented with drugs or used alcohol or tobacco. And I maintained moral standards. So, what was wrong? In my other life, I defied authority. I became frequently delinquent from school. I developed an attitude that created many situations in which I chose to defend myself physically. I lived life dangerously with a foolish sense of immortality. I had as many enemies as I had friends. At the depths of my personal despair, I was kicked out of my high school and told that I could never return. Worst of all, I was very unhappy.

I didn't like who or what I was. I was struggling to identify with something. I had sunk to the bottom.

Then I began to reach out. I reached to God as I never had done before in my life. I reached to my family, and I found that that was where my best friends really were. I reached to the scriptures and the prophets to find reservoirs of truth that would set me free. And I reached to the bookshelves to find new meaning in life.

I made many great discoveries during that learning process. Among them was a truth that I did not learn the real power of for years to come. I developed a belief that nothing bad happens in a person's life without an equal or greater benefit coming in return. I gained the understanding that pain will do only one of two things—either it will push us to the furthest point from our dreams or it will draw us closer to them than any other circumstance could. The choice is ours.

Take Thomas Edison, for example. He "devoted ten years and all of his money to developing the nickel alkaline storage battery at a time when he was almost penniless. Through that period of time, his record and film production company was supporting the storage battery effort. Then one night the terrifying cry of 'Fire!' echoed through the film plant. Spontaneous combustion had ignited some chemicals. Within moments all of the packing compounds, celluloid for records, film, and other flammable goods had gone up in flames. Fire companies from eight towns arrived, but the heat was so intense and the water pressure so low that the fire hoses had no effect. Edison was sixty-seven years old—no age to begin anew. His daughter was frantic, wondering if he was safe, if his spirit was broken, how he would handle a crisis such as this at his age. She saw him running toward her. He spoke first. He said, 'Where's your mother? Go get her. Tell her to get her friends. They'll never see another fire like this as long as they live!' At five-thirty the next morning, with the fire barely under control, he called his employees together and announced, 'We're rebuilding.' One man was told to lease all the machine shops in the area, another to obtain a wrecking crane from the Erie Railroad Company. Then, almost as an afterthought, Edison added, 'Oh, by the way. Anybody know where we can get some money?'

"Virtually everything we now recognize as a Thomas Edison contribution to our lives came after that disaster" (Jeffrey R. Holland, However Long and Hard the Road [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989], pp. 3-4).

Out of the pain of my teenage years, I began to lay the foundation of testimony and belief that would serve me well through a successful mission in the Rapid City South Dakota Mission. When I broke my neck on a desert floor the very foundation of my life shook until I thought it would crumble—but it stood.

What If the Lamanites Had Never Come

After being threatened by King Noah and his wicked priests, Alma left with his followers to establish their own community, but the Lord warned them that the armies of the Lamanites would come upon them if they did not flee again. Alma and his followers again uprooted themselves and fled for eight days into the wilderness, until they "came to a land, yea, even a very beautiful and pleasant land, a land of pure water" (Mosiah 23:4).

Alma and his people tilled the soil, organized themselves, and built buildings. In time they established a city and called it Helam. Enjoying the natural consequences of their righteous and industrious lives, the people prospered. I am sure that many expected that to be the end of their struggles, that they would live happily ever after.

The very opposite happened. After nearly twenty-four years, while the people were working in their fields, an army of Lamanites—their mortal enemies—literally stumbled upon them. The Lamanites had become lost from their own city and were trying desperately to find their way home again.

Why? Why did the Lamanites have to get lost? Why, after the sacrifices Alma's people had made to build a city where they could worship their God, teach their children, and enjoy peace, did their enemies have to discover them? Why didn't God protect them? Why didn't he intervene in their behalf and lead the Lamanites away from them? Hadn't they lived the gospel? Weren't they true to their covenants? Weren't their desires righteous?

The people of the city of Helam were frightened and ran to confer with their high priest and leader, Alma. He counseled his followers to pray to God for deliverance. The Lamanites' hearts were softened, and they spared their lives.

But the Lamanites did take military control of the city. One of the wicked priests of King Noah was declared king, and "he exercised authority over them, and put tasks upon them, and put taskmasters over them" (Mosiah 24:9). So great were the afflictions upon the people that they cried mightily to the Lord. Threatening them with death, the king commanded them to stop their cries.

"And Alma and his people did not raise their voices to the Lord their God, but did pour out their hearts to him; and he did know the thoughts of their hearts" (Mosiah 24:12). The Lord eased the burdens upon his people's backs as a witness that he does visit his children in the midst of their afflictions.

Then, making good on his promise, the Lord caused that a deep sleep should come upon the Lamanites, and Alma and his people fled again into the wilderness. While they were stopped to give thanks for their deliverance, the Lord warned them that the Lamanites were in pursuit, and Alma's people continued their exodus in haste. After twelve days, they came upon the city of Zarahemla, where they were received by King Mosiah "with joy" (v. 25).

What a miracle! Who would have thought? Alma and his followers were brought to the great city of Zarahemla and became united with a people of like mind, heart, and desires. To answer the question, Why did the Lord allow the Lamanites to get lost? it is necessary to ask another one: If the Lamanites had never come, would Alma and his people ever have found Zarahemla? Alma's followers found Zarahemla not in spite of the Lamanites but perhaps because of them.

What Would You Trade?

Some years ago I was in a business relationship that became an enormous burden. I felt trapped and used. I felt cheated by the other parties. I felt I had been treated dishonorably, and it was costing me financially and emotionally.

Before long, attorneys were introduced into the embroiled relationship. Hurtful words were spoken, threats were made, and battle plans were detailed for a lengthy legal confrontation. I felt my world spinning out of control. Tens of thousands of dollars were being spent to keep the legal wheels turning. Time was taken from other interests and needs, and money was being consumed in a skirmish of pride.

Why? I thought I was doing what was right. I was keeping my covenants with the Lord. I had tried to serve others, be honest, and give of myself. At the time, I was speaking about three times a week at Church firesides, youth programs, and high schools—all on my own time because I wanted to make a difference. I was having trouble understanding why this other part of my life was coming apart at the seams. Despite my strong belief that "nothing bad ever happens without an equal or greater benefit coming in return," I was struggling to keep my hopes and dreams alive.

Then, late one night, I got a phone call from my attorney. Thinking he was calling about an upcoming legal deposition, I was surprised when he asked me, "Art, have you and Dallas considered adopting any children?" I was taken aback. I responded that we had discussed it but had decided against it because of the time, money, and stress involved in such a pursuit. I told him that we had concluded to spend our efforts in a continuing attempt to bear our own children, despite our having tried unsuccessfully for two years.

Not easily discouraged, my attorney explained that aside from his specialty as a business attorney, he also had done a number of adoptions. Acknowledging that we had never approached him with the intention of adopting, he told me that a situation had arisen in which a fifteen-month-old girl was available for adoption. He had a list of potential parents who were on a waiting list, but he said he felt spiritually compelled to call us and at least offer her to our family. Dallas and I were shocked, to say the least. Within forty-eight hours, our new daughter, McKenzie, came home—to our home!

I cannot express what joy she has brought into our lives in the years she has been with us. I cannot even fathom what our lives would be like without her. Dallas and I have felt from the moment we said yes that McKenzie had always been meant for our family—she just had to take a different route to get there.

Within just a few months, the legal battle I was in came to an end. The question is, If the painful legal confrontation had never commenced, would McKenzie ever have found her way to our home? I believe that we have been blessed by McKenzie's life forever, not in spite of the legal fight but perhaps because of it.

Yet Learned He Obedience

When we suffer from discouragement, frustration, and pain, it becomes easy to let go of our dreams. When we surrender our hopes to our circumstances, they become our master. I am not suggesting we should hold to unrealistic dreams or expectations, but at the same time, I am saying that when we hold onto even simple ambition through the storms of life, it will bring strength, courage, and even peace. Our dreams ignite hope, our hope inspires will, our will fosters confidence, and our confidence rewards us with peace.

The apostle Paul, writing of the Savior's experiences, said, "Yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered" (Hebrews 5:8). Jesus Christ became the Savior of the world, not in spite of his sufferings, but perhaps because of them.

If you are struggling, if you are battling the crashing waves of life, if you wonder how long you can survive, then I am throwing you this life preserver from my own experience: do not give up on your dreams. Dreams should never be destroyed by circumstances. Dreams are born in the heart and mind, and only there can they ever die.
