Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 2

The Question of the Ages

The lights from above burned my eyes. Everything was blurry, but I was aware that people were rushing from one side of me to the other. Voices spoke in urgent tones, though I could not make out what they were talking about. I could feel a heavy weight pulling on my head and the cold metal tongs embedded in my scalp that held it. The skin from my nose was being tugged at as someone worked to stitch my wounds.

Where was I? What was happening? My mind raced for answers. Somehow, I knew I was hurt really bad. Why me? Why now? Why . . . ? The salt from my tears stung my face as I drifted away again.

From the beginning of time mankind has searched endlessly for answers to the age-old question, Why? Why do we suffer? Why is there so much pain? And most urgently, Why me? This question has often been at the center of the search for meaning. I do not pretend to have discovered all the answers, but I have found some truths that have brought me lasting peace.

I am an avid animal lover. I especially love dogs. From the time I was a child, I have had dogs as companions. Their unconditional love and boundless enthusiasm have brought me endless joy.

A couple of years ago, I owned two Rottweilers. They were very friendly dogs—as long as I lay still. One weighed 100 pounds and the other 120 pounds. Both dogs were very affectionate and lovable, but they did three things over a short time that motivated me to take dramatic measures in their lives.

First, I came home from work one day to discover that my living room couch was in the family room. When your dogs move major pieces of furniture, that's a problem. They had destroyed a brand-new couch by tearing it to shreds. Second, I took both of my dogs on a walk one day. Before starting out, I tied both of their leashes to my wheelchair. Then they saw a cat. I felt like Ben-Hur! Needless to say, I didn't do that again. Third, though my Rottweilers may not have been very bright, they were extremely intelligent (there is a difference, you know). They figured out that I was in a wheelchair. So, anytime I got angry at them, they would run for the nearest curb, jump up on it, and smile! That really ticked me off.

To control the dogs better, I invested in a couple of shock collars. The purpose of shock collars, frankly, is to inflict pain. Now, the level of the pain can be adjusted, depending on the need, from a slight irritation to dropping them. Let me tell you, there is an appropriate time to drop a 120-pound Rottweiler. For instance, my larger dog had a personality disorder. He honestly believed that small children are hairless cats. He liked to chase them. That would definitely be an appropriate time to drop a 120-pound Rottweiler.

There are several reasons why I used shock collars. First, I wanted my dogs to associate the pain with their behavior and not with me. You see, if I had to discipline my dogs personally, I would either yell at them, swat them, or chase after them. They would then do one of several things—run from me, cower, or bite me—none of which was acceptable. By using the shock collars as a form of discipline, my dogs associated the pain or discomfort with their behavior and not with me—they assumed some big dog in the sky just hated them!

Have you ever noticed that your children are much more obedient when you are home than when you are away? That points up the second reason why the shock collars were useful. Because my dogs associated the pain with their behavior and not with me, they were much more obedient even when I was away.

The third reason I used the shock collars is that pain is a great teacher. It is not the only teacher, but it is a great one. Why? Because pain conveys only one message: "Stop doing what you're doing!" Pain does not dislike you. It isn't following you around in life. It is simply saying, "Stop doing what you are doing!" It's that simple.

Lest you misunderstand and think that I am cruel for using shock collars, let me ask you a question: When our children exhibit behavior that is inappropriate, dangerous, or just rude, isn't it often necessary, in order to correct them, to introduce some form of discomfort, even pain, into their lives? The pain can be provided in a variety of ways. We scold them—emotional pain. Or we spank them—physical pain. Or we send them to their room—isolation. Or we take away their privileges—curtail their freedom. Wouldn't you agree, as parents and teachers, that if some form of discomfort is not applied, children often never learn. Why? Because pain is a great teacher.

If you were to put your hand into a fire, what would you immediately do? Pull it out, I hope! The cause of the pain is immediately understood and the message is very clear: "Stop doing what you are doing!" Sometimes, however, the source of the pain you and I experience in our personal lives, in our relationships, in our financial lives, and in our emotions is not so evident. Failing to understand, we often continue to do the same things, over and over and over again. And we wonder why the pain never goes away.

What would happen if you left your hand in the fire for three days? The answer is obvious. You'd lose your hand. I don't mean to be morbid, but there is a significant point to be made here. When your hand is gone, will it hurt anymore? No. The wrist may be quite uncomfortable, but when the hand is gone, it will no longer hurt. The point is this: If we ignore pain long enough, it will eventually go away. But by the time it does, we may have caused permanent and lasting damage, and a new pain will enter our lives, which often is worse than the first.

How are hardened criminals created? Are they born that way? No. Criminal behavior begins with little acts of deceit, dishonesty, and theft. At first, the person may feel pangs of guilt and even remorse (pain), but if those feelings are ignored long enough, they will eventually go away, leaving the door open for more serious acts of social misconduct and crime. The scriptures describe this pattern as becoming "past feeling." When we become "past feeling" we will eventually cause permanent and lasting damage.

One day some years ago, while left to myself at home, I became hungry. I made what preparations I could as a quadriplegic to fix myself a hot meal. I fumbled around in the refrigerator, found something remotely appetizing, and stuck it into the microwave. Counting the seconds until I could satisfy my hunger, I quickly removed the steaming hot plate from the microwave and laid it on my lap. Working my way to the table, I made a couple of brief stops to get a fork and a napkin. Within a minute or two, as I lifted the hot plate to the table, I smelled something unusual. I sniffed at my food trying to detect the source. I made my way back to the kitchen to see if something was still burning there. It was then that I looked down at my lap and discovered the source of the odor—I was smelling my own burning flesh!

I quickly got my pants off to reveal serious burns on both my thighs. The wounds were ugly, but I had no sensation of pain—one of the dubious benefits of being paralyzed. Some might think that would be a great condition to be in. Imagine if we could play football without getting sore muscles. What if we could cut our finger on a knife with no discomfort? But without the sensation of pain, I had done serious damage to my body. If I had enjoyed even the slightest suggestion of discomfort, I could have avoided costly medical bills and weeks of inconvenience and concern.

Pain conveys a simple message: "Stop doing what you are doing!" Without pain, we would find only misery without end.

Unfortunately, we do not always take such an intelligent approach to the pain and discomfort of our lives. All too often we react with feelings of anger, bitterness, and resentment. Though these feelings are completely natural and many times justified, they often cause us to miss the message of pain. Pain is to teach us and redirect us, not just to torment and punish. Sadly, when we do not heed the message of pain, our behavior remains unchanged, and the pain continues, causing greater and greater damage to our peace and happiness.

Ask New Questions

In his nationally best-selling book Awaken the Giant Within, Tony Robbins has written, "Quality questions create a quality life" (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992, p. 180). We are constantly asking ourselves questions—usually subliminally. We may ask ourselves what time we need to get up to be ready for work in the morning. Why do I have to get up? What if I choose not to get up? What's for breakfast? Why is there no milk in the refrigerator this morning? We are constantly asking ourselves questions—that's the way the mind works.

Let's suppose for a moment that we weigh more than we want to—whatever that is. We look at ourselves in the mirror and ask, "Why am I so overweight? Why does everything I eat turn to fat? Why don't I weigh what I want to weigh?" At this point the mind begins its search for an answer—it must find an answer. Finally the mind spits back, "Because you eat too much!"

That answer may not even be true. Our weight may be due to our metabolism. Perhaps, as recent studies have suggested, the cause is genetic. Suppose it is not the quantity of the food we eat but the quality. Maybe we are not exercising or we have health problems we may not be aware of. Whatever the reason, it may not be because we simply "eat too much."

I have discovered three things in this regard. First, I have learned that you cannot get an answer to a question that you have not asked. Second, perhaps the worst way to ask a question is always to begin it with the word why. Why? Because it will very seldom lead to a solution of the problem, and more often than not, it will make you feel worse about the conditions of your life. Third, if we learn to ask new questions, we will get new answers.

When we begin questions with why, it creates feelings of hopelessness and discouragement. It prevents us from learning the real lessons that the pain can communicate to us. Asking why can destroy peace.

A better way to ask a question is to begin it with the words what and how. What can I learn from this experience? How can I avoid this situation in the future? What could I have done differently? What would the Lord expect from me? What would Jesus do? How can I please him? When you ask a new question, you will always get a new answer.

How Do You Respond to Pain?

I have discovered from my experiences that there are three ways of responding to the pain in our lives, each of which leads to significantly different results. The first way is practiced by those I have chosen to label the Why-ners. Why-ners always ask why. Why am I always overweight? Why can't I enjoy a better relationship with my spouse? Why does God hate me? Why me? Why? Why? Why? I have found that this response to pain very seldom leads to a solution of the problem. More often than not, it only adds more pain. Unfortunately, why-ners never learn the lessons of their pain, and so the pain unavoidably continues. Why-ners never hear, "Stop doing what you are doing!" Instead they focus on what everyone else has done to hurt them. They point fingers of blame and bitterness at anything outside themselves in an attempt to answer their why's. As long as they never learn to ask new questions, they continue to be punished by the same old answers.

The second response is the one made by what I call the Harvesters. The Harvesters are people who are truly optimists. Rather than always focusing on the pain of their lives, they envision what they can do with their pain to improve the quality of their lives. These people have truly learned to make lemonade out of lemons. They are harvesters because they focus on the eventual outcome of the crop, not on the storms. That is a significantly better response than the one practiced by the Why-ners, but it still preserves more pain than we need to experience.

The third response to pain is the one I call the Birthright. Birthright people believe that they have come to this earth with a purpose only they can fulfill. Because of this sense of divine purpose, their perspective on pain is broader. They understand that pain is a teacher and their friend. They know that if they are to fulfill the purpose of their lives, change is inevitable and required. When we refuse to change in this life, life will compel us to change, and that is always a more painful experience.

The birthright response calls on that same sense of purpose Viktor Frankl so eloquently discusses in his book Man's Search for Meaning. When we feel that sense of purpose, we find ourselves embracing pain rather than fighting it. When we adopt our birthright, we listen to our discomforts, ask new questions, and look for ways to change our lives to better align ourselves with our purpose. Faith in our birthright gives us a worthy claim on peace, no matter how strong the winds that may blow.

The Three Ps

Pain is a part of life. There is no way to avoid it. But though we may not be able to control the degree of pain in our lives, we can at the very least develop an ability to respond positively to it. In his book Learned Optimism (New York: Pocket Books, 1990), Dr. Martin Seligman of the University of Pennsylvania recommends three ways to avoid looking at the problems and pain of our lives. I call them the three Ps. Understanding these three Ps and discovering new ways to view our struggles can bless us with a greater measure of peace in troubled times.

The first is to avoid looking at our problems as though they are permanent. No problem is permanent, especially if we view life in its eternal entirety. But, it is easy to view our circumstances as though they will never change. Such an attitude creates a feeling of surrender and frustration. Satan is the one who teaches that things will never change. He uses this perception to convince us of the futility of trying to better ourselves, our circumstances, or our behavior. If we believe our condition is permanent, it comes down on us like a weight, robbing us of peace. If there is any constant in this life, it is change. As winter turns to spring, life changes—we change.

The second of the three Ps is pervasive. We may look at our troubles as though they permeate every area of our lives. We may see our pain as so tremendous, so all-encompassing, so pervasive, that it affects everything we do. No problem has that kind of power, unless we give it permission. No struggle is so pervasive that it will destroy every avenue of our lives, unless we want it to. Again, Satan tempts us to believe that our sins, even though properly repented of, will prevent us from ever being a good father or mother, a worthy Church member, or a faithful mate. By viewing our problems as pervasive, we invite misery and destroy any desire for effective change.

The third P is to look at our pain as though it is personal. We perceive that we are hurting because we are bad. We suffer because God is somehow punishing us. We are unhappy because we have never deserved to be happy. Perhaps the greatest revelation of my youth was that I was not my behavior. We can change. Taking our discomforts too personally blocks our progress, our learning, and our growth. Worst of all, it destroys our peace.

The Greatest Miracle of All

Sometimes we cry out and wish that God would take away all our feelings of frustration, loneliness, fear, and rejection. I know that he can. But I also know that he loves you and me more than that.

A friend once asked me, "Art, if you could go back, if you could have flown a plane, driven with a different friend, or traveled during the day to have avoided the pain you have suffered in your life, would you?" My answer is simply no. Now, you may not understand that. But if you knew what I know, heard what I have heard, and saw what I have seen, then you would echo with me when I say, "I thank God that life is hard." Why? Because in all of the pain and frustration, loneliness and rejection, you and I learn. When we learn, we grow. And when we grow, then the greatest miracle of all happens: you and I change.

You see, of all God's creatures, large and small, that walk or crawl upon the face of this earth, only you and I are afforded the great miracle called change. We can change our behavior. We can change what we think and how we respond. You and I can change! Why? Because a long time ago, a man—a God—loved you and me enough to die for us. And because he did, change means something. As long as you and I are first willing to change, then we can call on his power to say, "Peace, be still."
