Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 3

Avoiding the Apple Syndrome

The Apple Syndrome has existed since the beginning of time. Today, however, more than ever, it has been responsible for the destruction of self-confidence, character, and eternal relationships.

To understand the Apple Syndrome, you have to go back thousands of years with me to a beautiful garden in a place called Eden. Adam and Eve had been strictly forbidden to partake of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. For whatever reason, the time came when both the man and woman partook, and the consequences were not far behind. The Lord went to Adam and in essence asked, "Why, Adam? Why did you eat of the fruit of the tree?" And what did Adam say? "The woman! [We're taking a little poetic license here.] The woman caused me to eat." The Lord turned to Eve and asked, "Eve, why did you eat of the fruit of the tree?" Eve's response? "The serpent beguiled me."

You see, it is human nature to blame our circumstances, condition, and behavior on people, things, and environment outside ourselves when things are difficult, trying, or tragic. The practice of blaming has become commonplace in our modern world, even though it eventually stunts our spiritual and emotional growth.

Our litigious society increasingly seeks to avoid difficult circumstances by pointing fingers of blame. If we join in, we ignore the remedies for our struggles and begin to become unbalanced in our individual lives. Struggle, difficult circumstances, and pain are all essential to growth in this life. When we fall victim to the Apple Syndrome by attempting to shift responsibility for our lives to circumstances, conditions, and behavior outside ourselves, we deny ourselves opportunities to learn, grow, and become.

As a young man, I was out driving my father's car with some friends. I was driving a little too fast, and the roads were still wet from an earlier rain. When I took a sharp corner, the car slid into a curb. The impact bent both wheels on one side of the car. As I drove the limping car home, I had just enough time to come up with a really good story for my dad.

I raced inside the house shouting, "Dad, Dad, you're not going to believe what just happened." (That was more prophetic than I imagined.) I continued, "As I was driving home from school by myself, observing the laws of the road, I gently went around the corner, when a small child darted out into the road! Because of the skills that you have taught me and the genetics of my body, I managed to avoid the child, but I struck the curb and damaged your car. Aren't you proud of me?" I got the same response you might be having now. My father grinned and said, "Son, when you are ready to tell me the truth, come back and we'll talk."

I stormed off to my room thinking, "I can't believe that my own father doesn't believe his son!" Then I thought of a new story. Approaching my father again, I admitted, "You're right, Dad, I wasn't being completely honest before. There was no small child in the road. It was a little dog. But aren't they important too?" Well, he didn't buy that story either. He finally dragged the truth from me, and then he made me pay for the damage.

A few weeks later, I was driving my father's other, undamaged, car home from work. I stopped at a traffic signal—and someone rear-ended me. I was truly excited about this, because, for the first time in all my young driving experience, it really wasn't my fault! And I had the evidence to prove it.

I raced home. Perhaps too gleeful in my approach, I boldly declared to my father the circumstances surrounding his newly damaged car. My father, not changing his expression, simply stated, "Son, it's your fault."

I could not believe what I was hearing! I said, "You must not have understood what I was saying. We're not communicating. I was an innocent victim of circumstance. There was nothing I could do, no place I could go. What do you expect from me?"

Calmly, my father responded, "Son, let me ask you a few questions. Did you decide to get up this morning?"

"Yes sir, I did." "Did you get yourself dressed, or did your mother have to do it again?" (Sarcasm intended.)

"I got myself dressed, Dad."

"That's obvious. Did you drive yourself to work, Son?"

"You know I did. You know it's too far to walk." (That's about the time you get the story about how he walked ten miles to school in the snow, uphill both ways!)

"And, Son, did you decide to stop at that light?"

"Yes sir, I did."

My father concluded, "Son, you need to take more responsibility for your life."

I didn't understand what he was trying to say. And quite frankly, I was just a little upset. But that was years ago. I began to understand what my father really meant when I broke my neck on a desert floor. While I was lying in that hospital bed, it came to me. What my father was saying was this: "Son, when you are ready and willing to take 100 percent responsibility for your life—for the conditions, circumstances, and behavior of your life—it is then and only then that you truly have the power to change your future." And that one simple truth saved this young man's life forever.

It would have been easy to have blamed my condition and pain on circumstances and people outside myself. I could have been angry at God. But he didn't fall asleep at the wheel, did he? And besides, he has been the giver of every good thing in my life, before and since. It would have been human nature to be bitter toward my friend who fell asleep. But it was just an accident—that's all. I could have blamed my pain on life. I have found, however, that despite the circumstances of my life, it is sweet and good. Besides, I have gotten into the habit of breathing, and I kind of like it!

The truth I learned was that by pointing fingers of blame, I removed the power I had within me to learn from my experience, to make changes in my behavior, and ultimately to grow. I believe that when we are learning, growing, and changing, we are happy.

As I travel the world speaking with young and old alike, I've noticed the diminishing self-confidence people are experiencing. This lack of self-confidence translates itself into their occupations, personal relationships, and spiritual growth. They often feel an overwhelming sense of hopelessness and uncertainty about their future. I believe this has become an alarming problem because it gives us a greater tendency to lean on the Apple Syndrome.

Psychologists have taught us that self-confidence stems from perceived control. When we perceive that we control our destiny, happiness, and spiritual future, we tend to have greater confidence in ourselves and in our world. The great damage perpetrated by the Apple Syndrome is the surrendering of our perceived control.

By taking 100 percent responsibility for the conditions, circumstances, and behavior of our lives, we put ourselves back into the driver's seat. When we point fingers of blame, what we are really saying is that we have little or no control over our destiny. We are driven by the winds of fate. Unless we take 100 percent responsibility, it is impossible to look for solutions, resolve conflicts, and grow spiritually. Instead we focus on the behavior of others, stating, "When they change, then I'll change." This attitude is surprisingly pervasive. How often have we found ourselves saying: "You make me so mad" or "If only she would be more supportive" or "I'll never get ahead as long as he's around" or "I couldn't help myself" or "If they just hadn't kept pushing me"—essentially, "The devil made me do it." Each of these statements puts us into a mental condition of surrendering to circumstance and resigning ourselves to fate. I believe that we have more control than that.

I do not mean to imply that outside circumstances or other people do not play a role in our lives and that some responsibility should not be laid at their feet. Certainly many factors influence the conditions we experience. But if we focus our excuses upon those factors, we feed a spirit of fear and uncertainty regarding our future.

The apostle Paul stated, "God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind" (2 Timothy 1:7). We live in a world that is governed by law, a world where "God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap" (Galatians 6:7), a world where we are given power to act and not be acted upon (see 2 Nephi 2:13). Because of these laws, we can, as Paul declared, "come boldly unto the throne of grace" (Hebrews 4:16). That is true, eternal, self-confidence.

Jacob and Joseph, brothers of Nephi, took 100 percent responsibility for their lives when they "did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence." By taking this stance, they found strength to do the work required: "Wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments" (Jacob 1:19; emphasis added).

William Ernest Henley was struck down in the prime of his life with a crippling disease. Left in a hospital and expected to die within months, he wrote this immortal poem, entitled "Invictus":

Out of the night that covers me,

Black as the Pit from pole to pole,

I thank whatever gods may be

For my unconquerable soul.

In the fell clutch of circumstance,

I have not winced nor cried aloud.

Under the bludgeonings of chance

My head is bloody, but unbowed.

Beyond this place of wrath and tears

Looms but the horror of the shade,

And yet the menace of the years

Finds, and shall find me, unafraid.

It matters not how strait the gate,

How charged with punishments the scroll,

I am the master of my fate;

I am the captain of my soul.

After eighteen long months, William Henley walked from that hospital.

I believe the Lord desires his children to become "masters of their fate" and "captains of their souls." By avoiding the Apple Syndrome of blaming circumstances and other people and by accepting 100 percent responsibility for our lives, we acquire the spirit of power, of love, and of a strong mind. We have confidence in the future, and we possess the power to walk boldly before the throne of God.
