Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 4

Santa Claus Is Coming to Town and Other Myths about Faith

It was the night before Christmas, but all was not quiet in our house. If the mice had been making noises, we would never have heard them. A family of nine children can redefine even the noblest of Christmas traditions.

I used to start dreaming of the coming Christmas morning within hours after the clock struck midnight on New Year's Eve. I loved everything about Christmas: the smells, candy, food, trees, decorations, giving, spirit, songs, and sights. But, I especially loved the getting part of it. Throughout the year, I carefully compiled my list of wishes. Every television commercial uncovered a need. Toy stores were the breeding ground of creativity, and the list grew by leaps and bounds.

As Christmas drew nearer, I began to prioritize my wants. Anything I needed was immediately eliminated because providing those things was just expected—that was part of the responsibility parents had toward their children. My list had to be limited to real wants, the kind of stuff I knew I couldn't get otherwise during the coming year. I did know, however, that Santa had a budget, so I had to choose carefully the wants that I had the best chance of getting, lest my parents be forced to choose on their own. I didn't want to risk disappointment.

On Christmas Eve, my parents gathered all the children around the tree. We read the Christmas story from the scriptures and had family prayer, and then we were allowed to open one gift each. It was kind of a teaser. I am not sure why we always got so excited, though, because it was always the same present every year: new pajamas. After all, my mother wanted to make sure we looked good for Christmas morning pictures.

Sleep always came slowly on Christmas Eve. If we listened carefully, we could hear Santa Claus bumping about downstairs, wrapping the gifts and making sure everything was in its proper place. My mind often raced, "Did I specify I needed that new bike in metallic blue? Did I leave enough obvious hints that Santa would know the priority of the items on my list?"

It was a tradition that we had to go downstairs as a family. But there was a ritual that had to be observed first, I am sure mostly as a form of torture to us children. Everybody had to be cleaned, scrubbed, showered, shaved, and neatly dressed in our new pajamas before we began the spirit of getting. My mother lined up all nine children on the stairs for the cermonial picture-taking, which seemed to drag on for hours.

Finally, the moment arrived we had been waiting 364 days for! In unison my parents shouted, "Go!" And the mad dash to the living room and the Christmas tree was on. Older children hurdled the younger ones in an effort to get there first. Seeing the room for the first time on Christmas morning was always a treat. Santa had always wrapped about half of our presents and left the other half unwrapped and scattered throughout the room. When there are nine children, that makes for a lot of gifts everywhere.

Shrieks of joy filled the room. We could not get the gifts unwrapped fast enough. Paper flew through the air. The room strobed with the flashes of the camera and the relentless plea from my mother: "Look over here now, . . . show me what you got, . . . now smile!" Flash! Flash! Flash!

Christmas was always the greatest day of the year for me as a boy, just as it is for many children. Unfortunately, I brought some of those same childhood attitudes into my relationship with God and my beliefs about the role of faith in my life. From those early Christmas memories and other experiences, I developed some erroneous beliefs about how faith works. Fortunately, through my missionary experiences, personal revelation, and gospel study, I have discovered how to counteract some common myths about faith.

Myth 1: God Is Some Kind of Cosmic Santa Claus

In some way my childhood experiences of Christmas became a part of my relationship with God. Without meaning to, and without conscious knowledge, I related to God as though he were some kind of cosmic Santa Claus.

In Primary and at home, I was taught the fundamentals of an appropriate prayer: 1. Dear Heavenly Father . . . ; 2. I think thee . . . ; 3. I ask thee . . . ; 4. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

The emphasis in those prayers always seemed to be on the "I ask thee" part. My prayers were a "to do" list for God. "Please keep me safe. Watch over me. Help me score well on my test. Keep me out of trouble. Cause my parents to show mercy on me after they find out I wrecked their car. Help Jenny fall in love with me and say yes to my invitation to the prom." And the list went on and on.

Asking for help from the Lord is appropriate, but for a long time, it was 98 percent of my prayers. I raced through the few, trite things I was grateful for in order to make sure I had plenty of time to get my full, prioritized list to the Lord, so that he could work on my demands right away. Unfortunately, such an approach to prayer and faith caused me a lot of discouragement, frustration, and misunderstanding. I had fallen victim to the myth that God's sole duty is to bring me pleasure and grant my wishes as I ask for them.

Now, if you had asked me if that was what I was doing, I would have denied it vehemently. When I am honest with myself, however, and look back over the years at that behavior, I have to confess my guilt. As I discovered the error of my ways, I began to search for a more appropriate means of communicating with my God.

The Lord has said, "And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive" (Matthew 21:22). I didn't have any trouble with the asking part. I had trouble with the believing part. Faith is an action verb. Faith requires that we do something. To ask God to do something, we must first be willing to do our part. Since I learned that principle, I am much more cautious about what I ask for. I first ask myself, "Am I willing to do all that is required of me?" Only after I can honestly answer that question yes am I ready to petition the Lord for his help.

Another habit that I have made is to spend more time expressing gratitude. My mission president taught me that, in effective leadership, I should always share at least two positive things about the individual I had a stewardship over before expressing a constructive criticism. This practice always created a better foundation for communication and improved our relationship.

In prayer, I now follow a similar pattern of spending twice as much time thanking God for his rich blessings in specific detail as I do creating my "to do" list for him. Completely aside from the fact that to express gratitude to God is a commandment, it is also an act of faith. To exercise faith is to act as if our prayers have been answered. If I truly believe that God will hear and answer my righteous desire, I will spend more time thanking rather than just asking.

When we stop treating God as though he is some kind of a cosmic Santa Claus, we will find that the nature of our prayers changes, our relationship with him improves, and our faith is strengthened. It is not God's purpose to meet our every demand but rather to provide support, love, light, and strength. By seeing God as the great resource he is, we will stop abusing our communication with him and start asking better questions. When we ask better questions, we will get better answers.

Myth 2: God Will Deliver Us from the Consequences of Our Bad Choices

I was ten years old and completely bored by the sacrament meeting speakers' dissertations. Before long my mind was envisioning the G.I. Joe that I had recently received for Christmas. That G.I. Joe had a parachute strapped to his back. He also had a slingshot that could be used to shoot him high into the air, where the parachute would open and the small, plastic figure would float gently back to the earth.

Then I had my first major revelation. I thought, If G.I. Joe can do it, so can my younger brother. I dragged my little brother up to the top of our two-story house the minute we got home from church. Taking a sheet from the bed along with me, I told my brother to hold on to all four corners of the sheet and jump off the roof. He was not as enthusiastic as I was about the whole adventure, however. His refusal became more adamant as I pushed him closer to the edge.

Finally, I grabbed the sheet from him and declared that I would demonstrate how it all worked. Grabbing all four corners tightly, I jumped from the rooftop. About the time I was passing the balcony, I had my second major revelation: I wasn't going to slow down. Suddenly, I became a fervent believer in prayer. My lips moved so fast in my attempt to communicate with God that the wind caused them to whistle! The fall seemed to last an eternity. I made more promises to God during the descent than I could possibly have ever fulfilled. As you can guess, moments later I crashed to the ground at full speed.

It is easy for me now to understand that my prayer and my faith were somewhat misplaced, but at the time I was disappointed that God had not saved me. Since then, I have had other experiences in which I made inappropriate requests of God in an effort to avoid the natural consequences of my own foolish behavior. As much as Heavenly Father loves his children, it is misplaced faith that asks him to prevent all pain in this life, especially the pain we create for ourselves. My mission president taught me that it was foolish to think I could sow my wild oats on Saturday and pray for crop failure on Sunday.

Unfortunately, many of my experiences with prayer have been based on this myth. I have prayed that God would help me score well on a test that was critical to my educational future, yet I never studied for it. I have asked my Father in Heaven to bless me with good health while I was abusing my body with junk food and poor eating habits. I have petitioned him for safety and then driven faster than the posted speed limit without a seat belt on. When we ask God to remove the natural consequences of our own behavior, we set ourselves up for disappointment and frustration.

The Lord declared through Joseph Smith: "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear" (D&C 38:30). Fear is the opposite of faith. If we want to exercise real faith and eliminate fear, we must first do all we can do to prepare. I have heard of many instances in which well-intentioned Saints have taken to heart the admonition of the Lord to "neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say." Unfortunately, that is all too often an excuse not to prepare, and then they wonder why they experienced fear and the results of their words were less than satisfying. What these well-intentioned Saints missed was the rest of the verse, in which the Lord commands us to "treasure up in your minds continually the words of life" (D&C 84:85). In short, prepare!

Asking or expecting the Lord to help us escape the natural consequences of our behavior is contrary to the purposes of faith and will only lead to frustration in our relationship with God.

Myth 3: If God Does Not Answer Yes to Our Prayers, It's Because We Don't Have Enough Faith

Breaking my neck in a serious automobile accident was the most painful experience of my life. Every day I prayed that God would heal me and take from me the physical condition of my life. I asked him to restore me to the health I had enjoyed before the accident left me paralyzed.

After more than ten years of being in a wheelchair, I still persist in my prayers for that healing, but I have had to guard against feeling that because I have not been healed yet, I do not yet have enough faith. Though faith is a growing thing, and I believe that I can always find greater measures of faith in my life, I have also had to understand that some miracles just take time.

Oscar Wilde said, "When the gods wish to punish us they answer our prayers" (An Ideal Husband, act 2). If God answered yes to all prayers, there would be no sickness, no discomfort, no death, no hunger, no pain, no adversity, no poverty, no challenges, no disappointments, and especially, no freedom. If there were no pain, there would be no learning, no growth, and no change. And without those things, why would we be here?

It is my testimony that God does love us. It is my belief that though sometimes we cry out and wish that God would remove all the pain from our lives, he loves us more than that. He loves us enough to bless us with the miracle of time. By so doing, he provides you and me with our greatest opportunities for growth and change, essential ingredients of immortality and eternal life.

God is not a cosmic Santa Claus. Faith does not remove the natural consequences of our poor decisions. And just because God does not always answer our prayers in the way we desire, that does not mean that we are devoid of faith and found wanting in the eyes of the Lord. These three myths and others often contribute to feelings of inadequacy and failure in exercising our faith. By avoiding these myths and exercising faith as God intended it to be used, we can build our relationship with him and come before his throne boldly. Faith is more than just one of the basic principles of the gospel; it is the power that will bring us safely home again.
