Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 6

The Search

The sun rose, warming Mathias's back as he sat reading in his garden. The sounds of the city started up as traders made their way to the marketplace for the day. A smile spread softly across Mathias's face. He lived in Jerusalem during a period of unrest and change, but he had done well as a trader himself. Now he was enjoying the benefits of the years of sacrifice and labor spent while he was young and strong. His only regret was that he had neglected to seek out a companion for his life. But now he was betrothed to Rachel, and they would be together shortly. Mathias felt truly blessed. All except for a gnawing feeling in the pit of his stomach that would not go away.

It was a spot. That was all. A small, reddish spot on the back of his leg that would not go away. At first, Mathias gave it little thought. When the wound refused to heal, it troubled his mind. He had to know. He traveled to the temple to find his boyhood friend Daniel, a priest. Daniel would know what to do.

Daniel greeted Mathias with a warm embrace. When the small talk was concluded, Mathias showed Daniel the spot that would not heal. Trying to hide his fear, Daniel invited Mathias to stay with him for a fortnight. By then they would know.

For two weeks Mathias stayed in a small, dark bedroom off the back of Daniel's modest home. Day and night Mathias read and prayed. Surely God would not punish him in this way. Mathias's life had been blessed from the beginning. God must have greater things in mind for him than this. Mathias prayed with more energy and intent than ever before in his life. Why, when his life was just beginning, was it being threatened?

Mathias knew how lepers lived. They were doomed to a slow, miserable, and lonely death. Their skin rotted until it fell off the bone. They were condemned to beg for food on the streets. They were not allowed to wander among the people. The law required that any time another person approached they must cry out, "Unclean! Unclean!" A leper's life was misery without hope. Surely there must be a prophet in Israel who could save him. But Mathias knew there had not been a prophet in Israel for centuries.

After the two weeks had passed, Daniel and Mathias knew. Daniel promised to deliver to Rachel a letter explaining Mathias's fate. The letter declared his undying love and tragic future. As Mathias was leaving, a young man rushed through the door.

"Please forgive me, Mathias. Please forgive me!" the young man begged. Mathias recognized him as Immanuel, who worked for his chief competitor in the marketplace. Mathias asked, "What have I to forgive you for?" Immanuel spoke. "I have done a terrible thing. My employer has always hated you. He envied your successes and sought daily to defeat you and drive you away. When his scheming and deceit failed him, he looked for new ways to destroy you." Immanuel began to weep. Mathias urged him on.

"My employer had me give new blankets to the lepers on the outskirts of Jerusalem. Later, he commanded me to retrieve as many of them as I could. I had to do so carefully, however, to avoid becoming diseased myself. He then made a gift of the blankets to you. In time, you would receive the dreaded leprosy, and your downfall would be complete. I cannot live with what I have done. Can you ever forgive me?" Immanuel sobbed.

Mathias's face flushed with anger. With each passing second, his rage burned hotter. "I will have my revenge," Mathias boomed before running from Daniel's home toward his fate.

The weeks and months passed painfully. Mathias traveled alone. He couldn't bear to see others suffering as he was. When strangers passed him on the road, Mathias, as required by law, drew his cloak across his face and cried, "Unclean! Unclean!"

The thought that occupied Mathias's mind was how he could get close enough to his enemy to kill him. In his leprous condition he could never get inside the walls of the city. The marketplace, where his enemy spent his days, was always crowded. But his enemy couldn't stay there forever. Eventually, he would have to travel to purchase new goods from other cities and lands. Once his adversary was outside the city walls, Mathias could reach him. He could wait until then.

Finally Mathias's patience rewarded him. He saw his enemy leaving the city with his caravan. If he hurried, he could catch him before he reached the crossroads. He had waited so long for this day. Every step had been rehearsed over and over again in his mind. Success would be measured by the death of his enemy.

Mathias hurried along the highway, concealing himself in the ravines that paralleled the road. The crossroads were just ahead. Then he noticed a small band of lepers traveling in the same direction. They too appeared to be in a hurry. That was peculiar because lepers usually had no need for haste. One of them, an old man, fell in his struggle to keep up. "Please help me," he cried. Mathias helped the old man to his feet. "We must get to the highway before he passes. Please help me," the old man begged.

Mathias quickly searched the crowd for his enemy's caravan. The other lepers were now beside the road and crying aloud as with one voice, "Jesus, Master, have mercy on us." Suddenly, a man who appeared to be at the center of the crowd turned and faced the lepers. His voice was different from any Mathias had ever heard before: "Go shew yourselves unto the priests" (Luke 17:13-14). The throng enveloped him again.

The lepers began to run and shout. Mathias saw their strength improve and their backs become straight again. The man whom Mathias had helped began to walk and then to run. Tears streamed down the old man's face. Mathias too felt the healing power. The sores that covered his body began to close. His flesh felt like fire as it became new again. Realizing that he too had been made whole, Mathias ran and shouted. He was clean!

And then he stopped. Who was this man that he should make him whole again? Who was this Jesus who had power to restore his life to him again? Who was he? Mathias knew he must find out. He must return, give thanks, and worship him.

Turning, Mathias raced back toward the highway. Now clean, he pushed his way through the crowd until he reached this man called Jesus. Mathias fell on his face at his feet, thanking him and wetting his feet with his tears. Jesus gently lifted Mathias to his feet and gazed into his eyes. Never before had he felt such love and compassion. As the penetrating eyes of Christ gazed upon him, Mathias felt the hate, anger, and bitterness he had held for so long melt away. For the first time in a very long time, he had no desire for revenge.

Jesus spoke. "Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine? There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger" (Luke 17:17-18). Before he knew it, Mathias was outside the crowd once again. But the words kept echoing in his ears: "Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?"

In modern times the Lord has declared, "In nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments" (D&C 59:21). Gratitude is not a suggestion; it is a commandment.

Being grateful is easy in the midst of abundance. When our lives are going just right, when our bills are paid and money is left over, when our children are obedient, it is easy to be grateful. What is hard is being grateful when things aren't going so well. Who has time for gratitude when pain fills our days?

Does the Lord really expect us to be grateful when things aren't going well? He commanded us to be grateful in "all things." Does that mean we should be grateful when we reach the end of our money before the end of the month? Yes. Does that mean we should be grateful when we suffer from loneliness and depression? Yes. Does that mean we should be grateful if our employer terminates us? Absolutely. Does that seem ridiculous? There are reasons.

God does not command his children to be grateful in all things to serve his own selfish purpose but rather to bless our own lives. Learning to be grateful in all things promotes a measure of peace that we may never know otherwise. Gratitude becomes the means by which the Lord brings rich blessings into our lives. He declared, "And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more" (D&C 78:19).

Being grateful in all things can bless our lives in many ways. It can restore peace to our troubled hearts in three specific ways.

Good Fruit

Someone once asked me, "How can you talk so positively about something that happened to you that is so bad?" Can good come of evil? If my accident and the experiences I have had because of it can be regarded as evil, then my answer has to be yes. Yet the Savior, during his ministry in Jerusalem, said: "Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. . . . Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them" (Matthew 7:17-18, 20).

I had the innocent expectation as a child that good things would always happen to me. I also thought that bad things happened only to bad people. As a teenager, I became embittered as some of the "bad" things in life began coming my way. It just wasn't fair, I thought. The whole eternal plan must be out of whack. Not until years later did I learn that only the innocent and the ignorant expect only good things to happen to them. It takes a greater understanding to comprehend that for the man or woman of Christ, good comes from all things. There is a difference. The apostle Paul stated the difference perfectly: "All things work together for good to them that love God" (Romans 8:28).

My question then is, If the fruits of my tree (the accident) are good—the blessings I have received, the love I have felt, the Spirit that has presided, the relationships that have been built with the Lord and those I love, the miracles I have experienced—how can the tree be evil? Too often we declare evil that which is really good. By accurately identifying more trees in our life as good, gratitude comes more easily to us.

A Thousand Reasons

Gratitude, even in hard times, encourages us to focus on the Source of all blessings. Someone has said that an ungrateful person is like a hog under a tree eating apples and never looking up to see where they come from. When we keep our eyes focused on our problems, we only discover new problems.

In my travels as a professional speaker, I have had to rely on a myriad of different means to get me from airport to hotel and back again. Generally, the company I am speaking for hires a limousine to pick me up at the airport and return me when I have completed my obligations. That may seem like fun, but I still have longed for more freedom as I travel, rather than always having to rely on someone else to transport me from place to place.

At home, I drive a minivan equipped with hand controls and a ramp that permits me to roll my wheelchair directly behind the steering wheel of the van and drive from that position. It has been a miracle, and it has afforded me great freedom. But because my van won't fit in my suitcase, I am without those conveniences when I travel.

Then I heard that some major car rental companies have begun renting full-size cars equipped with hand controls for customers confined to wheelchairs. Perhaps that was the answer.

I rented my first such car in Boston, Massachusetts. I realized the first of many problems at the car rental counter. It was about five feet high, and I was only about three. I hollered, "Hello! Hello!" A face appeared over the top of the fortress and asked, "May I help you?"

"Yes," I responded. "I'd like to rent a car."

"One of ours?" the employee questioned.

The employee handed me a clipboard, rental agreement, and pen. I dropped them on the floor. Noticing that I lacked normal use of my hands, the employee asked, "Would you like the additional insurance?"

"Yes. Give me all of it!" I chuckled. The employee looked at me as if to say, "I am never going to see our car again!"

Keys in hand, I headed for the parking lot, where my next series of challenges began. I fumbled with the keys to unlock the door. Once the door was open, I congratulated myself on it—I had never done that before. I transferred myself into the car and got myself ready behind the wheel—I had never done that before, either. I disassembled my wheelchair and hoisted it over my body into the seat beside me—also a first. With the engine warm and my body positioned to travel, I reached for the gear shift to put the car into drive. Problem. I couldn't push the button in on the gear shifter to move it into drive. Taking my hand off the brake, I placed both hands on the gear shift. I wondered if I would be able to push the button, get the car into drive, and then get my left hand back to the brake before I hit the car in front of me. I reasoned, "Well, I got the insurance. Why not?"

Before I knew it, I was driving. I could go where I wanted to go and get there when I wanted to get there. No longer was I dependent on someone else's schedule or itinerary. I was free! Today, I rent cars in all the cities I travel to.

Years ago, it would have been easy to focus on all the things I could not do—and they were numerous. But by focusing on the things that I could do, I found that the Lord blessed me with more. Yes, before my accident there may have been ten thousand things I could do. Today I may be able to do only a thousand of them. Nevertheless, I can choose to focus on the nine thousand things I cannot do, or I can focus on the one thousand I still can. By focusing on the one thousand and being grateful for them, I have learned to do many more.

The Mustard Seed

Being grateful, even while the waves of struggle surround us, is an act of faith. Nephi, on the sea with his family, was attacked by his two brothers, Laman and Lemuel. In their rage, they bound him and left him out in the elements for four days. Nephi said: "behold [my wrists] had swollen exceedingly; and also mine ankles were much swollen, and great was the soreness thereof. Nevertheless, I did look unto my God, and I did praise him all the day long; and I did not murmur against the Lord because of mine afflictions" (1 Nephi 18:15-16).

It takes faith to praise God while the seas rage. It takes faith to be grateful, even in the midst of pain and struggle. It takes faith to thank the Giver of all good things when our plate doesn't seem so full anymore. When we can do that, then his promises will be fulfilled: "And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more" (D&C 78:19).

"Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?" Are you one of them? Is there some blessing you have received for which you have not returned to give thanks? Are you focusing on the leprosy of your life or on the blessings God grants you every day? Return and give glory to God, and his peace will follow.
