Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 7

The Power of Incrementalism

The sun was already climbing quickly into the sky. With it came the heat. It was summer in Utah, and the day's temperature would break one hundred degrees. My breathing became more and more labored as I raced toward the mountain that towered before me.

Years earlier, I had been told by my doctors that I would never again participate in any athletic activity or competitive sport. The doctors had many compelling reasons for their predictions. Aside from the obvious limitatations of my body, as a quadriplegic I could no longer sweat. I have to admit that has its advantages. I have probably saved a million dollars in deodorant, and I do have significantly more friends!

But the inability to sweat has its disadvantages, too. Without sweat, the body cannot cool itself. If I push myself too hard, or too long, or if the outside temperature gets too high, then my body temperature steadily rises. Before long, my head becomes light, my breathing becomes heavy, and my muscles fatigue very quickly. Those are the first signs of heatstroke, and if you do not curtail your activities, sometimes it can even be fatal.

Now, I was pushing that warning to its limit. For three years I had trained for a race longer than any race I had ever entered. In fact, I had trained to race a distance that would be farther than any quadriplegic at my level of ability had ever attempted. On 2 July 1993, I began that race in downtown Salt Lake City, Utah, intending to finish in St. George, a distance of 325 miles. My goal? To complete the ultramarathon in seven days—if I could complete it.

I was averaging nearly fifty miles a day by the third day. My hands were so bloody and swollen that my doctor asked me to consider stopping the race before I did any permanent damage. I kept thinking, It can't get any harder than this. Surely it will get better.

The fourth day, I faced headwinds of between ten and fifteen miles per hour and had little opportunity to rest. The winds were so stiff sometimes that I had to push even going downhill to keep my speed up. My hands throbbed and ached with every stroke. I kept thinking: it will get better. It can't get any harder than this, surely.

The fifth day, temperatures reached 105 degrees, and I was racing on a jet black road surface. I baked in the heat. My family, who traveled with me as my road crew, doused me with ice water time and time again to keep my body temperature down. My body ached, my muscles were beyond fatigue, and my breathing was labored at best. For three hours I didn't have the strength to speak to anyone. I put my head down and just kept pushing forward. Each minute I asked myself if I could survive the next minute of pushing.

My head became so light that for a time I wasn't sure where I was. With my eyes closed, I focused on the sounds and patterns of my breathing to give me a rhythm to hold to. The sounds of my breathing became mixed with the sounds of someone walking briskly next to me. Assuming that a member of my family had joined me as a source of support, I kept my eyes closed. The walking persisted. With each push, I gained a greater sense of peace. Things would be all right.

I opened my eyes to thank whoever it was for the support. The horizon stretched beside me, but nobody was there. I looked over my shoulder. The nearest person to me was my sister Beverly, on a bike some thirty yards behind me. The sound of footsteps stopped as abruptly as they had come. But whoever had come to walk that hot and difficult road with me had left me with a peace that persisted until the end.

The sixth day was the most difficult. With temperatures still breaking one hundred degrees, I came to the base of a mountain that seemed to go up forever. As the road got steeper, I slowed down to a crawl. If I raised my head off my knees more than an inch, my front wheel rose off the surface of the road. Then, as I strained against the push ring, my glove slipped, and I immediately began to roll backward. I reached quickly for the brake on the front wheel. With my front wheel locked, however, and with no weight over my front wheel, my wheelchair skidded across the road as I rolled backwards. If I grabbed for my push rings, I would flip over backwards. I was headed for a deep ravine when Beverly grabbed my chair, stopping its backward descent.

I inched my way up that mountain for eight hours and covered twelve miles. The road climbed to nearly eight thousand feet before I began the welcome descent. The last fifty miles passed quickly. I could smell the finish line. Seven days after I left Salt Lake City, I rolled the final miles into St. George. Police had stopped traffic, and people lined the streets as I raced by. Tears fell from my eyes. I had made it—I had done the impossible.

We live in an instant world—a world of instant soup and instant oatmeal. We live in a world of instant love and instant wealth—it's called the lottery. We live in a world of space shuttles, fax machines, and satellite transmissions where the operative word in business is now and today is too late. Young people often think that by the time they are twenty-eight years old, if they don't make as much as their fathers, live in a bigger house, and drive a faster car, they are failures. Why? Because we live in a world that teaches us that if we can't have it now, do it now, or enjoy it now, then it must not be worth very much.

That's a lie—a lie that is taught by the voice of Satan himself. The truth is, perhaps the greatest things of value in life come only after great effort, hard work, and just as important, time. President Spencer W. Kimball said, "There are infinitely more [miracles] today than in any age and just as wondrous" (New Era, Oct. 1981, p. 48). Then where have they all gone? And why do you and I sometimes seem to miss them? Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "Some of us think a miracle is a miracle only if it happens instantly, but," and this is the important part, "miracles can grow slowly. And patience and faith can compel things to happen that otherwise never would have come to pass" (Ensign, Feb. 1972, p. 71).

Some Miracles Take Time

What is a miracle, anyway? If you and I went back thousands of years to see a man stand beside a large body of water and raise his arms in the air, see the water part to the right and to the left, and watch two million people cross on dry ground, would we call that a miracle? I think we'd answer, Yes. What if we saw a man call down fire from heaven to consume a worthy sacrifice? Would we call that a miracle? We'd say, Absolutely. What if we went back to the meridian of time and saw the Man among men, the King of kings, our Lord of lords—and we watched him as he laid his hands upon the sick, and they were healed; the deaf, and they heard; the lame, and they walked? Were those miracles? I think we'd answer with a resounding Yes.

Is it a miracle when a small caterpillar grows and becomes a beautiful butterfly? Is it a miracle when an ugly duckling matures into a beautiful swan? I think so. (I have four sisters!) And was it a miracle when a hundred and fifty years ago a fourteen-year-old boy walked from a grove of trees, having been called to establish a church that has grown to include more than nine million members? Was that a miracle? I think we'd have to say, Absolutely.

What is the difference? What's the difference between Moses parting the waters of the Red Sea and a small caterpillar growing into a beautiful butterfly? What's the difference between Elijah calling down fire from heaven and the ugly duckling maturing into a beautiful swan? And what's the difference between the Savior making the blind to see, the deaf to hear, and the lame to walk, and Joseph Smith, with his experience in a grove of trees, beginning the restoration of the gospel that is flowering into the Church we belong to today?

The difference is time.

When we are struggling and in pain, the last thing we want to hear is that some things just take time. We want instant solutions, quick fixes, and immediate help. When help doesn't come in an instant, we feel cheated, alone, and discouraged. If we do that, we miss the miracle of time itself. And when we miss the miracle of time, it works against us rather than for us.

As I reflect on the life of Joseph Smith, I am reminded that at the age of fourteen he took to the Lord his questions about which of all the churches was true. In glorious light, this young boy was told by the Savior himself that he must join none of them, but that if he remained faithful, God would through him restore the true church and kingdom once again upon the earth. The light faded, and once again the boy was alone.

How soon do you think he anticipated the return of his Lord in restoring the truth to the earth as he had promised? Tomorrow? Next week? Or perhaps even next month?

How long did young Joseph wait? Three years. Three years passed before he was visited again by a heavenly messenger of truth and light. Moroni visited him then and introduced the Book of Mormon, which was still only inscribed upon plates of gold. Moroni visited Joseph every year for four years before Joseph was allowed to receive the plates. By then seven years had passed from the time Joseph received his first vision.

Certainly nobody would argue that the fulfillment of all the prophecies concerning the Restoration would be a miracle of enormous proportions. And those events were prophesied thousands of years before. Time plays an essential role in the working of miracles.

How Long?

One constant element in all of the promises the Lord made to Joseph Smith was that he would have to wait. Everything Joseph received, it seems, he waited for.

At times, Joseph became impatient in "waiting upon the Lord," but the Lord was building a prophet as much as he was building his kingdom. When Joseph suffered in Liberty Jail for a season, he became weary of his anguish. In desperation he cried out, "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" His questions in this cry for help began time and again with the words, "How long . . . ?" (D&C 121:1-2).

Many times I, too, became weary in my suffering. Many times I echoed the words of the Prophet Joseph, particularly, "How long . . . ?"

But slowly, because of the things I have experienced, I came to understand the great miracles that come through the process of waiting. As I learned to "wait upon the Lord," he schooled me in what would produce happiness and joy. He provided me with tools to work with and friends and family to help along the way. I could have chosen to be bitter instead of choosing to learn; but the blessings that have already come from my experiences outweigh the pain and anguish. The miracle is in the journey perhaps even more than in the destination itself.

Faith and persistence are growing things. And in my growing, I have focused on the promises made to Joseph Smith in his darkest hour: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes" (D&C 121:7-8).

Time can be our enemy or our friend. Much of the outcome depends on our attitude toward time and how we respond to its challenges. I have been in a wheelchair now for more than ten years. I am still seeking the miracle of walking. I believe it will yet come, but in my journey through time, I have discovered some valuable truths about how best to deal with time itself. I have been able to find a measure of peace despite my years of "waiting upon the Lord."

By the Yard It's Hard

First, I have discovered the power of incrementalism, which is simple: some of the greatest blessings of life are received in increments. Rarely do we experience "big bang" miracles in our lives. Miracles often have to be measured by gains made over days, weeks, months, and even years. Small gains accumulate, and strength grows. Think of the tiny threads of steel that make up a cable. Any one of them by itself can be broken by a child, but once interwoven a thousand times over, the threads become nearly unbreakable. If we break our dreams into smaller, more manageable increments and exercise patience as we go along, over time we can achieve much. The individual, small tasks may not be impressive, but the accumulation of them makes the miracle. Our challenge is to remain steadfastly on the path despite the distractions and discouragements along the way.

As a quadriplegic I have achieved many goals that were thought to be impossible. Some still evade me. Despite my proven ability to race hundreds of miles over rough and hot terrain, I haven't yet been able to learn how to get myself from the floor back into my wheelchair if I should fall out. As much as it is an issue of strength, it is an issue of balance.

Last year, I traveled alone to a large city in the East to speak to a client's organization. In the morning, I awoke and felt in the dark for my wheelchair. As I transferred my body from the bed to my wheelchair, the brake holding the chair in place slipped, and the chair rolled away. I lost my balance and fell to the floor in a heap.

I was in trouble and I knew it. I tried with all my strength to lift myself back into the chair, but I fell short each time. I struggled to pull myself up into the bed again, but I could not. My mind searched for solutions.

I thought about calling the bellman downstairs and asking him to come and assist me. I wasn't sure what you tip a bellman for lifting a person in contrast to a suitcase, and besides, the telephone was well out of my reach. I had to think of something else, or I would miss my appointment to speak to an audience of a thousand people.

The sun, which was beginning to rise, started to illuminate the room. Across the room was a sofa couch. Suddenly I had an idea. I dragged myself across the floor toward the couch, pulling my wheelchair along behind me. When I got to the couch, I pulled off one cushion and placed it on the floor. The cushion was about six inches high. That was easy—I could lift myself onto the cushion on the floor. Once I was on top of the cushion, it was only about eight more inches to the top of the sofa's box spring. I could do that. Once on top of the box spring, it was only another six inches to the top of the cushion still on the couch. It was working! From there, it was only six inches up to get back into my wheelchair. I had done it!

Incrementalism works. We can achieve our goals if we break them down into smaller, more manageable steps. Too often we see only the problem looming ominously before us and have difficulty in creatively reducing it to pieces we can deal with. By the yard, it's hard; by the inch, it's a cinch.

Adding the Daily Drops

The second truth I have discovered about the power of incrementalism is how important it is to be patient and to be satisfied to grow slowly, one day at a time. In the scriptures we read about the ten virgins who were called at the last minute to a wedding of great importance. Five of the virgins had sufficient oil to keep their lamps lit, but the other five virgins had not sufficiently prepared.

As I have read and reread the account, I have wondered why the solution wasn't simpler. In the attitude of Christian concern, why couldn't the five wise virgins simply have shared their oil with the five foolish ones? A friend who traveled to Israel brought me back the answer. She brought me a replica of the lamps used in Christ's day. I was amazed to see how small the lamps were. They fit comfortably into the palm of your hand. The reservoirs for oil were so small that they held only enough oil for one. The light that came from the lamp was also just enough for one. Even if the five wise virgins had wanted to share their oil with the foolish virgins, it would have been impossible—there simply wasn't enough oil for all of them. Each had to depend on her own, personal preparation.

The same is true of us. As children, we depend on our parents to provide us with sufficient spiritual oil to light our paths. There comes a time, however, when we must find our own source of oil to fill our lamps. I have discovered that filling my own spiritual lamp is a daily thing. My reservoir is small, and filling it is not something that can be done at a local gas station. It must be added a drop at a time at regular and frequent intervals.

For me, those drops of spiritual oil are produced by reading the scriptures and praying every day. They are generated as I spend time with my family and perform acts of kindness to others. Spiritual oil is accumulated by attending church meetings and paying a generous fast offering. Oil is added to my lamp when I am diligent in performing my responsibilities as a father, husband, priesthood holder, and member of the Church.

The time to prepare is now. The oil can be added only a drop at a time. If we wait for the darkness to come, the winds to blow and the seas to rage all around us before we check the level of our oil, peace will be lost and darkness will prevail. We need to prepare a little at a time, a day at a time.

The Big Picture

Finally, we need to find patience, to understand that some miracles, dreams, and impossibilities just take time. The path to our deepest dreams and desires will always be strewn with rocks and briars—that's what makes the journey worth it. We need to keep our eyes on the goal without getting too caught up in the pain of the path.

My world-record-setting race of 325 miles required months and years of training to accomplish. As I got closer to the date I was to begin the race, my training intensified. I did much of my training at a middle school that had a circular service road nearly one mile long. On an average training day I circled the track ten to thirty times.

One particular day, my training was going well. I felt strong and aggressive. My speeds were increasing and my strokes becoming more fluid. Wheeling along about fifteen miles per hour, I came quickly around a bend. Some activity on the road ahead temporarily distracted my attention from the road surface in front of me. Before I knew it my racing wheelchair had slammed into a curb, flown into the air, and turned sideways. Still in my chair, I came crashing to the ground and slid for several yards across the asphalt road. Only my helmet saved me from a head injury. My arms and elbows were raw and bloody. Bystanders ran to lift me and my chair back to the proper position. My training was finished for the day.

It would have been easy to have become discouraged about my injuries and stop my training then. I knew when I began that my training would be filled with bumps and bruises, but I was training for something that had rewards that would far outweigh the pain.

Pain does not automatically mean that happiness is gone and peace is destroyed. If we can realize the value of time in the growth of miracles, take the responsibility of adding drops of oil to our reservoirs daily, and keep our eyes on the goal, having faith that the Lord will reward our efforts, then peace can be restored and miracles will occur.
