Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 9

Learning to Laugh Again

A A few years ago, my family convinced me that it was in my best interest to learn how to scuba dive with them in Hawaii. Feeling up to the adventure, I agreed.

I went through all of the safety instruction, training, and education beside a hotel pool. Finally, the time came to dive into the ocean. With some help, I struggled into my wet suit. I put the weight belt around my waist, the air tank on my back, and the buoyancy compensator vest across my chest. They even put the flippers on my feet—I'm not sure why I needed the flippers, but they said it looked right.

My brothers dragged me into the ocean. Then I overheard one of them say I looked a lot like shark bait, and I suddenly got a much better idea why I had been invited.

The bouyancy compensator vest was full, and I was floating on the surface. I was relaxed. I was comfortable. It was like lying on a very big waterbed with the ocean surface rolling back and forth.

Unfortunately, the instructor had a different idea in mind for me. He swam over and let all the air out of my vest. Suddenly I began to sink. There was a problem in my descent, however. With the flippers on my feet, my feet floated better than my head. I was descending headfirst! I dropped fifty feet to the bottom and hit my head on a rock on the ocean floor. My flippers were sticking straight up. Even the fish were looking at me strangely.

The instructor, now sympathetic to my plight, swam down and reinflated my vest. Now, I don't know what he thought I was going to do, but I went straight back up again—feet first! I passed my family on my way to the top, and my feet surfaced as if they were in a scene from The Hunt for Red October. The instructor, who must have thought he was an engineer, attempted another solution. He thought that if he took the weight belt off my waist and put it around my knees, perhaps I would float more horizontally. Brilliant man. It would have worked, too, if the weight belt hadn't slipped down around my ankles. Now I sank back down to the bottom of the ocean. Only now I was standing on the bottom of the ocean, waving in the current like kelp.

My family was compassionate. From time to time they returned. They picked me up off my rock and moved me to a new one. I am pretty sure they were using me as some kind of a marker.

The Lord has said there is "a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance" (Ecclesiastes 3:4). In our busy world of responsibilities, ambition, and duty, it is easy to forget that there is a time to laugh, especially when we are caught in the tide of our own struggles and discomfort. When we are stressed we tend to find little to be jovial about.

As schoolchildren we were often warned to "wipe that smile off your face" or reminded to "buckle down." Many of us dutifully carried those messages into our adult lives, valuing solemnity more than humor and straight faces more than light-heartedness. But a good sense of humor has a place in our busy lives.

Joan Griffith wrote: "Have you ever felt stressed out? That hope, joy, and peace are long-lost cousins? In quiet desperation you plan an escape—a night with the VCR watching stupid comedies. You are consumed by belly laughs. The grin lingers. In the morning your bounce is back and that old creative energy soars freely again. Was this merely an attitude fix, or did your physiology improve?" (Omni, Aug. 1992, p. 18).

Laughter provides many physiological, emotional, and spiritual benefits. A group of Swedish medical researchers concluded that laughter helps the body generate its own medication. Norman Cousins, in his best-selling book Anatomy of an Illness, reported that "ten minutes of solid belly laughter would give me two hours of pain-free sleep." Because his illness involved severe inflammation of the spine and joints, it caused excruciating pain even to turn over in bed. Clearly, laughter contributes to good health. Scientific evidence is accumulating to support the biblical axiom, "A merry heart doeth good like a medicine" (Proverbs 17:22).

Laughter also eases the pain and frustrations of our stress-filled lives. Dr. Annette Goodheart, a psychologist in Santa Barbara, California, found that humor helps an individual to confront personal problems in a more relaxed and creative state. A study at the University of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada, revealed that those who value humor the most were also most capable of coping with tensions and severe personal problems. A further study showed that those who had the greatest ability to produce humor on demand were also best able to counteract the negative emotional effects of stress.

A good sense of humor is invaluable in the workplace. In a 1985 survey, eighty-four of one hundred personnel directors and vice presidents from a thousand of the nation's largest corporations agreed that: "people with a sense of humor do better at their jobs than those who have little or no sense of humor." The survey concluded that people with a sense of humor tend to be more creative, less rigid, and more willing to consider and embrace new ideas and methods.

There is also a "time to laugh" in our homes and families. Nancy Samalin wrote: "A not so funny thing happens to a lot of people when they become parents. They start to take themselves too seriously. Maybe it's an occupational hazard; after all, it's hard to see humor in spilled cornflakes, forgotten mittens, and crayons that have been ground into the carpet. And it's not easy to be funny when you ask someone for the eighteenth time to brush his teeth or get ready for preschool. In fact, one of the more difficult parts of being a parent is that you must constantly get small (and very determined) people to do what they don't want to do. Sometimes it seems that the job of being a parent is so much work, you can forget to have fun." Nancy Samalin concluded, "Lightening up can actually achieve better results with children than a grimly determined approach" (Parent's Magazine, Sept. 1993, p. 173).

A good sense of humor can go a long way in marriage and relationships, too. In a survey of thirty family therapists, Fred Piercy, a professor of family therapy at Purdue University found that nearly all used humor to halt fights in their own marriages. "Laughter diverts attention from anger and negative feelings," he says. Used correctly, it can actually bring arguing spouses together. Dr. Redford B. Williams Jr., professor of psychiatry at Duke University Medical Center, said, "Being angry is bad for your health." His preventative prescription: "It's hard to be angry when you're laughing." In other words, a couple who laughs, lasts.

A healthy dose of laughter is good for the soul. Julius Segal wrote: "There is strong evidence that those who are able to stand back and view life's hassles as absurd rather than threatening are less prone to depression, anger, and fatigue than those who succumb to agitation and gloom" (Parent's Magazine, Feb. 1991, p. 183). "When you laugh at a problem, you are putting it into a new perspective—seeing its silly aspects and gaining control over it," wrote psychologists Carol Wade and Carol Tarvis in Psychology (New York: Harper & Row).

I Am the Serious One!

More than a year after leaving the hospital, I began to learn how to drive again. The process was awkward and even dangerous in the beginning. The first vehicle I could drive independently was a full-sized van. I drove from a large captain's seat that I transferred to from my wheelchair. This setup provided the greatest degree of safety for me, despite its being a challenge every time I drove somewhere.

A few years later, I purchased a minivan that had been equipped for my use. It was much easier and more convenient to use. The van had a ramp to provide me access to the inside. Once inside, I simply rolled behind the steering wheel, and my chair electrically locked into place.

I was out running some errands a few weeks later when some of my teenage impulses mysteriously returned. I was stopped at a traffic light when another minivan pulled up beside me. I eyed the van and driver. His van was the same make, model, and year as the one I was driving—with one major difference: I had the superior V6, fuel-injected model, and he didn't! I began to rev my engine just a little. He glanced over at me and noticed the smirk on my face and revved his engine, too.

The light turned green, and we both accelerated. I slammed the accelerator from my hand controls to the floor, my tires chirped, and I sped through the intersection. Suddenly, my wheelchair broke free from the electric lock and immediately propelled itself straight to the back of my van. With the other driver pulling ahead and my vehicle without a driver, my van changed lanes. Pushing against the force of the moving van, I made my way miraculously back to the steering wheel and slowly brought my vehicle to a stop. My racing days were over.

The new van was much more convenient, but it added a measure of risk: my wheelchair is not nearly as prepared to absorb the impact of an accident as a permanent captain's seat would be. In fact, the back of my wheelchair is pretty low. My only concern has been over what would happen if I should one day be rear-ended. The force of the impact would throw my body backward, and the low back on my wheelchair would be inadequate to hold me in place.

One afternoon, while waiting at another traffic light, it happened. I heard a loud crash from behind as my body jerked backward. I had been rear-ended. My head was now resting on the floor behind where I had been seated. With my wheelchair still locked in place behind the steering wheel, my knees had caught under the dash, and so I was doing a perfect backbend that would make any gymnast envious. I thought, This is great! I've always wondered what would happen in this circumstance, and now I know. I can't wait to tell Dallas!

About that time I noticed through the windows that the clouds were moving above me. Then I realized that it wasn't the clouds that were moving—it was me! With my hand off the hand-controlled brake, the van was moving slowly through the heavily traveled intersection. Cars screeched to a halt to avoid hitting my vehicle. I could just imagine what the other drivers were thinking as they saw a driverless van going through a red light. Miraculously, again, I was able to pull myself back into an upright position. People were staring at me from all directions. I smiled and waved.

I come from a family of nine children, and I am the serious one! From the time I was a child, my family has used its sense of humor to handle any crisis. I am not sure I would have survived the emotional trauma of my injuries and the complications of my new life if it hadn't been for the wit, chuckles, laughs, and good-natured humor of my family.

If You Weren't Born with It

Many people feel that a sense of humor is something you have to be born with. Being reared in a family that nurtures a sense of humor helps, but that is not a requisite to acquiring it. I am convinced that a sense of humor can be learned. When we are frustrated, discouraged, and feeling lost, finding our sense of humor can take us a long way back to the road of peace. Following are some things I have found useful to do when my own sense of humor evaded me during times of despair.

Life is hard. There are times when seriousness and solemnity should prevail. There is a difference, I believe, between being light-minded, which the scriptures warn us against, and being lighthearted. When the storms of life rage all around us, few things can restore peace and calm faster than an appropriate use of humor.

Norman Cousins wrote: "Hope, faith, love, humor, and a strong will to live offer no promise of immortality, only proof of our uniqueness as human beings and the opportunity to experience full growth even under the grimmest circumstances. Far more real than the ticking of time is the way we open up the minutes and invest them with meaning. Death is not the ultimate tragedy in life. The ultimate tragedy is to die without discovering the possibilities of full growth" (Good Housekeeping, Nov. 1989, p. 92). Learn to laugh again, and peace will be yours.
