Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Life Preserver 10

The Life Preserver That Never Fails

I I was miserable. Everything was going wrong in my life. I understand that in the eyes of a seventeen-year-old, every problem seems magnified; however, I really felt I had hit bottom. My ship was taking on water fast.

One night, speaking in confidence to my mother, I told her, "I feel like I am drowning." She responded, "But, Art, you're a strong swimmer."

I was failing four out of five classes in school. The principal had recently called me into his office to tell me that he was kicking me out of "his" school. If I wanted to complete my education, he demanded that I do it elsewhere. His remarks cut to my very center: "Art, you are a loser. You always have been and always will be. You will never serve a mission for your church—why would they want you? You'll never be an Eagle Scout—you haven't got what it takes. You'll never graduate from high school, and certainly not mine." With that, I was sent home.

The parents of one of my best friends called me to their home later that same day. Their remarks hurt even more. They felt I was a bad influence on their son. Their demand was simple: "Don't ever spend time with our son again."

I was hurting more deeply than I ever had before. I wanted to scream—instead, I cried like a baby. I laid my head on my pillow that night and sobbed. Mostly I was feeling sorry for myself, but I also felt a real sense of loss. I didn't know where to go or what to do. The waves were crashing in, and I felt hopeless.

Maybe I really was worthless. Maybe my principal was right—I was a loser. Surely God must have made a mistake in sending me to earth; how could I have possibly fought for right during the war in heaven when everything in my life seemed so wrong?

Sleep simply would not come. The tears wouldn't end. During the early morning hours, I crawled from my bed to make one final attempt to communicate with God. A part of me warned that I was unworthy to call on his name and that my desires would only be met with silence and disdain. I hesitated. But something pushed me back to my knees. Alone, and drowning in a sea of darkness, I cried with all the energy of my heart to God.

"Who am I? Do you know me? Do you love me?" My questions were fired in desperation—I had to know. Would God come down so low as to hear me?

What happened next is still difficult to describe. I wish I could say that an angel appeared in glorious fashion and answered the questions of my heart and mind. But, as you may well guess, it didn't happen that way. I wish I could tell you that a strong, powerful voice penetrated my mind and restored peace to my soul. But that didn't happen, either. Instead, I felt something. I wasn't sure at first what it was. It was warm. It felt like a small point of light touching the innermost part of my heart. With it came thoughts and feelings I had never had before. And what I learned on my knees that morning changed the course of my life forever.

Remember Moses' experience on the mount? He was "caught up into an exceedingly high mountain, and he saw God face to face, and he talked with him" (Moses 1:1-2). As marvelous as that was, something else about the event touches me even more. Almighty God spoke to Moses and said, among other things, "Behold, thou art my son; . . . and I have a work for thee, Moses, my son" (Moses 1:4, 6). That's how the light in my heart made me feel.

But there's more to the story. The presence of God withdrew from Moses, and in his weakness, Moses fell to the earth. As he did, Satan came tempting him, saying: "Moses, son of man, worship me." Notice that Satan's first line of attack was to reduce Moses to "son of man" (v. 12).

"Moses looked upon Satan and said: Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of His Only Begotten. . . . Get thee hence, Satan; deceive me not; for God said unto me: Thou art after the similitude of mine Only Begotten" (vv. 13, 16).

Satan in his anger ranted and raged. Moses "began to fear exceedingly; . . . he saw the bitterness of hell. Nevertheless, calling upon God, he received strength, and he commanded, saying: Depart from me, Satan, for this one God only will I worship, which is the God of glory" (v. 20).

Satan trembled and the earth shook. Moses declared, "In the name of the Only Begotten, depart hence, Satan" (v. 21).

"And it came to pass that Satan cried with a loud voice, with weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; and he departed hence, even from the presence of Moses, that he beheld him not" (v. 22).

Moses had won.

In the same way Moses received his strength to battle Satan, I found the weapons with which to effectively wage my war, too. Crying and alone, in my bed that night at age seventeen, I knew Satan had won a battle but the war was just beginning. God had taught me some of what he had taught Moses of old, and the balance of power had swung in my favor.

Foundation of Self-Esteem

Self-esteem can be defined as the value we give ourselves—how we esteem ourselves. Many popular books have touted the benefits of having a healthy self-esteem. While many of the arguments are valid and good, they often miss the mark in identifying the real source of a positive, productive self-esteem.

People get their self-esteem from a variety of sources. Some get it from their athletic prowess or good looks. Others esteem themselves for their intellectual capacity or social status. Still others find value in their pedigree or fine possessions. There is no arguing that all of these things do add value to many persons' feelings about themselves; however, none of them have a lasting effect.

When I broke my neck on a desert floor, I was left a quadriplegic. If I had depended for my self-esteem on my athletic ability or earning potential, my sense of worth would have immediately diminished. Instead, despite the trauma I experienced, my self-esteem remained intact and healthy—it was built upon a foundation that lasts. I had begun building that foundation on that early morning when I was seventeen years old.

The first and founding principle of self-esteem is the knowledge that we are God's children. We are literally his. As such, we are the natural heirs to all that he has—all powers, principalities, heights, dominions, and happiness. Some of God's first words to Moses were, "Moses, thou art my son." It was also the first principle of truth that Satan chose to attack in his efforts to destroy Moses.

The second truth is that God loves us unconditionally. There is nothing we can do that will separate us from the love of God. No act, no behavior, no circumstance will diminish God's undying love for each of us. Because that is true, he also loves you and me, regardless of our past or our present. Satan would have us believe otherwise. By so doing, he weakens our sense of self-esteem.

Third, as God told Moses thousands of years ago, He also has a work for us to do. I do not mean "us" collectively but "us" individually. Each of us was sent to earth with a purpose—a work to do. Many people travel through their entire lives and never find what it is because they never take the time to look. We were each born with a birthright—it is ours to find and keep.

As a struggling seventeen-year-old, that truth is what was taught to me through the avenue of prayer. It has served me well through some of the darkest hours of my life. Any self-esteem that is not firmly built on the truth that we are God's children, that he loves us unconditionally, and that he has a work for us to do, will eventually fail.

Our Birthright

Having a true knowledge of our divine heritage and birthright gives us strength even in our darkest hours. When all the world seems allied against us and the winds of adversity blow, a testimony that God is our father and that he has a work for us to do reassures us with the blessing of peace.

The Titanic sank, despite the efforts of the most brilliant men. Only one life preserver outlasts all others: Jesus Christ.
