Art E. Berg, Finding Peace in Troubled Waters: Ten Life Preservers for When Your Ship Springs a Leak ( 1995)

Peace, Be Still

The telephone rang. I picked it up and heard a woman sobbing. It took several minutes for her to compose herself enough to identify who she was and why she had called. Her voice was halting and broken as she recounted the events of the previous twenty-four hours.

Her son had been in an automobile accident. He was driving home from work late one night when a drunk driver came out of nowhere. The drunk driver lost control of his car, crossed the median of the highway, and slammed into her son's automobile. Her son's neck had been broken, and he had been left paralyzed from the neck down. As the story too often goes, the drunk driver was unscathed.

The mother now sat beside her son's broken and bloodied body as a respirator assisted his breathing. Where had all their hopes and dreams gone? Her son had received his mission call only a week earlier to serve in Moscow, Russia. She remembered how excited he had been, how eager he was to go and serve the Lord. And now this. She didn't know what to feel. Anger, hatred, and bitterness? Hope? Love? And what about peace?

There is very little to do in such circumstances but to listen. A tear rolled down my cheek. I had been down that road before.

This woman wanted direction. Which way to go? She felt like she was drowning. The winds were blowing as they never had before in her life. The seas crashed all about her. The tempest seemed too powerful to endure.

I visited her and her son in the hospital a few days later. We talked at greater length then. I threw them a few of the life preservers I have offered you here. Once, a long time ago, they had saved my life. I could only hope that these good people would hold to them.

With all my heart, I know that the life preservers I have thrown to you through the words on these pages are lasting and true. They have real power. Most of all, amid the waters of our lives, they will give us the power to find peace through our Savior. Peace, be still.
