Necessity for a Restoration

The Marvelous Work

The work of the Protestant revolution having been accomplished, and the land of America having been prepared by the sowing of the seed of religious freedom, the time for the restoration of the Gospel had arrived. The promise made by the Savior that the Gospel of the kingdom should be preached in all the world for a witness, was about to be fulfilled, and the Church of Jesus Christ was again to be established in the earth. The "marvelous work and a wonder," which Isaiah predicted should come forth in the latter days, was about to make its appearance, to the confounding of the wisdom of the worldly wise.

Reasonable and Scriptural to Expect a Restoration

It is reasonable as well as scriptural, to believe that the Lord, before he shall come in judgment and to commence his reign of a thousand years, will send a messenger to prepare the way before him. In justice the people should be warned and given the privilege of repentance and remission of sins, through the preaching of the Gospel, and have an opportunity for membership in the Church of Christ. "Surely the Lord God will do nothing," said Amos, "until he revealeth the secret unto his servants the prophets."[1]

Ancient Predictions to be Fulfilled

Many of the ancient prophets had spoken of the opening of the heavens and revealing anew to man, the everlasting Gospel, before the second coming of the Lord. The visitation of heavenly messengers, and the pouring out of the Spirit of the Lord, in which the sons and daughters of Israel should prophesy, old men dream dreams, and the young men see visions, were also foretold as events for the latter days.

Daniel Saw Our Day

Daniel, in vision, while an exile at the court of Babylon's great king, saw our day and the work of setting up the kingdom which should be given to the Saints of the Most High, who should possess it "even forever and forever." The same event he confirmed in the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream of the wonderfully constructed image. It was to be in the last days at a time when the kingdoms represented by the toes of the image should bear rule. In that day the God of heaven will "set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed, or left to other people."

Vision of John

John also saw the time when the Gospel should be declared by an angel flying in the midst of heaven "having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." This also was to be in the last day, when the people were departed from the teachings of the Lord, and needed a call unto repentance, for this angel was to be followed by another who should say: "Babylon is fallen, is fallen;" and before Babylon should fall, she was to be warned and given a chance of repentance.

Joseph Smith Divinely Called

It was necessary, therefore, that one should be chosen and clothed with power from the Father to re-establish the Church of Jesus Christ on the earth.[2] In choosing a representative to stand at the head of this "great and marvelous work, about to come forth unto the children of men," the Lord did not select one who was versed in the learning and traditions of the world. His ways are not the ways of man, neither are his thoughts like the thoughts of men. One taught in the learning of the world would have had too much to unlearn of the traditions and philosophy of men. In his great wisdom, the Lord chose an unsophisticated child--a boy fourteen years of age. Unto this youth the Lord revealed the fulness of the Gospel, which the world could not receive because of unbelief. Through years of heavenly guidance--for he was instructed by messengers from the presence of the Lord--this young man, Joseph Smith, was prepared to direct the work of the restoration of the Gospel and the building of the Kingdom of God.

Notes

1. Amos 3:7. The Prophet Joseph Smith's revision.

2. The erroneous idea which prevails in the world in relation to the Church, is set forth in Smith's Bible Dictionary, Article--Church, vol. 1, p. 458, as follows: "We have seen that according to the scriptural view the Church is a holy kingdom, established by God on earth, of which Christ is the invisible King--it is a divinely organized body, the members of which are knit together amongst themselves, and joined to Christ their Head, by the Holy Spirit, who dwells in and animates it; it is a spiritual but visible society of men united by constant succession to those who were personally united to the Apostles, holding the same faith that the Apostles held, administering the same sacraments, and like them forming separate, but only locally separate, assemblies, for the public worship of God. This is the Church according to the Divine intention. But as God permits men to mar the perfection of his designs in their behalf, and as men have both corrupted the doctrines and broken the unity of the Church, we must not expect to see the Church of Holy Scripture actually existing in its perfection on earth. It is not to be found, thus perfect, either in the collected fragments of Christendom, or still less in any one of these fragments; though it is possible that one of those fragments more than another may approach the scriptural and Apostolic ideal which existed only until sin, heresy, and schism, had time sufficiently to develop themselves to do their work."
