Boyhood of Joseph Smith

1805-1820

The Birth of Joseph Smith, the Prophet

Joseph Smith, son of Asael, was born in Topsfield, July 12, 1771. Near the close of the eighteenth century he was residing in Tunbridge, Vermont, where he owned a good farm and engaged in tilling the soil. It was here he met Lucy Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack, of Gilsum, who later became his wife. She was visiting in Tunbridge with her brother Stephen, who at that time was a resident of Tunbridge. Joseph Smith, after his marriage, continued to reside in Tunbridge for about six years. In 1802 he rented his farm and moved to Randolph, to engage in the mercantile business. Later he sold his farm in Tunbridge and moved to Royalton, then to Sharon, Windsor County, where their son Joseph was born, Dec. 23, 1805. In 1811 the Smith family moved from Vermont to Lebanon, New Hampshire, just over the border line, where they intended to settle down "and began to contemplate, with joy and satisfaction" the prosperity which had attended their exertions. They were desirous, as most parents are, to provide comfortably for their children and give them the advantages of an education. Of this desire the Joseph Smith mother writes:

Early Struggles of the Smiths

"As our children had, in a great measure, been debarred from the privilege of schools, we began to make every arrangement to attend to this important duty. We established our second son, Hyrum, in an academy at Hanover; and the rest, that were of sufficient age, we were sending to a common school that was quite convenient; meanwhile myself and companion were doing all that our abilities would admit of for the future welfare and advantage of the family; and were greatly blessed in our labors."

These desires, however, were rudely shattered, for an epidemic of typhus fever passed over the land and all the Smith children were sorely afflicted. The oldest daughter, Sophronia, lay for a long time nigh unto death, and was saved only by Divine providence in answer to prayer. Joseph recovered from the fever after an illness of two weeks, but was left suffering with extreme pain in his shoulder which was first treated as the result of a sprain, but later developments proved it to be from another cause. A bag of pus had formed which had to be lanced. The description of his suffering is very vividly told by his mother in the following words:

Serious Affliction of Joseph Smith

"As soon as the sore had discharged itself, the pain left it, and shot like lightning (using his own terms) down his side into the marrow of the bone of his leg, and soon became very severe. My poor boy, at this, was almost in despair, and he cried out, 'Oh, father, the pain is so severe, how can I bear it!'

"His leg soon began to swell, and he continued to suffer the greatest agony for the space of two weeks longer. During this period I carried him much of the time in my arms in order to mitigate his suffering as much as possible; in consequence of which I was taken very ill myself. The anxiety of mind that I experienced, together with physical over-exertion, was too much for my constitution, and my nature sank under it.

Tenderness of Hyrum Smith

"Hyrum who was rather remarkable for his tenderness and sympathy, now desired that he might take my place, as he was a good, trusty boy we let him do so; and, in order to make the task as easy for him as possible, we laid Joseph upon a low bed, and Hyrum sat beside him, almost day and night, for some considerable length of time, holding the affected part of his leg in his hands, and pressing it between them so that his afflicted brother might be enabled to endure the pain, which was so excruciating that he was scarcely able to bear it.

Surgical Aid Sought

"At the end of three weeks, we thought it advisable to send again for the surgeon. When he came, he made an incision of eight inches on the front side of the leg, between the knee and ankle. This relieved the pain in a great measure, and the patient was quite comfortable until the wound began to heal, when the pain became as violent as ever.

"The surgeon was called again, and he this time enlarged the wound, cutting the leg even to the bone. It commenced healing the second time, and as soon as it began to heal, it also began to swell again, which swelling continued to rise till we deemed it wisdom to call a council of surgeons; and when they met in consultation, they decided that amputation was the only remedy.

A Council Held

"Soon after coming to this conclusion, they rode up to the door, and were invited into a room, apart from the one in which Joseph lay. They being seated, I addressed them thus: 'Gentlemen, what can you do to save my boy's leg?' They answered, 'We can do nothing; we have cut it open to the bone, and find it so affected that we consider his leg incurable, and that amputation is absolutely necessary in order to save his life.'

"This was like a thunderbolt to me. I appealed to the principal surgeon, saying, 'Dr. Stone, can you not make another trial? Can you not, by cutting around the bone, take out the diseased part, and perhaps that which is sound will heal over, and by this means you will save his leg? You will not, you must not, take off his leg until you try once more. I will not consent to let you enter his room until you make me this promise.'

"After consulting a short time with each other, they agreed to do as I had requested, then went to see my suffering son. One of the doctors, on approaching his bed, said, 'My poor boy, we have come again.' 'Yes,' said Joseph, 'I see you have; but you have not come to take off my leg, have you, sir?' 'No,' replied the surgeon, 'It is your mother's request that we make one more effort, and that is what we have now come for.'

"The principal surgeon, after a moment's conversation, ordered cords to be brought to bind Joseph fast to the bedstead; but to this Joseph objected. The doctor, however, insisted that he must be confined, upon which Joseph said very decidedly, 'No, doctor, I will not be bound, for I can bear the operation much better if I have my liberty.' 'Then,' said Dr. Stone, 'will you drink some brandy?'

"'No,' said Joseph, 'not one drop.'

"'Will you take some wine?' rejoined the doctor. 'You must take something, or you can never endure the severe operation to which you must be subjected.'

"'No,' exclaimed Joseph, 'I will not touch one particle of liquor, neither will I be tied down; but I will tell you what I will do--I will have my father sit on the bed and hold me in his arms, and then I will do whatever is necessary in order to have the bone taken out.' Looking at me, he said, 'Mother, I want you to leave the room, for I know you cannot bear to see me suffer so; father can stand it, but you have carried me so much, and watched over me so long, you are almost worn out.' Then looking up into my face, his eyes swimming in tears, he continued, 'Now, mother, promise me that you will not stay, will you? The Lord will help me, and I shall get through with it.'

"To this request I consented, and getting a number of folded sheets, and laying them under his leg, I retired, going several hundred yards from the house in order to be out of hearing.

The Operation

"The surgeons commenced operating by boring into the bone of his leg, first on one side of the bone where it was affected, then on the other side, after which they broke it off with a pair of forceps or pincers. They thus took away large pieces of the bone. When they broke off the first piece, Joseph screamed out so loudly, that I could not forbear running to him. On my entering the room, he cried out, 'Oh, mother, go back, go back; I do not want you to come in--I will try to tough it out, if you will go away.' . . .

"I was immediately forced from the room, and detained until the operation was complete; but when the act was accomplished, Joseph put upon a clean bed, the room cleaned of every appearance of blood, and the instruments which were used in the operation removed, I was permitted again to enter.

He is Healed

"Joseph immediately commenced getting better, and from this onward continued to mend until he became strong and healthy. When he had so far recovered as to be able to travel, he went with his uncle, Jesse Smith, to Salem, for the benefit of his health, hoping the sea breezes would be of service to him, and in this he was not disappointed."

Removal to New York

Continued sickness pursued the family for a year; this, together with three successive years of crop failure, placed the family in rather straitened circumstances. So discouraged did they become that the decision was reached to move to the milder climate and more fertile region of western New York, where there would be a better opportunity to retrieve their fortunes.

As soon as arrangements could be made and obligations settled, Joseph Smith and family moved to Palmyra, New York, a distance of about three hundred miles from their home in New Hampshire. The members of the family now counseled together relative to the course they should adopt. It was finally decided to purchase about one hundred acres of land, situated about two miles south of Palmyra on the border of Manchester township. It should be remembered that western New York, at that time, was sparsely settled. Ohio, Michigan and Illinois were still largely in a state of wilderness, and beyond the great "Father of Waters" lay a vast country scarcely known. More than ten years later Missouri was spoken of by the Lord to Joseph Smith, in a revelation as being on the "borders of the Lamanites."[1]

The Purchase of a Home

At the time of the removal to Palmyra, two of the boys, Alvin and Hyrum, were able to be of material assistance in making their new home. With their father they set to work clearing the newly acquired land from a heavy growth of timber, a condition which generally prevailed in that country one hundred years ago. During the first year they cleared about thirty acres--no small task in itself--besides engaging in a day's labor now and again, as opportunity afforded, in order to raise means to meet their obligations. Thus, during the first year, they were able to meet most of their first payment on the land, which during that year was not in a condition to be farmed. The mother, through her untiring industry, took upon herself the task to provide the household necessities, which she did through the sale of hand-painted oil-cloth table covers, a work in which she was quite skilled, and in which she met with fair success.

Removal to Manchester

About four years after the arrival of the Smith family in Palmyra, they moved to the farm where they built a four-room log house, which was later increased by the addition of sleeping rooms on the rear. It was while living in this house that Joseph received his glorious visions. The building of a more commodious home was contemplated under the direction of Alvin, the oldest son, who much desired to see his parents comfortably located. "I am going to have," he said, "a nice, pleasant room for father and mother to sit in, and everything arranged for their comfort, and they shall not work any more as they have done." This was indeed a noble thought and desire, for his parents had toiled and labored much in the midst of trials and tribulations that had reduced them to a state of poverty.

Death of Alvin Smith

Alvin did not live to realize the blessing thus contemplated and to see the fulfilment of his dream. The frame of the new house was raised and the necessary material procured to complete the structure in the fall of 1824; but in November of that year Alvin was stricken. He died on the 19th day of that month in the twenty-seventh year of his age. He lived to know of the visitation of the Father and the Son, and of the coming of Moroni, and was convinced that these things were true. He died with a prayer on his lips for his younger brother Joseph, and admonished him to be true to the great work entrusted to his care. Alvin is spoken of as a "youth of singular goodness and disposition, kind and amiable."

The Hand of Providence

While hard to bear, the many misfortunes of the Smiths were all overruled by the providence of the Lord, for their good. Had they remained in Vermont, or New Hampshire, the purposes of the Lord could not as well have been accomplished. He had a great work for the youthful Joseph to perform, and it was necessary that the family should move to the field of his activities. Therefore, through the valley of tribulation they were led by the hand of the Lord to the place he had prepared for them.

Notes

1. Doc. and Cov. 54:8.
