The Visitation of Moroni

1823-1827

Life of Joseph Smith Between 1820-23

"I continued to pursue my common vocations in life until the twenty-first of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-three, all the time suffering severe persecution at the hands of all classes of men, both religious and irreligious, because I continued to affirm that I had seen a vision.

"During the space of time which intervened between the time I had the vision and the year eighteen hundred and twenty-three--having been forbidden to join any of the religious sects of the day, and being of very tender years, and persecuted by those who ought to have been my friends and to have treated me kindly, and if they supposed me to be deluded to have endeavored in a proper and affectionate manner to have reclaimed me--I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God. In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been. But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native cheery temperament.

"In consequence of these things, I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections; when, on the evening of the above mentioned twenty-first of September, after I had retired to my bed for the night. I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one.

The Appearing of Moroni

"While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noon day, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrists; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom. Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

The Book of Mormon Revealed

"He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people. He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants; also, that there were two stones in silver bows--and these stones, fastened to a breast plate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim--deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted seers in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book.

Moroni Quotes Ancient Prophets

"After telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi, and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus:

"For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

"And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

"He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers; if it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at its coming.

"In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled. He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people, but soon would come. He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in. He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here.

Moroni's Admonition

"Again, he told me, that when I got those plates of which he had spoken--for the time that they should be obtained was not yet fulfilled--I should not show them to any person; neither the breastplate with the Urim and Thummim; only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them; if I did I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it.

"After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so, until the room was again left dark, except just around him, when instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance.

The Second Appearance of Moroni

"I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling greatly at what had been told to me by this extraordinary messenger; when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and in an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside.

"He commenced, and again related the very same things which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation; which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. Having related these things, he again ascended as he had done before.

The Third Appearance of Moroni

"By this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind, that sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment at what I had both seen and heard. But what was my surprise when again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him rehearse or repeat over again to me the same things as before; and added a caution to me, telling me that Satan would try to tempt me (in consequence of the indigent circumstances of my father's family), to get the plates for the purpose of getting rich. This he forbade me, saying that I must have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building His kingdom; otherwise I could not get them. After this third visit, he again ascended into heaven as before, and I was again left to ponder on the strangeness of what I had just experienced; when almost immediately after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me the third time, the cock crowed, and I found that day was approaching, so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of that night.

The Fourth Appearance of Moroni

"I shortly after arose from my bed, and, as usual, went to the necessary labors of the day; but, in attempting to work as at other times, I found my strength so exhausted as to render me entirely unable. My father, who was laboring along with me, discovered something to be wrong with me, and told me to go home. I started with the intention of going to the house; but, in attempting to cross the fence out of the field where we were, my strength entirely failed me, and I fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious of anything. The first thing that I can recollect was a voice speaking unto me, calling me by name. I looked up, and beheld the same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light as before. He then again related unto me all that he had related to me the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father and tell him of the vision and commandments which I had received. I obeyed; I returned to my father in the field, and rehearsed the whole matter to him. He replied to me that it was of God, and told me to go and do as commanded by the messenger. I left the field, and went to the place where the messenger had told me the plates were deposited; and owing to the distinctness of the vision which I had had concerning it, I knew the place the instant that I arrived there.

The Hill Cumorah

"Convenient to the village of Manchester, Ontario county, New York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.

"Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised it up. I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and the other things with them.

"I made an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messenger, and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would it, until four years from that time; but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates.

The Four Annual Visits to the Hill

"Accordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner His kingdom was to be conducted in the last days.

"As my father's worldly circumstances were very limited, we were under the necessity of laboring with our hands, hiring out by day's work and otherwise, as we could get opportunity. Sometimes we were at home and sometimes abroad, and by continued labor, were enabled to get a comfortable maintenance."

Temptation of Joseph Smith

As Joseph Smith journeyed to the Hill Cumorah on that memorable first visit, he was beset by many conflicting emotions. His father's family was poor and in financial distress. Creditors had been bearing down heavily upon them. The adversary of all righteousness took advantage of these conditions to sorely tempt the youth with all his power. The plates of the book were made of gold and were of great intrinsic value. Could they not be used to relieve the financial embarrassment of the family? Or was there not some thing else deposited with the plates that might be used for such purpose? Such were the thoughts Satan put into his heart as he approached the hill, and the admonition of the angel was temporarily forgotten.

He had no difficulty in locating the spot where the records were hidden.[1] It was the matter of but a moment to scrape away the grass and dirt and with a lever pry loose the stone which served as a covering to the box containing the sacred treasure. There before him, lying on two stones which were crosswise of the box, he beheld the record. With it were the Urim and Thummim, two transparent stones set in bows of silver and attached to the breastplate--all as the angel had described. He was enraptured. Putting forth his hand he attempted to remove the plates, but received a shock, which in a measure deprived him of his strength. After a moment's hesitation he made a second attempt, but received a greater shock than at first. The cause of this was unknown to him, for he had supposed that physical strength and exertion were all that were necessary for him to obtain the record. The third time he stretched forth his hand to take the plates and again received a shock with considerable violence, which sapped his strength and made him powerless. In his great excitement and without meditation he exclaimed: "Why cannot I obtain the book?" "Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord," answered a voice near by him. Looking up he was astonished to behold the heavenly messenger of his former visits.

Powers of Good and Evil Shown

In humble repentance he sought the Lord in prayer. His vision was opened and the glory of the Lord shone round about him, and he was made to feel the sweet influence of the power of righteousness. While he was beholding this vision the angel said, "Look!" Joseph beheld the prince of darkness surrounded by his innumerable train of associates in all their diabolical fury. As the visions of evil passed before him the angel said: "All this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and impure, the glory of God and the power of darkness, that you may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one. Behold, whatever entices and leads to good and to do good, is of God, and whatever does not is of that wicked one. It is he who fills the hearts of men with evil, to walk in darkness and blaspheme God; and you may learn from henceforth, that his ways are to destruction; but the way of holiness is peace and rest."[2]

Joseph was further informed that the record had been deposited for the sake of the glory of the Lord, for they contained the fulness of the Gospel as it was given to the ancient inhabitants of this American continent, and was to be brought forth by the power of God; and moreover that the translation would go forth to the Gentiles, many of whom would believe--afterwards it should go to the house of Israel many of whom should also be brought into the Church of Christ.

Value of the Prophet's Lesson

The lesson taught to Joseph Smith on this occasion was one of lasting benefit to him. Henceforth he understood the power of the evil one and was prepared to resist temptation. Years afterwards, when speaking of this event he said, "Ever afterwards I was willing to keep the commandments of God." Had the lesson not been taught in this manner, at a later day he might have fallen into temptation when off his guard, with results that would have brought disaster.

The Interval of Four Years

During the interval of four years, from 1823 to 1827, Joseph Smith was under the necessity of aiding his father's family in paying their debts and procuring a living. At times he found employment at home and at times abroad, as opportunity afforded. The death of his oldest brother Alvin, in 1824, made it all the more needful that he exert himself for the benefit of the family. In October, 1825, he entered the employ of an aged gentleman named Josiah Stowel. Mr. Stowel had heard of some old Spanish silver mines in Harmony, Pennsylvania, and employed his hired help in searching for the hidden treasure. Joseph, after about one month of fruitless search, persuaded this kindly gentleman to forsake the foolish venture. From this employment came the cry that Joseph Smith, the "Mormon" Prophet, was a "money-digger."

The Prophet's Marriage

While residing in Harmony and in the employment of Mr. Stowel, Joseph boarded at the home of Mr. Isaac Hale. It was here, and under these conditions, that he met Miss Emma Hale, daughter of Isaac Hale. The friendship of these young people ripened into love, and they were married about one year and three months later, January 18, 1827, by Squire Tarbill, in South Bainbridge, New York.

Notes

1. The following description of Cumorah is from the pen of Oliver Cowdery:

    You are acquainted with the mail road from Palmyra, Wayne County,
    to Canandaigua, Ontario County, New York, and also, as you pass
    from the former to the latter place, before arriving at the little
    village of Manchester, say from three to four, or about four miles
    from Palmyra, you pass a large hill on the east side of the road.
    Why I say large, is because it is as large, perhaps, as any in
    that country. To a person acquainted with this road a description
    would be unnecessary, as it is the largest and rises the highest
    of any on that route. The north end rises quite sudden until it
    assumes a level with the more southerly extremity, and I think I
    may say an elevation higher than at the south a short distance, say
    half or three-fourths of a mile. As you pass toward Canandaigua
    it lessens gradually until the surface assumes its common level,
    or is broken by other smaller hills or ridges, water courses and
    ravines. I think I am justified in saying that this is the highest
    hill for some distance round, and I am certain that its appearance,
    as it rises so suddenly from a plain on the north, must attract the
    notice of the traveler as he passes by.--Messenger and Advocate,
    1834, page 158.

2. See Improvement Era, vol. 2, p. 807.
