Joseph Smith Receives the Record--The Priesthood Restored

1827-1829

Joseph Receives the Record

Each year, on the twenty-second day of September, between the years 1823 and 1827, Joseph went to the Hill Cumorah, as the angel had instructed him, where he was taught in matters pertaining to his sacred duties. At last the time arrived for the delivery of the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate. It was the 22nd day of September, 1827. The Prophet went to the hill to keep the final appointment with Moroni, before the record should be given into his hands. Once more the angel instructed him in his duties and impressed upon his mind the great responsibility now to be placed upon him, saying:

    "Now you have got the record into your own hands, and you are but
    a man, therefore you will have to be watchful and faithful to your
    trust or you will be overpowered by wicked men; for they will lay
    every plan and scheme that is possible to get it away from you, and
    if you do not take heed continually, they will succeed. While it
    was in my hands, I could keep it, and no man had power to take it
    away, but now I give it up to you. Beware, and look well to your
    ways, and you shall have power to retain it."[1]

Moreover, he was told, if he let the record go out of his hands or neglected his duty, he should be cut off, but through faithfulness and perseverance he should be protected until the angel should come for the record and again take it into his keeping.

Designs of the Wicked Frustrated

Joseph soon found that the warning of the angel was all too true concerning the powers of darkness being arrayed against him, and the desire of evil-disposed persons to destroy him and obtain the plates. Scarcely was the record in his possession before strenuous exertions were made by wicked persons to get them out of his hands. Every scheme and invention which the powers of darkness could devise, were used. Conjurors, diviners with peepstones and other means were employed. Mobs gathered and searched the premises of the Smith home, even breaking into the house and ransacking it. Under pretext of law searches were made. At times it became necessary to hide the record in strange places. Once they were hidden in a hollow log in the woods; again, under the hearthstone in the house, and under the floor in a nearby shop. When the Prophet departed for Pennsylvania he hid them in a barrel of beans, and when a search was made they were not discovered. The Lord was with him in his labor and the powers of darkness were overcome and of no avail.

Martin Harris

So intense and bitter became the opposition in Manchester that the Prophet sought a place of refuge in another locality. Having received an invitation from his wife's parents to come to their home in Harmony, Pennsylvania, he accepted the invitation and prepared to go. Being very poor he experienced some difficulty in procuring the necessary means to meet his obligations and make the journey. In this hour of distress, and in the midst of persecution, he found a friend in Martin Harris, of Palmyra, New York. Joseph, with his wife's brother, Alva Hale, had gone to Palmyra to transact some business, and while there he was approached by Martin Harris, who said to him: "How do you do, Mr. Smith? Here are fifty dollars. I give this to you to do the Lord's work with; no, I give it to the Lord for His own work." Joseph offered to take the money and give his note which Alva Hale also agreed to sign, but Martin Harris refused to take the note. This money enabled the Prophet to make the journey to Harmony where he found a haven of rest.

Removal to Pennsylvania

Shortly after this event Joseph moved to Harmony, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, to the home of Isaac Hale. Later he purchased from Mr. Hale a small farm, to which he removed. Here in comparative peace he commenced to make a copy of the characters on the plates, which consisted of the learning of the Jews and the language, in hieroglyphics, of the Egyptians. He also, by Urim and Thummim, made a translation of some of them. This was done between December, 1827, and the February following. In the month of February, 1828, Martin Harris came to Harmony to visit with Joseph Smith. He had been much impressed with the Prophet's story and desired to know more concerning the work.

The Prophecy of Isaiah Fulfilled

Martin Harris took the transcript that had been made together with the partial translation, and departed for New York. Just what his object was, and what he had in mind, is not made clear. That he was led to do so by inspiration was later shown. He first submitted the characters to Professor Charles Anthon of Columbia College with the request that he examine them. He then took them to Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell, also of New York. When Martin returned he made the following report:

    "I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters
    which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to
    Professor Charles Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary
    attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was
    correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the
    Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated,
    and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyrian and Arabic;
    and he said they were true characters. He gave me a certificate,
    certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters,
    and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was
    also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket,
    and was just leaving the house when Mr. Anthon called me back, and
    asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in
    the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had
    revealed it unto him.

    "He then said to me, 'Let me see that certificate.' I accordingly
    took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and
    tore it to pieces, saying, that there was no such thing now as
    ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him,
    he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates
    were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, 'I
    cannot read a sealed book.' I left him and went to Mr. Mitchell,
    who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the
    characters and the translation."

A number of years later, when he discovered the use to which his testimony had been given, Professor Anthon denied the statement of Martin Harris, although he did confess that such a person called to see him with such characters, but he treated it as a hoax. There may be some slight errors in the account of Martin Harris, but in the main his story must be true for it is the fulfilment of an ancient prophecy of Isaiah[2] almost word for word. It is not likely that Martin Harris was familiar with the prophecy of Isaiah at that time and without question Professor Anthon had no intention of fulfilling prophecy in making his answer, but nevertheless such proved to be the case.

The Lost Manuscript

The impression made on the mind of Martin Harris by this interview resulted in his removal to Harmony to give further aid to Joseph Smith. He arrived about the 12th of April, 1828, and immediately commenced to write as the Prophet dictated his translation of the record. Martin continued in this work until the 14th of June, at which time one hundred and sixteen pages of manuscript on foolscap paper had been prepared. Some time after Martin Harris commenced to write he importuned the Prophet for the privilege of taking the manuscript home and showing it to some skeptical friends, who had sorely criticized him for the part he was taking in the work. He was desirous of convincing them; and they had, without doubt, pleaded with him to do this thing. Especially had his wife implored him for a look at the manuscript.

The Prophet inquired by Urim and Thummim, and the request of Martin was denied. However he was not satisfied and importuned and pleaded with Joseph again to inquire of the Lord. This he did, but the answer was the same as before. Still Martin implored, and so insistent and prolonged were his pleadings that Joseph Smith again, the third time, inquired of the Lord. This time the answer was favorable. The request was granted on certain positive conditions. Martin was to show the manuscript to his brother, Preserved Harris, his wife, his father and mother and his wife's sister, Mrs. Cobb. No other person was to see the writings. In a most solemn covenant Martin bound himself to this agreement. When he arrived home, and pressure was brought to bear upon him, he forgot his solemn oath and permitted others to view the manuscript, with the result that by stratagem it passed out of his hands.

The Lord was displeased with Joseph Smith for his constant importuning, and took from him the Urim and Thummim after the departure of Martin Harris with the partial translation from the plates. When the fact was known that Martin had lost the manuscript, the Prophet suffered the torments of the damned. He found no rest; there was no peace of conscience. In the bitterness of his soul he feared to approach the Lord. This condition continued for some time until one day the angel appeared to him, and returned the Urim and Thummim, that he might through them receive a revelation from the Lord. (Doc. & Cov. Sec. 3.) In this revelation it was made known that the purposes of the Lord were not frustrated, but the designs of men. Joseph was soundly rebuked and warned against yielding to temptation. Nevertheless the mercy of the Lord was extended to him because of his severe punishment and sore repentance. After the revelation was received, both the Urim and Thummim and the plates were taken from him, but in a few days were restored again. This was the most bitter lesson Joseph Smith ever received. It seemed necessary to prepare him for the great responsibilities yet before him.

A few days later Joseph received another revelation (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 10) in which he was forbidden again to translate the portion of the record which had been lost. Satan had put it into the hearts of wicked men, the revelation declared, to alter the writing of the manuscript and then, if Joseph Smith should translate again, they would say that he could not do it twice alike, and thus they would catch him in his words which he had pretended to translate.

What the Lost Record Contained

The lost manuscript contained the abridgment made by Mormon of the record of Nephi, from the time Lehi left Jerusalem down to the reign of King Benjamin, or to the words of Mormon, in the Book of Mormon. When Mormon made his abridgment of the records of the Nephites, the Lord directed him to attach also the small plates of Nephi, which contained the record of the people covering the same period of time as the abridgment down to the reign of King Benjamin. In this manner there were two accounts of that history, the abridgment and the original. Now the translation of the abridgment was lost; but the better account could still be translated, and the designs of Satan be defeated. Thus the "wise purpose" of the Lord, in directing Mormon to include Nephi's plates, was made known to Joseph Smith.

The Coming of Oliver Cowdery

Martin Harris was never permitted to act as scribe again. For a time the Prophet was without assistance. For several months he was under the necessity of "laboring with his hands" on his small farm in Harmony and otherwise seeking employment. The work of the Lord was lagging. He must be about his mission. He prayed to the Lord for help. On the 6th of April, 1829, a young school teacher, Oliver Cowdery, came to Harmony to inquire of Joseph Smith regarding his work. Oliver Cowdery had been teaching school near the home of the Smiths in Manchester, and part of the time boarded with that family. From them he learned of the Prophet's vision, the coming of Moroni, and of the plates. He had a feeling that these stories were true and desired to investigate at close quarters. He was convinced of the truth of Joseph's story, and two days after his arrival in Harmony commenced to write as the Prophet translated from the record. Later in the month of April the Lord gave to Oliver a revelation through Joseph Smith in which he was called to the work. In that revelation things were revealed that only Oliver Cowdery knew. From that time forth he continued to act as the amanuensis for Joseph Smith, until the Book of Mormon was finished.

Restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood

While translating, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery discovered that the question of baptism for the remission of sins was mentioned several times in the record. This caused them to marvel, for the doctrine of baptism was misunderstood in the world. They concluded to inquire of the Lord for light. On the 15th day of May, 1829, they retired to the woods and prayed for instruction on this question. While thus engaged in prayer a heavenly messenger descended in a cloud of light and said that he was John, known as John the Baptist in the New Testament. He said he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and had been sent to confer on Joseph and Oliver the Aaronic Priesthood, which holds the keys of the temporal Gospel. He laid his hands upon their heads and said:

    "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer
    the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering
    of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by
    immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken
    again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an
    offering unto the Lord in righteousness."

He stated that the Melchizedek Priesthood would soon he conferred upon them and that Joseph Smith should be called the first and Oliver Cowdery the second elder of the Church.

Joseph and Oliver Baptized

This messenger, after conferring the Priesthood, instructed Joseph and Oliver to go down into the water and baptize each other. After which they were to lay hands upon each other and re-confer the Priesthood which he had bestowed upon them. There are two reasons why they should be commanded to do this thing. First, to confer the Priesthood before baptism, is contrary to the order of the Organized Church, therefore they were commanded to confer the Priesthood upon each other in the regular way, after they were baptized. Second, the angel did for them that which they could not do for themselves. There was no one living in mortality who held the keys of this Priesthood, therefore it was necessary that this messenger, who held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood in the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time, should be sent to confer this power. It is contrary to the order of heaven for those who have passed beyond the veil to officiate and labor for the living on the earth, only wherein mortal man cannot act, and thereby it becomes necessary for those who have passed through the resurrection to act for them. Otherwise John would have followed the regular order, which is practiced in the Church, and would have first baptized Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and then conferred upon them the Aaronic Priesthood.

As the angel had commanded them, they repaired to the water where Joseph first baptized Oliver and then Oliver baptized Joseph. Immediately after coming out of the water they experienced great and glorious blessings, and being filled with the Holy Spirit, began to prophesy of the coming forth of the Church and the establishment of the great work of the Lord in the latter days. Their minds were now enlightened and the scriptures were opened to their understandings. For the first time in many centuries there now stood on the earth men with power to officiate in baptism for the remission of sin.

The fear of opposition compelled them to keep secret the matter of their ordination and baptism, except where they revealed it to a few personal friends, whom they could trust.

Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood

In course of time, and very shortly after the coming of John the Baptist, Joseph and Oliver received the Melchizedek Priesthood from Peter, James and John. The date when this Priesthood was conferred is unknown, but it was only a few days after the first ordination. In a revelation given in 1842 (Doc. & Cov. Sec. 128) we are informed that it was between Harmony, Pennsylvania, and Colesville, New York, on the Susquehanna River, where it was conferred. In another revelation given in September 1830, we are informed that the restoration was under the hands of Peter, James and John, "whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and special witnesses of my name" (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 27).

Help from Joseph Knight

While the work of translating was going on the Lord sent a friend in time of need to give material assistance to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. This was Joseph Knight, Sen., of Colesville, Broome County, New York. Having heard of the manner in which Joseph and Oliver were occupying their time, Mr. Knight brought them provisions from time to time, a distance of some thirty miles, and thus enabled them to continue their labor without interruption, which otherwise would have delayed the work.

Joseph and Oliver Remove to Fayette

It was not destined that the work of translation should go on in Harmony without interruption. Opposition finally made itself manifest and became so strong that even Isaac Hale--a man who believed in justice, law and order, but who did not express much faith in the mission of Joseph Smith--became somewhat bitter in his feelings. The necessity of a change of residence was apparent. Oliver Cowdery wrote to a young friend, David Whitmer of Fayette, New York, with whom he had previously corresponded regarding the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, desiring that he would come and take Joseph and himself to the Whitmer home in Fayette. This David Whitmer consented to do, and the removal was made in June, 1829.

When David was on the journey to Harmony on this mission, he was met some distance from the town of Harmony by Joseph and Oliver. In referring to this circumstance some years later, David Whitmer wrote: "Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day for dinner, and this is why they had come out to meet me. All of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished" (Millennial Star, vol. 40:769-774).

At the Whitmer Home

When they arrived in Fayette, they found Mr. Peter Whitmer, father of David, ready to receive them and anxious to know more concerning the work, Joseph and Oliver received their board free at the Whitmer home, and other timely assistance was also given them by members of the Whitmer family. David, John and Peter Whitmer, Jr., became very zealous in the work. The Lord spoke to each of them by revelation, calling them to cry repentance to their generation. The people of Seneca County, in which Fayette was situated, were friendly, and many houses were opened by those desiring to know more of the Prophet's message. Many were convinced and showed a willingness to obey the Gospel. Hyrum Smith, who had come to Fayette, David Whitmer and Peter Whitmer, Jr., were baptized, the first by the Prophet and the others by Oliver Cowdery. Samuel H. Smith, younger brother of the Prophet, had been baptized while the Prophet and Oliver were in Harmony, Pennsylvania. He was the third person baptized in this dispensation, receiving the remission of his sins on the twenty-fifth day of May, 1829, just ten days after the appearing of John the Baptist; Oliver Cowdery baptizing him. Samuel had accompanied Oliver from Manchester to Harmony early in April when Oliver came to inquire concerning the Prophet and the record he claimed to have, and remained with his brother Joseph during the spring. Samuel Smith had not taken to the Prophet's story as readily as other members of the family, and was rather hard to convince that Joseph and Oliver had been ordained and baptized. After much inquiry and explanation by Joseph and Oliver, Samuel retired alone to the woods, and in secret prayer obtained a revelation for himself. Now convinced, he was anxious to be baptized and to engage in the work of establishing "the cause of Zion."

Notes

1. History of the Prophet Joseph, p. 106, Lucy Smith.

2. Isaiah's prophecy is as follows: "And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed: And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid" (Isa. 29:11-14).

For a discussion of this point see the History of the Mormon Church, by B. H. Roberts, chapter 8. Also Orson Pratt's Works, Chapter 6, and the Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi, 27th chapter.
