The Witnesses of the Book of Mormon

1829-1830

The Witnesses Called

In due time, in June 1829, the Book of Mormon translation was finished. Three special witnesses must now be chosen who should behold the plates through divine favor and bear record to the world. This was according to the predictions of the ancient prophets who had kept the records of the Nephites. Nephi, son of Lehi, had prophesied: "Wherefore at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein. And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead."[1]

In a revelation given at the request of Martin Harris, after his repentance, in March, 1829 (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 5), this statement is reiterated, and Martin was told he might be granted this great privilege of being one of the witnesses, if he would humble himself sufficiently and overcome his pride in mighty prayer and sincerity of heart, and acknowledge the things he had done which were wrong. It was natural for Oliver Cowdery, the Prophet's scribe, and David Whitmer, to desire to be the two other witnesses of the special three.

When the translation was finished Joseph wrote to his parents requesting them to come to him. This information they conveyed to Martin Harris at Palmyra, who desired to accompany them. The next day after the word was received they started on the journey. The evening of their arrival at the Whitmer home was spent in reading the manuscript of the Book of Mormon, which caused them all to rejoice exceedingly. They had not previously realized the magnitude of the work of translation, nor had they received a clear understanding of what the book contained.

When the time arrived for the manifestation of the power of the Lord to the witnesses, as was the custom, early in the morning the little group at the Whitmer home engaged in singing and prayer. At the close of these services Joseph Smith arose and approaching Martin Harris said: "Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer." Lucy Smith, the Prophet's mother, who was present, says this was spoken, "with a solemnity that thrills through and through my veins to this day, when it occurs to my recollection."

These three men earnestly sought for the privilege of being the special witnesses, Joseph laid the matter before the Lord and received a revelation by Urim and Thummim granting their petition. The revelation is as follows:

Revelation to the Witnesses

    "Behold, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which
    if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of
    the plates, and also of the breastplate, the sword of Laban,
    the Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared
    upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face, and
    the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the
    wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea.

    "And it is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them, even
    by that faith which was had by the prophets of old.

    "And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with
    your eyes, you shall testify of them, by the power of God;

    "And this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not
    be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the
    children of men in this work.

    "And ye shall testify that you have seen them, even as my servant
    Joseph Smith, Jun., has seen them, for it is by my power that he
    has seen them, and it is because he had faith.

    "And he has translated the book, even that part which I have
    commanded him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true.

    "Wherefore, you have received the same power, and the same faith,
    and the same gift like unto him;

    "And if you do these last commandments of mine, which I have given
    you, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; for my grace
    is sufficient for you, and you shall be lifted up at the last day.

    "And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it unto
    you, that I might bring about my righteous purposes unto the
    children of men. Amen" (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 17).

The Witnesses Behold the Plates

A short time after this revelation was given these four, Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, retired to the woods and engaged in humble prayer. They asked the Lord to bestow upon them the blessing of the promise. Each prayed in turn, according to previous agreement. Joseph prayed first and after each had prayed and no answer of divine favor was obtained, they again observed the same order of prayer, but without result. Feeling it was because of his transgressions that no answer was received, Martin Harris suggested that he would withdraw from the others. After consultation this was agreed to, and Martin withdrew. Again the three knelt in prayer. Presently they beheld above them a light of great brilliancy, and an angel descended and stood before them. In his hand he held the plates, and before them were the other records and sacred things spoken of in the revelation. The angel took the golden book and turning leaf by leaf exhibited to the witnesses the engravings thereon. He then turned to David Whitmer and said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps his commandments." Immediately after this they heard a voice in the bright light which shone above them, saying: "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

Joseph Smith now left Oliver and David and went in search of Martin Harris. He found him at a considerable distance fervently petitioning the Lord in prayer. With earnestness he pleaded with Joseph to join him that he too might be blessed with a vision of the plates. Joseph readily consented, and before they had prayed very long the same vision burst upon their presence and they beheld the same messenger. The angel again turned the leaves one by one and the same scene was re-enacted. Martin Harris was overjoyed and cried out: "'Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld!" Jumping up he shouted hosannah and praised the Lord.

When they returned from this interview it was between three and four o'clock in the afternoon. The incident is related by the Prophet's mother in the following words:

    "On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed,
    'Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am: the Lord has now
    caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They
    have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have
    to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they
    know for themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people,
    and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too
    heavy for me to bear; and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any
    longer to be entirely alone in the world. Upon this, Martin Harris
    came in; he seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly
    to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver,
    adding, that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and
    the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard."[2]

Testimony of the Three Witnesses

In accord with the instructions they received in the revelation and by direct command from the voice of the Lord when they viewed the plates, the three witnesses gave to the world their united testimony in writing. This testimony, together with the testimony of eight other witnesses who also beheld the plates, has been published in every copy of the Book of Mormon as a witness to the unbelieving world. Their testimony is as follows:

    "Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people,
    unto whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of God
    the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which
    contain this record, which is the record of the people of Nephi,
    and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people
    of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken. And we
    also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of
    God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a
    surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen
    the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown
    unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with
    words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and
    he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the
    plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the
    grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld
    and bear record that these things are true. And it is marvelous in
    our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that
    we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the
    commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know
    that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the
    blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment seat
    of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And
    the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
    which is one God. Amen.

    Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Martin Harris."

Testimony of the Eight Witnesses

In addition to the testimony of the three witnesses, eight other witnesses were called to view the plates and to give testimony to the world, and became the "few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men." These eight men did not obtain the same privilege as the three special witnesses, for it was not in the presence of an angel that they beheld the record, but they were shown the plates by Joseph Smith by command of the Lord. Their testimony is as follows:

    "Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto
    whom this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator
    of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been
    spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the
    leaves as the said Smith has translated we did handle with our
    hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the
    appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we
    bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown
    unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the
    said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give
    our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we
    have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

    Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., John
    Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, Samuel H.
    Smith."

Necessity of the Testimonies

In all ages of the world when the Lord has had a work to be performed he has raised up witnesses. In this manner his works are attested so that those who reject them will be left without an excuse. The justice of the Lord demands that this shall be done. The Lord commanded Moses, when in the wilderness, that no man should be condemned except it be on the testimony of two or three witnesses. "One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established" (Deut. 19:15). The Savior himself bore witness to the justice and validity of this law when he contended with the Jews. Said He: "It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I am one that beareth witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me." In this manner he condemned them for rejecting his testimony, which was attested by the scriptures and had the approval of his Father.

If Joseph Smith had given no other testimony but his own, then he might justly have been condemned, for his testimony would not have been in keeping with the word of the Lord, but the testimony of three other men should be sufficient. Reinforced as that testimony is by the testimony of the eleven others, and by the witness which the book itself affords, the testimony given by Joseph Smith becomes binding on the world. All who reject it, the Lord said, shall be condemned, for the "testimony of two men is true," provide they are truthful witnesses. The Book of Mormon declares that in "the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established; and the testimony of three, and this work, in the which shall be shown forth the power of God and also his word, of which the Father and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear record--and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day" (Ether 5:4).

Validity of the Testimonies

The witnesses of the Book of Mormon were true and faithful to their testimony throughout their lives. The time came, however, when all three of the special witnesses became estranged from Joseph Smith and departed from the Church. Because of their spirit of rebellion against the Prophet and the work, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were dealt with for their fellowship and excommunicated from the Church. Martin Harris simply drifted away without action being taken against him in an official way. While the Prophet lived, they retained their bitterness of spirit and remained aloof, but during all those years, and to the end of life, all three were steadfast in their testimony as found in the Book of Mormon. In the year 1848, after the Church had been driven from Nauvoo, Oliver Cowdery returned to the Church, at Kanesville and humbly begged to be re-admitted as a member. Martin Harris also sought again a place and standing in the Church and in the year 1870 he came to Utah to make his home. He died in 1875, at Clarkston, Utah, at the age of 92 years. David Whitmer never came back to the Church, but shortly before his death, in refutation of the statements that had gone forth that he had denied his testimony, he published it again to the world, in which he said: "It is recorded in the American Cyclopedia and the Encyclopedia Britannica, that I, David Whitmer, have denied my testimony as one of the Three Witnesses to the divinity of the Book of Mormon; and that the other two witnesses, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, denied their testimony to that book. I will say once more to all mankind, that I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof. I also testify to the world, that neither Oliver Cowdery nor Martin Harris ever at any time denied their testimony. They both died reaffirming the truth of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon."[3]

Impossibility of Collusion

If there had been collusion between Joseph Smith and the witnesses, then of necessity they would have had to hold together and tell the same story. A disagreement on the part of any, or all of them, would have meant destruction to their plan, if it were not true. The boldness with which Joseph Smith and the Church met the situation, when these men rebelled, and took action against them and severed them from the Church, would never have been done if there had been fraud and collusion. The Prophet and the high council would not have dared to do it. This fact together with the other fact that after they were severed from the Church and had become estranged, they all three bore the same testimony, and all told the same story which they told when in the Church, precludes even the remotest possibility that they had planned together to deceive. These truths together with much more evidence which cannot be mentioned here, is strong presumptive evidence of the authenticity of the solemn message given by these witnesses to the world.

The Angel Receives the Plates

After the completion of the translation of the Book of Mormon in 1829, the angel again appeared to Joseph Smith and received back the plates into his keeping. Of this circumstance the Prophet wrote in 1838: "By the wisdom of God, they [the plates] remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangement, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him, and he has them in his charge until this day."

The Book of Mormon Printed

The question of printing the manuscript now confronted Joseph Smith. Not only was he without the necessary means, but printers were scarce and those who were approached were either prejudiced through bigotry, or unwilling for fear of the opposition of customers. Martin Harris, who possessed the means, came to the rescue with a promise to pay for the printing of the book. Finally a contract was entered into with Mr. Egbert B. Grandin, of Palmyra, who consented to print five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon for three thousand dollars. In the meantime the copyright to the book had been secured. The appearance of the words "Author and Proprietor" which appear on the title page of the first edition of the Book of Mormon, have caused some ridicule by enemies of Joseph Smith. This expression was printed in the book in accord with the law governing copyrights, and in no way detracts from the validity of the story of the translation of the record.

Soon after the completion of the translation and the securing of the copyright, the Lord commanded that Oliver Cowdery should transcribe the entire manuscript, and that in furnishing copy to the printer, the second copy should be used, and that only sheet by sheet, as the type should be set up. It was further provided that in going to and from the printing office, there should always be a guard to protect the manuscript, and that a guard should be placed at the home constantly to watch and protect the translation from evil disposed persons. These precautions were necessary because of the malicious opposition which prevailed in and about Palmyra, where the work was done. At times attempts were made to get the manuscript from the possession of Joseph and those who, with him, had the work in charge.

One man, named Cole, more cunning than the others who opposed the work, devised the plan of anticipating the publication of the book. Cole, an ex-justice of the peace, was printing a paper which he called Dogberry Paper on Winter Hill. He had announced to his subscribers that he would furnish them weekly installments of the Book of Mormon in his paper. Having access to the Grandin printing office, he commenced his publication by working on Sundays when the office was closed. In this manner he was able to publish a number of issues containing garbled extracts from the printed sheets of the Book of Mormon. As the copyright was secured, he was warned and finally stopped from this method of stealing. The work of printing the book continued, but not without interruption, for great pressure was brought to bear upon the printer who was threatened by enemies of the latter-day work, with a withdrawal of trade that would ruin his business. This came near to breaking the contract. However, after some delays, the book was finished some time in the spring of 1830, and made ready to go forth, as the Nephite prophets had foretold, to the Gentiles and then to the house of Israel as a voice speaking out of the dust.

Notes

1. 2 Nephi 27:12-13. Ether 5:2-4. Compare John 8:16-18.

2. History of the Prophet Joseph, p. 139. Lucy Smith

3. An Address to All Believers in Christ, David Whitmer. Compare Millennial Star, 43:301.
