Revelation on Doctrine and Church Government

1829-1830

Revelation to the Witnesses

Before the Church could be organized it was essential that there be revealed such matters as pertained to the organization of the Church. This was done between the time the witnesses viewed the plates of the ancient record and the sixth of April, 1830. The first of these (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 18) was given to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, at Fayette. It made known the calling of the Twelve Apostles who should be chosen in this dispensation, although it was about six years before they were called. It gave instructions "relative to the building up of the Church of Christ according to the fulness of the Gospel." It was also stated that the Book of Mormon contained "all things written concerning the foundation" of the Church and the Gospel. The Church, when organized, should be built upon the foundation of the Gospel and "the gates of hell shall not prevail" against it. Moreover, it was declared that "the world is ripening in iniquity, and it must needs be that the children of men are stirred up unto repentance, both the Gentiles and also the house of Israel." To Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, the Lord said that all men were now called on to repent, for the Priesthood was restored and the opportunity given for the remission of sins. These men had been called as special witnesses, and therefore were under obligation to warn the world. Until this time men had not been privileged to be baptized, for there had been no authority in the earth to officiate in gospel ordinances. The Lord said the worth of souls was great, for Christ had suffered "the pains of all men that all might repent and come unto him." As many as would repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ and endure to the end, should be saved. It was made clear in this revelation that all men must take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, for in his name should "they be called in the last day." Otherwise they "cannot have a place in the kingdom" of the Father.

The Twelve Apostles

Not only were Joseph Smith and the witnesses to the Book of Mormon to be called to testify, but there were to be twelve other witnesses, who should be appointed to declare the Gospel to both Gentile and Jew. The three witnesses to the Book of Mormon were designated to search out these Twelve Apostles, who were to have charge of the preaching of the Gospel in all the world.

Revelation Given to Martin Harris

The next great commandment (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 19) was given to Martin Harris, in March, 1830, as one of the three special witnesses. Martin was admonished and warned against his weaknesses, and was commanded to preach the first principles of the Gospel and declare "glad tidings" upon the mountains, and "every high place, and among the people," unto the end of his life. If he should fail, then misery should he receive. He was further instructed to keep his contract with the printer, and impart of his substance for the printing of the Book of Mormon, which "contains the truth and the word of God."

The Atonement and Eternal Punishment Explained

The most important teaching in this revelation was the doctrine of the atonement and the explanation of the expression "eternal punishment." "I am Alpha and Omega," said the Lord, "yea, even I am He, the beginning and the end, the Redeemer of the world. I have accomplished and finished the will of him whose I am, even the Father, concerning me--having done this that I might subdue all things unto myself, retaining all power, even to the destroying of Satan and his works at the end of the world, and the last great day of judgment, which I shall pass upon the inhabitants thereof, judging every man according to his works and the deeds which he hath done.

"And surely every man must repent or suffer, for I, God, am endless; wherefore, I revoke not the judgments which I shall pass, but woes shall go forth, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, yea, to those who are found on my left hand. Nevertheless it is not written that there shall be no end to this torment, but it is written endless torment. Again it is written eternal damnation; wherefore it is more express than other scriptures, that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory. Wherefore I will explain unto you this mystery, for it is mete unto you to know even as mine apostles. . . .

"For behold, the mystery of Godliness, how great is it? for, behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand, is endless punishment, for Endless is my name; wherefore--

Eternal punishment is God's punishment.

Endless punishment is God's punishment."

Then follows the statement that Jesus Christ "suffered the pains for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent." These sufferings were most exquisite and sore, which caused him "the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit;" and would that he "might not drink the bitter cup and shrink." Nevertheless he partook of that cup and finished his work, and this that men might not suffer if they would repent; but if they will not repent then they must suffer even as he.

Revelation on Church Government

In April 1830, just before the organization of the Church, another very important revelation (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 20) was received on Church government. In it the date for the organization of the Church was designated as April 6. The Church was to be "regularly organized and established agreeable to the laws of our country" by the will and commandment of the Lord. These commandments were given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, who had been called and ordained to be apostles, or special witnesses for Christ. Joseph Smith was to be the first elder of the Church and Oliver Cowdery the second elder, and they were to ordain each other to these callings, according to the grace of Jesus Christ. Other matters of great importance revealed are as follows:

Mention is made of the matter of translation of the Book of Mormon, which is said to contain the record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the Gospel to the Gentiles and also to the Jews. By the opening of the heavens, and the inspiration given to men who are called to his holy work, the Lord has shown that "he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever, and does inspire men and call them to his work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old.

By these great witnesses the world shall be judged, "even as many as shall come to a knowledge of this work." Those who receive it in righteousness shall receive a crown of eternal life, while those who reject it shall be condemned. It is declared that the Lord has spoken, and the elders of the Church have heard and bear witness so that through their testimony man may know there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting, the same unchangeable Framer of heaven and earth and all things which are in them. Man is created in the image of God, male and female, and is commanded to love and serve him. Through transgression of his laws, man became fallen, wherefore the Only Begotten Son was sent into the world to suffer temptations--but gave no heed to them--was crucified, died, and rose the third day and ascended into heaven to reign in power. All who believe on him and are baptized and endure to the end, shall be saved, no matter when they lived on the earth. Men everywhere must repent and believe in Christ, worshiping the Father in the name of the Son and endure in faith, or they cannot be saved. Justification through grace is true, as also is sanctification, to all who love the Father with all their might, mind and strength. The dangers of falling away from grace are pointed out, with a warning to the members of the Church to "take heed and pray always lest they fall into temptation."

Manner of Baptism Explained

By way of commandment to the Church the manner of Baptism is set forth as follows: "All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the Church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received into his Church." No person can be received into the Church unless he has arrived unto the years of accountability, which is eight years, for he must be capable of repentance, which infants are not. Baptism is to be administered in the following manner unto all who repent:

How Baptism is Performed

"The person who is called of God, and has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented him or herself for baptism, and shall say, calling him or her by name: Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. Then shall he immerse him or her in the water, and come forth again out of the water."

Duties of Elders, Priests, Teachers, Deacons and Members

An apostle is said to be an elder. His calling is to baptize and ordain other officers in the Church. It should here be explained that at the organization of the Church and for some time thereafter, the officers mentioned here were all that were needed. As the Church expanded the Lord revealed the duties of other officers in their time. Elders are to baptize, confirm members, preach, expound the scriptures, administer the sacrament and take charge of meetings which are to be conducted "as they," the elders "are led by the Holy Ghost, according to the commandments and revelations."

The priest is to teach, expound, baptize and administer the sacrament. He may ordain other priests, teachers and deacons, but cannot lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. He may take the lead of meetings in the absence of higher authority. It is his duty to visit the home of the members and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and to attend to all family duties. When called upon he is to assist the elder in his duties.

The teacher is to be the guardian of the Church. He is to see that there is no iniquity in the Church, neither lying, backbiting, or evil speaking among the members, and to see that the Church meet together often and that the members perform their duties. He is to take the lead of meetings if there is no elder or priest present and may assist them in their duties. He cannot baptize, confirm, or administer the sacrament.

The deacon is to assist the teacher and other officers in the Church, but he cannot baptize, confirm, or administer the sacrament.

Conferences of the Church

The elders of the Church are instructed to meet in conference once in three months, or from time to time as they may determine, to transact such business as may come before them. All who are ordained are to receive certificates of ordination, and shall be accepted as officers in the Church by the vote of the members.

Duties of Church Members

All members shall be received by baptism after they have repented of their sins. They shall have sufficient time to be taught the Gospel and Church government before they are confirmed and partake of the sacrament. Children are to be brought to the elders of the Church, who shall bless them. The members must meet together often to partake of the sacrament in remembrance of the Lord Jesus Christ. The elder or priest who shall administer the sacrament "shall kneel with the Church and call upon the Father in solemn prayer," repeating the words which the Lord Himself has given.

Transgressors

Any member of the Church transgressing the commandments of the Lord, or the rules of the Church, shall be dealt with as the scriptures direct. If any are expelled their names are to be "blotted out" and not kept on the records of the Church.

Recommendations of Members

Records of members are to be kept in a book, and the members moving from one branch to another shall take a letter of recommendation, or certificate, stating that they are in standing in the Church. This shall be presented to the presiding officer in the branch with which they desire to unite.

Summary

These commandments and instructions were given through Joseph Smith, shortly before the organization of the Church, to guide him and his companions in Church government. They are all important because they deal with the fundamental principles of the Gospel and doctrines of the Church. They set forth clearly many things which were familiarly known in the primitive Church, but which were either lost or perverted during the ages of apostasy and departure from the standards set by the Savior and his disciples. Again they are restored in their simplicity, freed from all mysticism and error, for the salvation of mankind.
