Organization of the Church

1830

The Church Organized

It was made known, shortly after the bestowal of the Melchizedek Priesthood, that the Church of Jesus Christ was to be organized. It was after Joseph Smith and his companions had engaged in solemn prayer that the word of the Lord came to them in the home of Father Peter Whitmer, "commanding us," the Prophet writes, "that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an elder in the Church of Jesus Christ; and that he also should ordain me to the same office; and then to ordain others, as it should be made known unto us from time to time. We were, however, commanded to defer this our ordination until such times as it should be practicable to have our brethren, who had been and who should be baptized, assembled together, when we must have their sanction to our thus proceeding to ordain each other, and have them decide by vote whether they were willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not; when also we were commanded to bless bread and break it with them, and to take wine, bless it, and drink it with them; afterward proceed to ordain each other according to commandment; then call out such men as the Spirit should indicate, and ordain them; and then attend to the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, upon all those whom we had previously baptized, doing all things in the name of the Lord."

Fulfilment of the Promise

On the sixth day of April, 1830, the time for the fulfilment of this promise arrived, Joseph and a few of those who had been baptized met in the house of Peter Whitmer, Sen., and proceeded, as the Lord had instructed them, to organize the Church. It was on a Tuesday, and there were six in number, namely, Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., David Whitmer and Samuel H. Smith. The small, but momentous meeting, was opened by solemn prayer. Those present then proceeded to express their willingness, as instructed by divine commandment, to accept Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God. Then they were called upon to declare whether or not they were willing to proceed to organize the Church of Jesus Christ. To both propositions they consented with unanimous voice. "I then laid my hands upon Oliver Cowdery," says the Prophet, "and ordained him an elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; after which he ordained me also to the office of elder of said Church. We then took bread, blessed it, and brake it with them; and also wine, blessed, and drank it with them. We then laid our hands on each individual member of the Church present, that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very marked degree, some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly."

All six of these young men--Hyrum Smith, the oldest, was but 31 years of age--had been baptized previously to the organization. They were all again baptized on that memorable day, April 6, 1830.

A Record to be Kept

While they were still in session in this meeting of organization a revelation (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 21) was given to the Church in which they were instructed to keep a record. In this record, Joseph Smith was to be called "a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, and elder of the Church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ." The Church was also commanded to give heed unto all his words and commandments, "as he receiveth them, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith," said the Lord. By doing this "the gates of hell" should not prevail against them, for the Lord would dispel the powers of darkness. The Prophet would no longer have to mourn for Zion, for he should have inspiration to move the cause of Zion in mighty power, for the days of her rejoicing were at hand. Oliver Cowdery was appointed "the first preacher of the Church, unto the Church, and before the world, yea, before the Gentiles and . . . to the Jews also."

Destiny of the Church

In the manner here described, there came into the world a power, destined to grow and expand until it shall fill the earth, for it is the "kingdom which shall never be destroyed . . . and it shall stand forever." At the time of the organization, however, its influence and power appeared to be insignificant; yet it caused, even then, consternation and fear in the hearts of the wicked, and strenuous efforts were launched to bring it to destruction.

Others Called to the Ministry

Before the meeting closed Joseph and Oliver called out others and ordained them to different offices in the Priesthood, as the Spirit manifested unto them, presumably to the offices in the Aaronic Priesthood. The Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon them in abundance, and after a happy time spent in testimony and witnessing to each other the blessings of the Lord, they dismissed the meeting, feeling that they were now individually members of the Church of Jesus Christ, and acknowledged as such of God. There were others present besides the six who formed the organization of the Church. Six persons were required by law to properly form a society or organization of the kind. Others who were present also received of the Spirit of the Lord in the meeting and being convinced of the truth came forward and desired to be united with the Church. Shortly afterwards they were also baptized. Among these were the Prophet's parents, Joseph Smith, Sen., and Lucy Mack Smith; also Martin Harris and Orrin Porter Rockwell.

Baptism a New and Everlasting Covenant

As stated, all six of the original members of the Church were again baptized on the day of the organization. This action was due, in part at least, to the fact that baptism is the doorway into the Church as well as for the remission of sins. There had been a few others baptized before the sixth of April (see Ch. 9). Some of those previously baptized raised the question as to why they should again be baptized. In consequence of their desire to unite with the Church without re-baptism, the Prophet inquired of the Lord in relation to the matter and received the following revelation:

    "Behold, I say unto you, that all old covenants have I caused to
    be done away in this thing, and this is a new and an everlasting
    covenant, even that which was from the beginning.

    Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times, it
    availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by
    the law of Moses, neither by your dead works;

    For it is because of your dead works, that I have caused this last
    covenant and this Church to be built up unto me, even as in days of
    old.

    Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek
    not to counsel your God. Amen" (Doc. and Cov. sec. 22).
