The Public Ministry of the Church (2)

1830

Oliver Cowdery's Error

Another revelation given in July, 1830, instructed Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer, to devote their time to the study of the scriptures, to preaching and confirming the Church in Colesville, and performing such labors as should be required of them, until after they should go to the west to hold conference. All things were to be done in the Church by common consent, in prayer and faith. Oliver Cowdery returned to Fayette and Joseph began to arrange the revelations ready for recording. In this work he was assisted by John Whitmer. While they were thus engaged a letter was received from Oliver Cowdery commanding Joseph "in the name of God to erase" certain words from one of the revelations, "that no priestcraft be amongst us." Joseph immediately answered by letter that he could not alter the revelations of the Lord. It became necessary, however, for him to make a trip to Fayette to correct the error in Oliver's mind, for the latter had convinced several others that the revelation was wrong. After some difficulty and earnest prayer, they were all convinced that the words of the revelation were right, and peace again prevailed.

Instructions on the Sacrament

In the month of August, Newel Knight and his wife came to Harmony on a visit. As the wives of Newel Knight and Joseph Smith had neither of them been confirmed, that matter was attended to at this time. A meeting was held in which the four and John Whitmer participated, and desiring to partake of the sacrament, Joseph set out to purchase some wine. He had not proceeded far from his door when he was met by an angel who gave him the following commandment:

    "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Lord, your God, and your
    Redeemer, whose word is quick and powerful. For behold, I say unto
    you, that it mattereth not what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
    drink, when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do
    it with an eye single to my glory; remembering unto the Father my
    body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for
    the remission of your sins. Wherefore, a commandment I give unto
    you, that you shall not purchase wine, neither strong drink of your
    enemies: Wherefore, you shall partake of none, except it is made
    new among you; yea, in this my Father's kingdom which shall be
    built up on the earth."

This is one of the many important revelations (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 27) given to the Church. The knowledge that it matters not what we eat or drink, if we partake of the sacrament in the Spirit of the Lord and by divine authority, is the foundation for the present practice in the Church of using water instead of wine, for so the Lord has commanded.

In September the Lord added to this revelation stating that the time would come when he would "drink of the fruit of the vine" on the earth with the ancient prophets and apostles, from Michael, or Adam, the "ancient of days," down to our own day, including all the faithful whom the Father has given him out of the world.

In obedience to the above commandment, they prepared wine of their own making and partook of the sacrament, confirming the two sisters as members of the Church.

Joseph Moves to Fayette

The spirit of persecution became so strong in Harmony, that Joseph Smith was forced to leave and take up his residence in Fayette. Even his father-in-law, Isaac Hale, turned against him because of the falsehoods which were circulated and the prejudice existing in the neighborhood. This bitterness he retained throughout his life. In August, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, with John and David Whitmer, went to Colesville and visited the members of the Church residing there. They prayed that the eyes of their enemies might be blinded, for the enmity in Colesville was extreme. Their prayers were answered, and though they passed by a number of the most bitter of the mobocrats, who looked intently upon them, yet they were not recognized. In the evening of the day of their arrival--a meeting was held and those who had been previously baptized were all confirmed. They partook of the sacrament, sang and praised the Lord in testimony without molestation. The next morning the brethren took leave of the Saints in peace and in due time arrived home in safety.

Spurious Revelations of Hiram Page

Shortly after Joseph Smith made his home in Fayette, Satan commenced a subtle attack upon the work within the Church. Hiram Page, one of the eight witnesses, obtained a stone with which he was receiving revelations purporting to be for the guidance of the Church; but these revelations were at variance with those given to Joseph Smith, and also with the teachings of the Savior and his apostles, as contained in the New Testament. Oliver Cowdery and members of the Whitmer family were deceived. Through the Prophet the Lord gave a revelation to Oliver Cowdery in which the order of heaven, in regard to revelation, was pointed out for the guidance of the Church. "Behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee," said the Lord, "no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this Church, excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses; and thou shalt be obedient unto the things which I shall give unto him, even as Aaron, to declare faithfully the commandments and the revelations, with power and authority in the Church." It was further stated that there should be none other appointed to receive revelations, until the Lord should appoint another in his stead, for he held the keys of this power. Oliver was instructed to take Hiram Page, alone, and tell him that the revelations he had received were not from the Lord, but were given through the power of Satan, who had deceived him. Oliver was also instructed that he was to write by wisdom, but he was not to command him who was at the head.

The Mission to the Lamanites

The Lord, in this revelation, appointed Oliver Cowdery to take a mission to the Lamanites in the west, "and inasmuch as they receive thy teachings," it read, "thou shalt cause my Church to be established among them." There were other reasons for this mission, which were not fully revealed. It is probable that in the spurious revelations of Hiram Page some reference was made to the building of the city Zion. In any case, the Lord explained that it was not revealed, and no man knew, where the city Zion shall be built, "but it shall be given hereafter. Behold, I say unto you, that it shall be on the borders of the Lamanites." This mission was not to be taken until after the conference which had been appointed for the 26th of September. Oliver was also first to settle the difficulty with Hiram Page, who was to be taught that he had not been appointed to receive revelations for the Church.

The Doctrine of Gathering--Destruction of the Wicked

Again the heavens were opened and the Lord made known many of his purposes and decrees which were for these latter days. A revelation (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 29) was given shortly before the second conference of the Church, containing instruction which was helpful for the guidance of the elders at that conference. They were taught the doctrine of the gathering of the Saints. The decree had gone forth from the mansions of the Father, that the Saints should be gathered into one place, for they were chosen out of the world, and they were to prepare their hearts against the day when tribulation and desolation would be sent forth upon the wicked. The hour is nigh, the Lord declared, when the earth should be ripe for destruction, for wickedness shall cease.

Because of the wickedness of the world, for the inhabitants thereof will not repent, the Lord should send forth terrible plagues to torment mankind. Great hailstorms should destroy the crops of the earth; flies shall "take hold of the inhabitants" and eat their flesh; their tongues shall be staid, and their flesh fall from their bones and their eyes from their sockets. The beasts of the forests, and the fowls of the air shall eat their bodies, and the great and abominable church, which shall endure until the end of unrighteousness on the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire, as Ezekiel had said, for abomination must not reign.

All these things were predicted by the apostles and must be fulfilled; and the twelve who were with the Savior in his ministry shall come in glory to judge the house of Israel who have been faithful, "and none else." The trump shall sound, the righteous dead will rise and Christ reign on the earth with his Saints for a thousand years. After the thousand years are ended, and men begin again to forsake the Lord, the earth shall be spared but for a little season. The final resurrection shall come; the righteous received in to eternal life and the wicked banished to partake of the second death with the devil and his angels. The second death is that same death which was first pronounced on Adam--banishment from the presence of the Lord. Those who partake of it cannot return, for they have no power. Then shall come the redemption of the earth, for old things shall pass away and all things become new, yet not "one hair, neither mote, shall be lost" for it is the workmanship of the hands of the Lord.

The Second Conference of the Church

According to appointment, on the 26th of September, the Church met in conference at Fayette. There were present eight elders, four priests and two teachers when the conference convened. Thirty-five persons had joined the Church, making a total of sixty-two in all. Joseph Smith opened the meeting with prayer and then read the fifth chapter of Isaiah, which speaks of the gathering, and made comments thereon. The matter of Hiram Page's "peepstone" was discussed and after considerable investigation, Hiram Page and all who were present, renounced the stone, and there was mutual satisfaction and happiness again. At this conference, which continued for three days, the Spirit of the Lord was manifest; much business was attended to, and those previously baptized were confirmed. Special prayer was offered in behalf of Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., who were called to go to the Lamanites. Peter Whitmer, Jr., was called by revelation at this conference to that mission. When the conference adjourned it was to meet January 1, 1831, and David Whitmer was appointed to keep the record. There were some baptisms during the conference and a number of the brethren were ordained.

The Call to Ziba Peterson and Parley P. Pratt

A great desire being made manifest on the part of others to accompany Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., to the Lamanites, it was made a matter of inquiry before the Lord. The result was that Ziba Peterson and Parley P. Pratt were also appointed to go. Ziba Peterson was among the first baptized and was an elder at the first conference of the Church. Parley P. Pratt was a resident of the wilderness of Ohio not far from the city of Cleveland. While on a missionary tour for the "Disciples" or "Campbellites," as they are called, and a visit to his former home in Columbia County, New York, he first heard of the Book of Mormon through a Baptist preacher by the name of Hamlin, who placed a copy in his hands. After reading it partly through Parley changed his plans and went to Manchester in search of the Prophet Joseph Smith. There he met Hyrum Smith who taught him the Gospel and presented him with a copy of the Book of Mormon which he again very carefully read. Late in August, with Hyrum Smith, he journeyed to Fayette, where he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery about the first of September. Shortly afterwards he was ordained an elder and then continued on his journey to his father's home. There he preached the Gospel to his parents and many of his boyhood friends. His younger brother, Orson, a youth 19 years of age, readily accepted his message and became a member of the Church. Returning to Fayette, Parley P. Pratt was appointed by revelation to take the missionary journey with Oliver Cowdery to the borders of Missouri, among the Lamanites.

The Missionaries Depart

In the fall of 1830, these four missionaries started on their journey to the west. On their way they preached the Gospel among the people as opportunity would permit. Near Buffalo, New York, they visited the Catteraugus Indians and left two copies of the Book of Mormon with members of the tribe who could read, and then continued on their journey. When they came to Kirtland, Ohio, near the home of Elder Pratt, they tarried for some time. Parley P. Pratt was acquainted with Mr. Sidney Rigdon, one of the leaders of the "Disciples," who with Alexander Campbell and Walter Scott, had been instrumental in the founding of that sect. They believed in the doctrines of faith, repentance and baptism for the remission of sins; but accepted the Bible as the only guide unto salvation. Convinced that the religious world had gone astray, these men had formed this organization with sincere desire to follow closely the teachings of the early disciples of the Lord. Through his preaching Sidney Rigdon had converted many souls unto this faith.

Parley P. Pratt, believing that many of the "Disciples" would readily receive the truth, had persuaded his fellow missionaries to spend some time among them in Ohio where they were located on what was called the "Western Reserve."

Sidney Rigdon

The first house at which they called, in Mentor, was the home of Sidney Rigdon. After the usual greetings, they presented Mr. Rigdon with a copy of the Book of Mormon, stating that it contained the record of the ancient people of America, and that the Lord had again established his Church in the earth with the authority of the Holy Priesthood. This was the first time Sidney Rigdon had heard of the Book of Mormon and of Joseph Smith. Replying to their statements, he said he had the Bible, which he believed to be the word of God; as for the Book of Mormon, he had considerable doubt of its divinity. He refused to argue with them, but promised to read the book. At their earnest solicitation Sidney Rigdon allowed the elders to hold meetings in his chapel. A large congregation assembled and gave close attention to the remarks of the elders. At the conclusion of the services Sidney Rigdon instructed the people to consider carefully the remarkable things they had heard, lest it should prove to be the truth. With deep and earnest study, he read the contents of the Book of Mormon, praying for divine guidance, and in the course of about two weeks, he received a manifestation so that he could say, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto me, but my Father, which is in heaven." He and his wife were then baptized and also many of his congregation.

In Kirtland the elders were also successful. The people besieged the missionaries both day and night, until they had very little time for rest. The greater number heard the tidings gladly, but some, there were, who came to dispute and oppose the work of the Lord. In a very short time branches of the Church were established numbering in all about one thousand souls.

The Journey Continued

The missionary elders continued on their journey after a stay of two or three weeks in Kirtland, leaving a number of the new converts to continue with the work. Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, Lyman Wight and Edward Partridge later became members of the Church and were ordained to the Priesthood.

Having accomplished this great work, and leaving watchmen for the tender flock, the missionaries took Dr. Frederick G. Williams with them. About fifty miles west of Kirtland, they passed through the country where Parley P. Pratt first made settlement in the western country. Here, again, they made a stop and preached the Gospel. The people were all excited over the things they had heard, for the knowledge of the labors of the brethren had preceded them. Other converts were made, including Simeon Carter, and although some opposition and bitterness was manifest, in the course of a short time a branch was raised up numbering about sixty souls. Arriving near the border of Ohio, the missionaries spent some days among the Wyandots, who received them kindly and rejoiced in the story of their fathers as they learned it from the Book of Mormon. In the city of Cincinnati they spent several days, and being disappointed in not being able to take boat, continued on their journey afoot to St. Louis. In the midst of winter weather, and suffering great hardships in a country little traveled by man, they pursued their journey till they arrived at Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, at that time scarcely more than a trading post on the borders of the United States. They reached Independence early in the year 1831; their journey had taken them a distance of nearly fifteen hundred miles, through a wilderness, in the most inclement season of the year. Four months had they been upon the journey, but during that time they had preached the Gospel to many thousands of white people and two nations of Indians. Churches had been built up and the work advanced along the route of their travels. This was the first missionary journey west of the state of New York, and its results were to be of incalculable benefit to the Church in years to come.

The Book of Mormon Taken to the Lamanites

In the land of the Lamanites, the elders preached the Gospel to the Delawares, presenting them with the Book of Mormon which they received with rejoicing. Oliver Cowdery explained to them in detail the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. A Mr. Pool, who believed the testimony of these elders, became their interpreter. Several of the Indians could read, and to them they gave copies of the Book of Mormon. The Indians answered them by saying: "We feel thankful to our white friends who have come so far, and been at such pains to tell us good news, and especially this new news concerning the book of our forefathers; it makes us glad in here," and the speaker for the tribe placed his hand on his heart. This good labor, however, was not to last, for the excitement reached the settlements in Missouri, and due to the efforts of sectarian priests the Indian agents ordered the missionaries out of the Indian country as disturbers of the peace, threatening to use military force in case of non-compliance. With disappointment they withdrew and thus ended the first mission to the Lamanites. From this time on they devoted their labors to the white people in Jackson County. However, they had declared the message of salvation to three great tribes, the Catteraugus, in New York, the Wyandots of Ohio, and the Delawares, west of Missouri.

It was now decided that Parley P. Pratt should return to Kirtland, and perhaps to New York to report their labors, visit the branches they had organized on their journey, and procure more books. In February he started on his journey, alone. In Kirtland he met the Prophet, who had come to that place, and to him he made a report.

Part Three

The Ohio and Missouri Period
