The Patriarchal Priesthood--Zion's Camp

1833-1834

The Patriarchal Priesthood

December 18, 1833, a number of elders assembled in the printing office in Kirtland and dedicated the printing press, with all that pertained thereunto, unto the service of the Lord. The first sheets of the re-printed Evening and Morning Star were struck off, it having been decided to continue that periodical in Kirtland until the press could be restored in Independence.[1] While the elders were assembled in the printing office on this occasion the Prophet gave the first patriarchal blessings in this dispensation. It was his privilege to do this, for he held the keys of all the authority in the Church, and was spoken of as the first patriarch in the Church because of this fact, in the minutes which were kept at that time. Those who received blessings under his hands on this occasion were: Oliver Cowdery, the father and mother of the Prophet, and three of his brothers, Hyrum, Samuel and William Smith. Oliver Cowdery, who held the keys of Priesthood with the Prophet, also gave a number of patriarchal blessings. Joseph Smith, Sen., was ordained to the Patriarchal Priesthood, to hold the keys of blessing on the heads of all the members of the Church, the Lord revealing that it was his right to hold this authority. He was also set apart as an assistant counselor to the Prophet Joseph in the presidency, and at a later day Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's brother, and John Smith, his uncle, were set apart to this same calling.

Organization of the First High Council

The first high council in this dispensation was organized at the home of Joseph Smith in Kirtland, February 17, 1834. The First Presidency presided in this council and the following brethren were chosen as its members: Joseph Smith, Sen., John Smith, Joseph Coe, John Johnson, Martin Harris, John S. Carter, Jared Carter, Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Orson Hyde, Sylvester Smith and Luke S. Johnson.[2] Several days before this action was taken the Prophet had explained the manner in which councils should be conducted. "No man," said he, "is capable of judging a matter in council unless his own heart is pure." Ancient councils were conducted with strict propriety; no one was permitted to whisper, leave the room, or think of anything but the matter before them for consideration. If the presiding officer could stay, others were expected to do the same, until the Spirit was obtained and a righteous decision was reached.

There were a number of cases awaiting the action of the high council as soon as it was organized, and within a day or two several trials were held and matters of discipline passed upon. One question considered was as follows: "Whether disobedience to the word of wisdom was a transgression sufficient to deprive an official member from holding office in the Church, after having it sufficiently taught him?" After a free and full discussion Joseph Smith, who presided, gave his decision as follows: "No official member in this Church is worthy to hold an office after having the word of wisdom properly taught him; and he, the official member, neglecting to comply with or obey it." This decision was confirmed by unanimous vote.

Zion Shall Not be Removed

A revelation was given to Joseph Smith December 16, 1833, giving the reason for the expulsion of the members of the Church from Jackson County (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 101). Nevertheless the Lord declared that Zion should "not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered." In his own due time he would redeem Zion, and let fall the sword of his indignation in behalf of his people. The cup of his wrath was to be poured out without measure upon all nations, when the cup of their iniquity is full. The Saints were instructed to "Importune for redress and redemption" before the judge, and if he should fail, then before the governor, and if they could not obtain redress from him they were to importune the president of the United States, and if he heeded them not, then the Lord would "vex the nation." The Church was instructed to purchase lands in Jackson and neighboring counties, for inheritances for the Saints. Moreover, they were instructed in a parable to gather together the strength of the Lord's house, "My young men and they that are middle aged also among all my servants, who are the strength of mine house, save those only whom I have appointed to tarry," said the Lord, "and go straightway unto the land of my vineyard, and redeem my vineyard, for it is mine, I have bought it with money." February 24, 1834, the Lord further declared that if his Saints would, from that time forth, repent and keep his commandments, they should "begin to prevail" against his enemies from that very hour; but if they polluted their inheritances they were to be thrown down, for he would not spare them if they polluted their inheritances. "The redemption of Zion must needs come by power," he declared, therefore the Saints were to collect money and purchase lands, as they had been commanded, and the young and middle aged were to gather to Zion and seek its redemption.

Zion's Camp

According to this instruction, a call went forth asking for volunteers to go to Zion. Five hundred men were wanted; yet, said the Lord: "If you cannot obtain five hundred, seek diligently that peradventure ye may obtain one hundred;" for with less than one hundred they were not to go. The first of May (1834) a part of these volunteers left Kirtland, and on the fifth Joseph Smith and the remainder took up their journey. At West Portage, about fifty miles west of Kirtland, they met and were organized in companies for the journey. Each company was divided as follows: a captain, two cooks, two firemen, two tent-men, two water-men, one runner, two wagoners and horsemen, and one commissary, twelve men in all. Every night before retiring, at the sound of the bugle they bowed before the Lord in prayer in their several tents, and every morning, at the trumpet's call about four o'clock, every man again knelt in prayer, imploring the blessings of the Lord for the day. As they traveled they endeavored to keep their identity unknown so as not to arouse opposition in the country through which they passed. As it was they were followed by enemies and spies, and delegations approached them from time to time to learn the meaning of their journey. The following questions were frequently put and answered in this manner:

"Where are you from?"

"From the East."

"Where are you going?"

"To the West."

"What for?"

"To see where we can get land cheapest and best."

"Who leads the camp?"

"Sometimes one and sometimes another."

Their journey took them through Dayton, Indianapolis, Springfield and Jacksonville, Illinois, and across the Mississippi River into Missouri. It was near the banks of the Illinois River, west of Jacksonville, where the bones of Zelph[3] the white Lamanite, were dug up and mounds, or ancient altars, were discovered. This was about the first of June, and on the third, while still camped on the banks of the river refreshing themselves, the Prophet Joseph got up on a wagon and uttered this prophecy: "I said the Lord had revealed to me that a scourge would come upon the camp in consequence of the fractious and unruly spirits that appeared among them, and they should die like sheep with the rot; still, if they would repent and humble themselves before the Lord, the scourge in great measure might be turned away; but as the Lord lives, the members of this camp will suffer for giving way to their unruly temper." Even this warning did not prevent some of the members of the camp from murmuring and finding fault against their brethren.

Message to Governor Dunklin

Acting on the commandment in the revelations the brethren in Missouri did not cease to importune the judge and the governor of the state, May 29, 1834, and again June 5, the Saints in Clay County petitioned the governor, and on the 6th, he wrote to Colonel J. Thornton acknowledging the just cause of the Saints in this demand made of him, stating:

    "Uncommitted as I am to either party, I shall feel no embarrassment
    in doing my duty--though it may be done with the most extreme
    regret. My duty in the relation which I now stand to the parties,
    is plain and straight forward. . . . A more clear and indisputable
    right does not exist than that of the Mormon people, who were
    expelled from their homes in Jackson County, to return and live
    on their lands; and if they cannot be persuaded, as a matter of
    policy, to give up that right, or to qualify it, my course as the
    chief executive of the State, is a plain one. The constitution of
    the United States declares that, 'The citizens of each state shall
    be entitled to all the privileges and immunities of citizens in the
    several states.'"

He then suggested to Colonel Thornton, which proposition he also presented to the Saints, that they sell out and move from their possessions; or, to attempt to peaceably settle their difficulties, and he would attempt to get the citizens to "rescind their illegal resolves" against the "Mormons" and agree to conform to the laws. If all this should fail, and they could not agree to divide their lands, then he would have to conform his action to that end, indicating that in justice he would be bound to assist the exiles to regain their property.

All such expressions led the members of the Church to hope for redress. Acting on this thought, about the 8th of June, a delegation from Zion's Camp was sent to Jefferson City to ascertain from the governor if he was ready to reinstate the Latter-day Saints on their lands in Jackson County, and leave them there to defend themselves, as he had previously indicated that he would. If so, they were ready, by command of the Lord, to take that course.

In the meantime the camp continued on its journey. To accept the governor's proposition to sell their lands, was out of the question; as soon would they expect to sell their children, for the Lord had commanded them to retain their possessions, or inheritances in that land. On the 15th of June, 1834, Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt, the delegates, returned from Jefferson City and reported that the governor refused to fulfil his promise. For some reason, which is not explained but which may be guessed, he had received a change of heart, although his reason was stated to be on the ground of "impracticability." Such a lamentable failure on the part of the governor to do his duty, was a severe blow to the Saints.

Threats of the Mob

On the morning of June 19, 1834, as the camp was passing through Richmond, Missouri, they were informed by a friendly farmer who entertained them and gave them refreshments, that they had many enemies about, and that a mob from Jackson and other counties was intending to intercept them before they could reach their brethren in Clay County. This was later confirmed. Their progress, by act of divine providence, was impeded which forced them to camp between the Little and Big Fishing rivers that night. As they were making camp five men rode up and told them they would "see hell before morning." They stated that an armed force from Ray and Clay counties was to join a Jackson County force at the Fishing River ford bent on the utter destruction of the camp. While these five men were in the camp, cursing and swearing vengeance, signs of an approaching storm were seen. No sooner had these men left the camp than the storm burst in all its fury. Hailstones so large that they cut limbs from the trees fell all around the camp, while the trees were twisted from their roots by the force of the wind. The earth trembled and quaked, the streams became raging torrents, and the mobbers dispersed seeking shelter that could not be found. One mobber was killed by lightning and another had his hand torn off by a fractious horse, and in fear they dispersed, saying, if that was the way God fought for the "Mormons" they would go about their business. On the morning of June 21, Colonel Sconce with two companions visited the camp to learn what the intention of the members were. He said: "I see there is an almighty power that protects this people, for I started from Richmond, Ray County, with a company of armed men, having a fixed determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm. The Prophet related to these men the sufferings of the Saints, and they left the camp offering to use their influence to allay the excitement which prevailed. During all this storm the members of the camp were protected from its fury.

Judge Ryland's Proposition

Evidently with the best of intentions, Judge John F. Ryland, on the 10th of June 1834, wrote to Algernon S. Gilbert offering to call a meeting in Liberty on the 16th, for the purpose of allaying the "disturbances between the Mormons and the citizens of Jackson County." A similar communication was sent to prominent citizens of Jackson County. In their answer Elders John Corrill and A. S. Gilbert expressed a willingness to meet, but declared that under no condition would the Saints sell their property in Jackson County. On the 16th, the proposed meeting was held. A deputation from Jackson County was present and made a proposition to this effect: They would buy all the lands that the "Mormons" own in Jackson County, and also all improvements, the value of said land to be determined by three disinterested parties; twelve of the "Mormons" would be permitted to go into Jackson County, to show their lands and improvements; the purchase was to be made within thirty days after the decision was reached, and one hundred per cent would be added to the appraisement. On the other hand, the "Mormons" were offered all the lands of the citizens of Jackson on the same terms. This proposition was signed by ten men who stated they were authorized to take this action.

After the reading of the proposition Samuel C. Owens, one of the Jackson committee, made a war speech and was followed by Rev. Riley who declared that "the Mormons have lived long enough in Clay County; and they must clear out, or be cleared out." The moderator of the meeting. Mr. Turnham, replied: "Let us be republicans; let us honor our country, and not disgrace it like Jackson County; don't disfranchise or drive away the Mormons. They are better citizens than many of the old inhabitants." General A. W. Doniphan arose and said: "That's a fact, and as the Mormons have armed themselves, if they don't fight they are cowards. I love to hear that they have brethren coming to their assistance. Greater love can no man show, than he who lays down his life for his brethren." At this instant pistols and knives were drawn and the cry was raised at the door that a man was stabbed. The mass instantly rushed out to see what had happened, and the meeting broke up in confusion.

Unfairness of the Proposition

Reflecting on the proposition offered by the mob committee from Jackson, the Prophet Joseph writes: "It may be thought, at first view, that the mob committee made a fair proposition to the Saints, in offering to buy their lands at a price fixed by disinterested arbitrators, and one hundred per centum added thereto, payment to be made in thirty days, and offering theirs on the same terms; but when it is understood that the mob held possession of a much larger quantity of land than the Saints, and that they only offered thirty days for the payment, having previously robbed the Saints of nearly everything, it will be readily seen that they were only making a sham to cover their previous unlawful conduct." To meet this proposition, which was not made in sincerity, the Saints would have been under the necessity of raising in thirty days approximately six hundred thousand dollars, a thing out of reason, which the mobbers knew. Moreover, they were well aware of the fact that the Saints would not sell although ten times the value of the land were offered, for the Lord had commanded them to hold to their inheritances.

Counter Proposition of the Saints

Some time later a counter proposition was made by the Saints to the Missourians. They offered to buy out all those who were unwilling to dwell in Jackson County with them in peace, on such terms as had been offered except that the payment would be made in one year. A committee of twelve, six from each side were to determine the value of the lands. It is needless to say that the proposition was not received very kindly by these hypocrites and deceivers.

Word of the Lord at Fishing River

While the camp was on Fishing River the word of the Lord came to Joseph Smith (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 105) stating that it was not required of the camp to continue the journey for the redemption of Zion. The camp had been brought to the borders of Jackson County, "for a trial of their faith." However, if it had not been for transgression of the people, the Lord declared, "they might have been redeemed even now. But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them, and are not united according to the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom. And Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom, otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself; and my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be by the things which they suffer. I speak not concerning those who are appointed to lead my people, who are the first elders of my church, for they are not all under this condemnation; but I speak concerning my churches abroad--there are many who will say, Where is their God? Behold, he will deliver them in time of trouble, otherwise we will not go up unto Zion, and will keep our moneys. Therefore, in consequence of the transgression of my people, it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion."[4] The elders were to be endowed with power from on high in the house of the Lord at Kirtland, and be taught more perfectly in doctrine and have experience and a better knowledge of their duties, before Zion could be redeemed. This was one reason for the building of the temple in Kirtland.

Disbanding of the Camp

On the 23rd of June (1834), the camp continued its march and the next day arrived near the home of Algernon Sidney Gilbert on Rush Creek, where, on the morning of the 25th, in compliance with the revelation of the 22nd, the camp was separated into small groups to quiet the feelings of the people, and dispersed among the brethren who were residing in Clay County.

The Prophecy Fulfilled

As soon as the camp arrived on Rush Creek, the cholera broke out among the members and continued for several days. The victims were seized suddenly and so powerful was the disease that within a few minutes some of the brethren were dead. About sixty-eight members were attacked and fourteen died. Among the number who succumbed was Algernon Sidney Gilbert, keeper of the Lord's storehouse in Zion, and one of the stalwart leaders who had stood in defense of the liberty and lives of the Saints in Jackson County.

Organization of the High Council in Missouri

The day after the revelation was given regarding the endowments (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 105), a council of high priests met and called a number of individuals to receive these blessings in the house of the Lord; and on the 3rd of July, 1834, the high priests assembled and a high council for the Church in Missouri was organized agreeable to the revelation and pattern given in Kirtland. Six days later the Prophet started back for Kirtland with a number of the brethren.

What the Camp Accomplished

While the object for which Zion's Camp was organized and for which they made the journey, as understood by the members, was not attained, yet without question they did accomplish all that the Lord expected of them. So he stated in the Fishing River revelation. Their faith was tried; experience had been gained by which men were to be chosen for responsible positions in the Church in days to come, and the work of the Lord advanced; but in addition to all this the Lord was preparing men through this experience for the responsibility of moving the entire people, of the Latter-day Saints in the great exodus to the West, which was later to come. The purposes of the Lord do not fail and all things are turned to his advantage.

Notes

1. At a meeting held in Kirtland Sept. 11, 1833, it was decided that a press should be established in that place and a paper published to be called the Messenger and Advocate, and that the Evening and Morning Star, formerly published in Independence, be continued in Kirtland until it could again be published in Zion, which the brethren thought would be but a short time. All the numbers of the Star published in Independence were republished in quarto size. The first number of the Star was issued in June, 1832, and the last in July, 1833, the month the press was destroyed by the mob. In December, 1833, the first number in Kirtland (No. 15) was issued, it continued until September 1834, when it was succeeded by the "Messenger and Advocate."

2. See Doc. and Cov. Sec. 102, for procedure in High Councils and minutes of this organization.

3. See Documentary History of the Church, vol. 2:79, for this interesting incident.

4. In a letter to the high council in Zion the Prophet said: "Now, my beloved brethren, you will learn by this we have a great work to do, and but little time to do it in; and if we do not exert ourselves to the utmost in gathering up the strength of the Lord's house that this thing may be accomplished, behold there remaineth a scourge for the Church, even that they shall be driven from city to city, and but few shall remain to receive an inheritance." This had reference to preparations "against the time" when the Lord should call them again to the redemption of Zion.
