Clay County Rejects the Saints--Apostasy and Sorrow

1836-1837

Dishonorable Action of Governor Dunklin

Governor Daniel Dunklin, of Missouri, who showed some sense of honor and willingness to enforce the law at the beginning of the trouble in Jackson County, later manifested a spirit of fellowship with the stronger side, against right and justice--a trait common with many politicians. In a communication to William W. Phelps and others, bearing date of July 18, 1836, he cravenly insinuated that the mobbings and expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from Jackson County, was due to faults of their own; the people would not have united against them, without some reason, and while they had some friends at first even these had forsaken them. Whether his conclusion was right or wrong, he maintained it to be the duty of the Saints to convince their enemies of their innocence and worthiness. "If you cannot do this," he wrote, "all I can say to you is that in this Republic the vox populi is the vox Dei." Such was the contemptible answer of the governor of a sovereign state, to an innocent people, driven from their homes and smitten by their enemies, because of their faith in the Gospel of our Redeemer.

Clay County Rejects the Saints

When the exiled Saints were driven from Jackson County, they found a place of refuge in Clay County, just over the Missouri River to the north. Here the people were hospitable and kindly disposed. The Saints had no intention of remaining in Clay County, for they fully expected to be restored to their former homes. After exhausting every source of redress, even to an appeal to the President of the United States, they prepared to make permanent settlement by purchasing lands. As time passed and the indication pointed to the gathering of the Latter-day Saints in that county, the citizens became alarmed. The people from Jackson were constantly menacing the Saints, even though they were peacefully minding their business in their new homes, but wrong begets wrong, and the deep-seated hatred of these mobbers had no end. Finally the citizens of Clay County decided to do the wrong thing, to their everlasting injury, and rid themselves, once and for all, from the danger which they felt confronted them by harboring the "Mormons" in their midst. That there was a danger of conflict there can be no question, with the menacing influence on the south, and growing hatred, because of association of the mobbers with many of the residents of the county to the north. However, these Clay County citizens preferred to expel the Saints in a gentle way if it could be done. A mass meeting was held June 29, 1836, for the purpose of presenting, with united front, a petition to the undesirable exiles, kindly requesting them to move to some part of the country where they could be entirely by themselves. The new country of Wisconsin was suggested as a suitable place. A report of conditions as they understood them and resolutions embodying their request, were unanimously approved. They did not fail to call attention to their great hospitality and kindness in 1833, when they received the exiles among them; and endeavored to impress upon the Saints the thought that they were devoid of "one spark of gratitude" if they refused to accept the suggestions offered to depart in peace to a more congenial locality. Yet they frankly admitted, "we do not contend that we have the least right to expel them by force," but if they would not go they were sure it would lead to civil war, "bearing ruin, woe, and desolation, in its course."

Some of the reasons why the "Mormons" had become "objects of the deepest hatred and detestation" to many of the citizens were declared in the petition to be as follows:

    "They are eastern men, whose manners, habits, customs, and
    even dialect, are essentially different from our own. They are
    non-slave-holders, and opposed to slavery, which in this peculiar
    period, when Abolitionism has reared its deformed and haggard
    visage in our land, is well calculated to excite deep and abiding
    prejudices in any community where slavery is tolerated and
    protected.

    "In addition to all this, they are charged, as they have hitherto
    been, with keeping up a constant communication with our Indian
    tribes on our frontiers, with declaring, even from the pulpit, that
    the Indians are a part of God's chosen people and are destined by
    heaven to inherit this land, in common with themselves. We do not
    vouch for the correctness of these statements; but whether they
    are true or false, their effect has been the same in exciting our
    community. In times of greater tranquility, such ridiculous remarks
    might well be regarded as the offspring of frenzied fanaticism; but
    at this time, our defenseless situation on the frontier, the bloody
    disasters of our fellow citizens in Florida, and other parts of
    the South, all tend to make a portion of our citizens regard such
    sentiments with horror if not alarm. These and many other causes
    have combined to raise a prejudice against them; and a feeling
    of hostility, that the first spark may, and we deeply fear will,
    ignite into all the horrors and desolations of a civil war, the
    worst evil that can befall any country."

For these real and fancied "wrongs" this people must move again, for their presence was obnoxious. These foolish citizens, acting as they thought in their own best interests, rejected the everlasting Gospel against themselves, as well as the people who proclaimed it.

The Saints' Reply

Three days later (July 1, 1836), the Saints met in council and formulated their reply. They accepted the requisitions of the citizens of Clay County, notwithstanding the added loss of property that would be entailed. They also thanked these citizens for their hospitality during the period of the sojourn among them, which covered a period of more than two and one half years. Let it be said that many of these citizens sympathized with the "Mormons" and proffered material help to aid them in the removal from the county; but in this drastic action they were acting, as they sincerely thought, in the best interests of their communities.

When the First Presidency heard of this ultimatum they fully endorsed the action taken by the Missouri Saints, and in a communication to the Clay County committee notified them of the fact. They also took occasion to inform the committee of many other things, in humility, which should have appealed to their sense of justice and touched their hearts.[1]

Caldwell County Organized

In pursuance of this action the Saints began to move from Clay County as soon as circumstances would permit, and located on Shoal Creek, in an uninhabited section in the north part of Ray County. The property of the few settlers in that part, they purchased, and commenced to build their homes. By December, 1836, a goodly number had taken up their residence there and a petition was sent to the governor asking for a county organization. This petition was granted about the middle of that month. This organization, and the prospect of a peaceful habitation, gave impetus to the growth of the "Mormon" colonies, and the County of Caldwell, as it was called, "grew like Jonah's gourd."[2]

The Kirtland Safety Society

Affairs in Kirtland had been progressing smoothly for some time, and many blessings were bestowed upon the people. Such a condition, however, was not to last. On the 2nd of November, 1836, articles of agreement were prepared for the organization of the "Kirtland Safety Society Bank." The State of Ohio, through prejudice, refused to grant a charter, so the matter rested until January, 1837, when a society was organized within the provisions of the law. Stock was subscribed for and the business commenced. During this year (1837) speculation was at high ebb throughout the entire nation. The Latter-day Saints in Kirtland partook of that spirit; several business ventures had failed to come up to expectations, and many of the members of the Church were financially involved. The authorities of the Church, with others of the leading brethren who had subscribed for stock in the Kirtland Safety Society, pledged themselves to be responsible for the redemption of all the notes of the institution, in proportion to the amount of stock subscribed. Since they had no charter, other banking institutions refused their notes. The cashier of this society, at one time the Prophet's clerk and a faithful elder in the Church, was found guilty of immoral conduct. He was forgiven on a show of repentance and confession, and retained his standing in the Church; but he never regained the spirit and shortly after became disaffected. He misappropriated the funds of the society to the extent of over twenty-five thousand dollars, which placed the institution in a precarious condition. Seeing how matters were being conducted, the Prophet gave a warning which was not heeded; therefore, early in the summer of 1837, he withdrew from the concern, resigned his office and disposed of all his interests therein, stating that he was satisfied after five months' experience, "that no institution of the kind, established upon just and righteous principles for a blessing not only to the Church, but to the whole nation, would be suffered to continue its operations in such an age of darkness, speculation and wickedness."

The Financial Panic of 1837

At this time the panic of 1837, swept over the United States. During the months of March and April, the failures in the City of New York amounted to over $100,000,000 and hundreds of institutions were driven to the wall. It was only natural that the Kirtland Safety Society, so improperly managed, should share in the general condition of failure.

Other Causes of Embarrassment

Other causes for the financial stress among the Saints, which also weighed heavily upon the heads of the Church, were the afflictions undergone at the hands of enemies, and the expenses attached to the erection of the Kirtland Temple. Moreover, the poor, destitute and needy, who had received the Gospel came to Kirtland seeking assistance and necessary homes. Large contracts for land were entered into for the benefit of these poor, that they might obtain homes to call their own; but those concerned were not always prompt in the payment of their dues--a common failure of mankind.

Apostasy and Sorrow

As the fruit of this condition, an apostasy followed rapidly, and it seemed, said the Prophet, "as though all the powers of earth and hell were combining their influence in an especial manner to overthrow the Church at once, and make a final end." Enemies abroad, aided by apostates within, united in various schemes to overthrow the Prophet as if he had been the sole cause of all the evils, not only in the communities of the Church, but throughout the entire land. Most of this evil which befell the Church might have been avoided if the Prophet's counsel had been accepted by the Saints. Apostasy developed within all the councils of the Church, and many of the leading brethren, who previously had been true and faithful, were involved.

The Pure in Heart Able to Withstand

It is strange to think of this dire condition, when just one brief year before, the glorious manifestations in the temple had been given to many of these men, who now possessed such bitterness of spirit. They seemed to have forgotten their many blessings, and the wonderful visions, and the great promises made them by the Lord, if they would be true and faithful in their ministry. The spirit of speculation and desire for wealth, during the brief spell of peace and harmony, had beclouded the minds of many, and their souls were filled with deadly hatred against their former brethren. Joseph Smith was called a fallen prophet by those whom he had cherished and loved, and whose love for him had been pronounced. Some, in their bitterness and darkness of mind, sought his life. Those who sought his welfare and spoke in his defense, were ridiculed and treated with great contempt. It was a time when the souls of men were tested, and only those who kept themselves pure and unspotted from the sins of the world, were able to withstand the trial. Every influence was brought to bear upon the members of the Church to get them to renounce the Prophet. Many good men were dragged into the net; others barely escaped, and only through their deep humility and great repentance, were they spared the awful fate which carried so many to destruction. It was during this time at disaffection that Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and others, including John Taylor and Willard Richards, who had but recently joined the Church, stood nobly in defense of the Prophet Joseph, in the face of a murderous spirit of opposition.

The Prophet's Visit to Missouri

In September, 1837, Presidents Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon went to Missouri to assist the Saints in that land in establishing places of gathering. Other brethren from Kirtland accompanied them. They arrived about the first of November in Caldwell County and immediately went into council with the elders there, regarding locations for the Saints. Those who met in council were Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Thomas B. Marsh, William E. McLellin, Lyman E. Johnson and William Smith from Ohio, and the high council of the Church in Far West, with William W. Phelps at their head. It was decided that there was room in that land to make it desirable to invite the Saints from other parts to locate there. The city Far West, which had been laid out and incorporated, was chosen as a central gathering place. It was decided to postpone the building of the Lord's house in Far West, which had been decided on, until the Lord should reveal his will to have it commenced.

Death of Jerusha Smith

A sad event occurred while Hyrum Smith was engaged in Far West assisting the Saints to locate, in the death of his wife Jerusha Barden Smith, October 3, 1837. "Tell your father when he comes that the Lord has taken your mother home and left you for him to take care of," was her dying statement to her five little children.

Attempt to Depose the Prophet

Presidents Smith and Rigdon returned to Kirtland from Missouri, on the 10th of December. They discovered that during their absence, Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, Luke S. Johnson, Joseph Coe, Sylvester Smith, and other of the leading councils had united to overthrow the Church. Some of these men had earlier in the year shown a spirit of opposition, but on a show of repentance had been reinstated; but the evils were not fully eradicated from their minds. Warren Parrish was a seventy, who a few short months before shared the Prophet's fullest confidence, as one of his closest and dearest friends. Now, through transgression, he became one of the Prophet's bitterest enemies and the leader of a movement to depose him and install David Whitmer in his stead. Meetings had been held by this clique in the temple, which they claimed as their own, and they resorted to violence to maintain their contention. In this manner the Kirtland Temple, so recently accepted by the Lord, was desecrated and defiled so that it ceased to be a sacred edifice to his holy name.

The British Mission

During these sad days of trial and tribulation, the word of the Lord came to Joseph Smith stating that something must be done for the salvation of the Church. The solution was the carrying of the Gospel to Great Britain. On Sunday, the 4th day of June, the Prophet approached Elder Heber C. Kimball in the Kirtland Temple and whispered to him, saying: "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: 'Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation.'" Brother Kimball, feeling his weakness, asked if Elder Brigham Young could not go with him. The Prophet answered that the Lord had something else for Brigham Young to do. Following this conversation Elder Kimball was set apart for this great work in the British Isles, which was to be the first foreign mission of the Church. While the First Presidency were setting Elder Kimball apart, Orson Hyde, of the council of the twelve came in, and listening to the blessing being given to his fellow laborer asked that he also might have the privilege of assisting in that work. Elder Hyde had been among those disturbed because of speculation. His heart melted within him and he now acknowledged his faults, and sought a blessing. His offering was accepted and he was set apart for the British labor.

The Work in Canada

The movement to send elders to Great Britain was the outgrowth of the work in Canada. Several of the elders had taken trips to Canada and had preached the Gospel there. Elder Orson Pratt was the first to carry the message into Canada in the year 1833. In the fall of that same year the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon went on a brief mission to Upper Canada and made a number of converts. In 1836, Elder Parley P. Pratt went to the City of Toronto and surrounding country and preached with wonderful success. It was here at this time that Elder John Taylor, afterwards of the council of the twelve and later President of the Church, received the Gospel. It was also here, and due to the preaching of Elder Pratt, that Joseph Fielding and his two sisters, Mary--who a few months later became the wife of Hyrum Smith--and Mercy R., were baptized. Others who received the Gospel in Canada were John Goodson, John Snyder and Isaac Russell. All of these people were in correspondence with relatives and friends in Great Britain whom they informed of the rise and progress of the Church, thus preparing them for events to come.

Departure for Great Britain

Elder Willard Richards, having requested the privilege of going to Great Britain, was set apart by Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith, on the 12th of June, 1837. The following day Elders Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, and Joseph Fielding, a priest, who came from Honeydon, England, left Kirtland on their mission to the British Isles. They were accompanied on their journey as far as Fairport by Elder Brigham Young and others. This little band of missionaries was later augmented by the addition of Isaac Russell, John Goodson and John Snyder, and on the 23rd of June, 1837, they engaged passage on the merchant ship Garrick, for Liverpool. On the morning of the 20th of July, the Garrick anchored in the River Mersey. As soon as these brethren landed they went to Preston, about thirty miles from Liverpool. It was election day for members of Parliament, and Queen Victoria, who had recently come to the throne, was about to organize her cabinet. As the missionaries alighted from their coach, they saw in letters of gold on a banner above their heads an inscription, "Truth will prevail," which they accepted as a favorable omen.

Elder Joseph Fielding had a brother Rev. James Fielding, who resided in Preston, and the brethren went to hear him preach on Sunday, July 23, 1837. At the service Rev. Fielding unexpectedly announced that there were present some ministers from America and they would occupy his pulpit in the afternoon. The invitation was joyfully accepted and President Kimball gave a brief address followed by Elder Hyde. That evening Mr. Fielding again offered his pulpit to the brethren and Elder Goodson and Brother Fielding preached. This was the opening of the door for the Gospel in England.[3]

The following Wednesday (July 26, 1837) another meeting was held in Rev. James Fielding's chapel. Elders Hyde and Richards preached and much interest was manifested by the congregation, many were convinced and sought baptism. Fearing that he would lose his entire flock the Rev. Fielding closed the doors of his chapel against the elders and from that time opposed the work with all his power. However, the work was started, a foothold had been gained, and the brethren received many invitations to preach in private homes. The work spread rapidly throughout the nation, many branches were organized and many souls sought salvation through the remission of their sins.

Revelation to the Twelve

The same day that the Gospel was first preached in England (July 23, 1837) the Lord gave a revelation through Joseph Smith to Thomas B. Marsh and the twelve. They were commanded to gird up their loins, take up their cross and follow the Savior and feed his sheep. "Exalt not yourselves," said the Lord, "rebel not against my servant Joseph Smith, for verily I say unto you, I am with him, and my hand shall be over him; and the keys which I have given unto him, and also to youward, shall not be taken from him till I come."

This was a timely warning, for even then some of the members of that council were in secret collusion with enemies of the Church. Their actions later developed, and before the close of the year they were in open rebellion as previously indicated.

Frederick G. Williams Removed

A conference of the elders held in Far West, November 7, 1837, refused to sustain Frederick G. Williams as a counselor to President Joseph Smith, and Hyrum Smith was appointed in his place. President Williams, Lyman E. Johnson, Parley P. Pratt and Warren Parrish had previously been cited to appear before a council of the Church, charges having been preferred against them, but the council being improperly organized, no action was taken at that time. President Williams became disaffected with many others, due to speculations and financial troubles in the fore part of the year 1837, and permitted himself to become estranged from the work.

Flight of Brigham Young

The feeling of opposition against the Prophet became so intense near the close of the year 1837, that it was with danger that anyone in Kirtland could speak in his defense. On the morning of December 22, 1837, Elder Brigham Young left Kirtland because of the fury of the enemies of the Church. Apostates had threatened to destroy him because he continued to proclaim publicly that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Most High and had not transgressed and fallen, as the apostates declared.

This was the condition of affairs in Kirtland at the close of the year 1837.

Notes

1. The minutes of these meetings and the communications involved in the question of the removal of the Saints are found in full in the Documentary History of the Church, vol. 2:448-462.

2. The Missourians were willing--feeling that the section chosen by the "Mormons" was of little value.

3. The inspiration of the Prophet Joseph to send elders to Great Britain for the salvation of the Church, was fully attested, for members were baptized by the thousands in the course of a few months following. Many of them emigrated and became stalwarts in the Church, and branches of great magnitude were raised up in various parts of England.
