Difficulties in Missouri--Governor Boggs' Order of Extermination

1838

Election Day at Gallatin

At the election held at Gallatin, Daviess County, Missouri, August 6, 1838, hostilities between the Missourians and the "Mormons" broke out. This was the kindling of the flame which was to result in the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from that state. The Saints had been warned two weeks before by Judge Morin, candidate for the state senate, that an attempt would be made to prevent them from voting; however, they paid little attention to the warning, hoping for better things. On that day, as a number of the brethren approached the polls, Col. William P. Peniston, who had led a mob against the Saints in Clay County, mounted a barrel and harangued the crowd, which he had gathered for the purpose, against the "Mormons." He accused their leaders of various vicious crimes and called the members "dupes, and not too good to take a false oath . . . they would steal, and he did not consider property safe where they were; that he opposed their settling in Daviess County, and if they suffered the "Mormons" to vote, the people would soon lose their suffrage." Peniston was a candidate for the legislature, and knowing the brethren would not vote for him, he was determined to prevent them forcibly from casting their ballots.

The result was that a premeditated attack was made upon the little band of voters. These "Mormons," about twelve in number, held their ground against a force of over one hundred. Many heads were broken in the conflict. Elder John L. Butler, filled with righteous rage, seized a club and knocked men down right and left. The mobbers disbursed swearing vengeance and threatening to get fire arms and return. The brethren were persuaded by the election officials to depart to save further conflict, since this was a prearranged attack, and their enemies came fully intending to create trouble. The brethren returned to their homes, collected their families and concealed them in the thickets, while they stood guard over their homes during the night.

The Prophet's Investigation

The next day the report having reached Far West that two or three of the brethren had been killed and the Missourians would not permit their bodies to be removed, or interred, Joseph Smith and about fifteen others armed themselves and started for Gallatin. At Colonel Lyman Wight's home they learned the correct status of the affair. On the 8th, some of the brethren called at the home of Adam Black, justice of the peace and judge elect for Daviess County, and had some conversation with him in which they asked him if he was their friend or enemy. While he said some very bitter things against the "Mormons," he assured them that he was not in sympathy with the mob, and would not aid them. He was asked if he would make such a statement in writing, and willingly did so in the following unique document:

    "I, Adam Black, a justice of the Peace of Daviess County do hereby
    Sertify to the people coled Mormin, that he is bound to support the
    Constitution of this State and of the United States and he is not
    attached to any mob, or will he attach himself to any such people,
    and so long as they will not molest me, I will not molest them.
    This the 8th day of August, 1838.

    "Adam Black."

Peniston's Affidavit

Two days after the interview with Adam Black, William P. Peniston, William Bowman and others, made affidavit before Judge Austin A. King, stating that the "Mormons," to the number of about five hundred men, were armed and collected in Daviess County, for the purpose, they verily believed, of committing great violence to the citizens, and to take vengeance for some injuries, or imaginary injuries, done to some of their friends, and to intimidate and drive from the country all the old citizens, and possess themselves of their lands, or to force such as do not leave, to come into their measures and submit to their dictation. They also stated that about one hundred and twenty men did commit violence on Adam Black, "by surrounding his house and taking him in a violent manner, and subjecting him to great indignities, by forcing him, under threats of immediate death, to sign a paper writing of a very disgraceful character."

Adam Black made affidavit of similar nature on August 28, 1838,[1] in this manner maliciously falsifying and breaking his promise made to the brethren.

Effect of These Falsehoods

These emissaries of evil knew the effect of their falsehoods would be to stir the Missourians, who needed very little provocation, to acts of violence against the "Mormons." They also hoped, with apparent reason, to win the sympathy of the officers of the state, especially Governor Lilburn W. Boggs. In fact it is not so clear that the governor was not secretly aiding them. He had been elected to the highest office in the state since the disgraceful expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, in which he took a very prominent part.

Mob Gatherings

These evil reports soon spread through other counties, and the people were informed by many rumors that the "Mormons" were preparing to commit acts of violence against the older citizens, in other parts of the state. Every conceivable plan was adopted to provoke the members of the Church to acts of violence. Their enemies captured prisoners and punished them: then circulated the report in the "Mormon" settlements that these prisoners had been tortured to death. Thus they hoped to stir the Saints up to anger, trusting they would seek revenge that occasion might be found against them as the aggressors; but the Lord revealed the evil intent of their adversaries.

Arrest of Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight

Based on these falsehoods of Peniston, Black, et al., charges were preferred against Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight. At first they objected to being tried in Daviess County, where the writ was issued, because of the enmity of the citizens there. After consulting with their attorneys, Atchison and Doniphan, they volunteered to be tried in Daviess County, before Judge Austin A. King. When the trial was held, Adam Black was the only witness who appeared against them, and William P. Peniston was the prosecutor. Several witnesses, both non-members and members of the Church, testified in their defense. However, the judge, who manifested a bitter spirit, bound them over in the sum of five hundred dollars. At the close of the trial he admitted to some of the witnesses that there was no evidence to warrant his action, but the people demanded it.

Proclamation of Governor Boggs

These rumors and false affidavits reached the governor, as their authors intended they should. On the pretext that the "Mormons" had entered into an alliance with the Indians and were in rebellion, Governor Boggs issued an order, through Adjutant General B. M. Lisle, to General Atchison and six other commanders of the militia, that as a "precautionary measure," an effective force of the militia be held in readiness to meet either contingency (i.e., the rising of the Indians or the "Mormons"). This force was to consist of four hundred men from each of seven divisions, mounted, armed, and equipped as infantry or riflemen, and formed into companies according to law, thus making a force of 2,800 men.

During all this excitement armed forces of the mob were collecting at various points and making threats against the Saints. Under the direction of the civil authorities, some of the brethren who were members of the state militia, intercepted a wagon load of arms and ammunition on the way to a camp of mobbers. These brethren from Far West took the guns and supplies, arrested three men who appeared to be in charge, and carried them to Far West. Here the men were examined before Albert Petty, justice of the peace, and held in bail to appear at the next term of the circuit court. Judge King was informed of the action taken and he replied that the prisoners should be turned loose and treated kindly. What disposition to make of the guns he did not seem to know, but said they belonged to the militia. Because of this statement, the brethren kept the guns and distributed them; but later, on the order of General Doniphan, they were gathered and delivered up to him.

Austin's Mob Force at Diahman

False accusations continued to spread and great excitement was manifest on every hand. The militia, according to the order of Governor Boggs, was mustered into service. In their ranks were many of the most bitter enemies of the Saints. Near Diahman a large mob force had gathered under the command of Dr. Austin, armed and in a threatening mood. General Doniphan, with an equal force of militia ordered them to disperse. They claimed that they had gathered in self defense, yet they were besieging the small settlement of "Mormons" at Diahman. Lyman Wight, who was a colonel in the state militia, had gathered such force as he could to protect the Saints. At the request of Doniphan he showed a willingness to disperse, but demanded that the force under Austin do the same. This, however, the force under Austin refused to do. General Doniphan took up a position between the mob and the people at Diahman, hoping that in a few days they would all disband.

Siege of De Witt

When Austin saw that his purpose to destroy Diahman was foiled he moved his force to De Witt, in Carroll County, with the determination of expelling the "Mormons" from that place. The citizens here attempted to defend themselves the best they could, and Austin thereupon laid siege to the town, firing upon the inhabitants from time to time, and threatening their extermination or removal from the state. In the meantime both Atchison and Doniphan, as well as a committee of citizens from Chariton County, who had come to investigate the situation, reported to the governor that the "Mormons" were very much alarmed and entirely on the defensive in this unequal conflict. General Atchison writing to the governor said: "Things are not so bad in that county as represented by rumor, and in fact, from affidavits I have no doubt your Excellency has been deceived by the exaggerated statements of designing or half crazy men. I have found there is no cause of alarm on account of the 'Mormons;' they are not to be feared; they are very much alarmed." When the governor received these reports he seemed very much elated, and replied: "The quarrel is between the 'Mormons' and the mob, and they can fight it out." Nevertheless, when he discovered that the "Mormons" were determined to fight it out and maintain their legal and constitutional rights against such overwhelming odds, he was much incensed, which later events will show.

Defense of De Witt

The forces of the Saints at De Witt, under Lieutenant Colonel George M. Hinkle, who held a commission in the state militia, prepared to defend themselves against their foes, who had come upon them without warrant or provocation. The mob forces under Dr. Austin first threatened De Witt, September 21, 1838, in defiance of all law, and ordered the inhabitants to leave the country by October first. If they were not gone by that time they were to be exterminated, "without regard to age or sex." The following day the citizens of the town petitioned Governor Boggs for relief against the mob. The governor turned a deaf ear to all appeals from the Saints, and seemingly failed to heed the expressions of any but their enemies. The siege of De Witt continued until the 11th of October, in the presence of state troops, under General Parks and Captain Bogart, a Methodist preacher, who looked on, but made no effort to interfere.

The Prophet Visits De Witt

When Joseph Smith learned of the distress of his brethren in De Witt, he paid a visit to that place. Although the town was under siege by the mob, he risked his life and slipped past the guards. He found the poor Saints in dire distress; their provisions were gone, and they had no prospect of obtaining more; their cattle had been driven off and consumed by their enemies. Again an appeal was made to the governor, through the services of a number of gentlemen, not members of the Church, but who understood the situation. This appeal was unheeded. On the 11th of October the Saints accepted the proposition of the mob, to vacate De Witt, with the understanding that they were to be recompensed for the loss of their property. That afternoon they started for Far West, destitute, hungry and cold. They were emaciated by their long siege; many had died from this abuse; several more died on the march to Far West, a distance of fifty miles. That they failed to receive compensation as they were promised, need hardly be mentioned.

Other Attacks by the Mob

Very much elated over their success at De Witt, the mobbers sought other fields of conquest. The Rev. Sachiel Woods, a Presbyterian, called the mob together and informed them that the land sales were coming on, and if they could get the "Mormons" driven out, they could get all the lands entitled to preemptions, and to hasten to Daviess County in order to accomplish their object. Moreover, that the lands purchased by the "Mormons" would again come into their hands, and they could have both the lands and the money the "Mormons" had paid for them. Cornelius Gilliam was also busy in Platte and Clinton Counties raising a mob to aid Woods in this wicked scheme. These mobbers commenced to burn the houses of the Saints and drive them from their doors, in the midst of a snow storm on the 17th and 18th of October, 1838. Among those who were thus deprived of shelter, was Agnes M. Smith, wife of Don Carlos Smith who was in the mission field. She was forced to wade Grand River carrying two small children, in the midst of inclement winter weather.

General Doniphan Orders a Defense

General Doniphan ordered out an officer with a force to march to the scene of trouble at Adam-ondi-Ahman, but these troops were in sympathy with the mob, and so were sent back by Doniphan, who said they were "damned rotten hearted." He then commanded Lieutenant Colonel George M. Hinkle, to organize a force at Far West, and march them to Diahman, while he would raise a force in Clay and other counties for the same purpose. At the same time General Parks commanded Col. Lyman Wight, who held a commission in the 59th regiment, under Parks, to collect his force at Diahman, which was done. When the mobbers learned of the action of these troops, they broke their camp and fled. What they could not accomplish by force, they now hoped to gain by stratagem; therefore they moved the goods from several of their log huts at Millport and Gallatin and set them on fire. Then they spread the report in the country round about that the "Mormons" had "riz" and were burning all before them.[2] This action had the desired effect, and mob forces commenced to gather in various parts of upper Missouri, and prepared for war. This evil action was augmented by the cunning falsehoods of Samuel Bogart, Col. William P. Peniston, Dr. Samuel Venable, and many others, who circulated affidavits of an inflammatory nature, accusing the "Mormons" of all the wicked deeds committed by the mob. Because of this the Saints in the various settlements were forced to flee to Far West, seeking protection.

Battle of Crooked River

Captain Bogart, although a member of the state militia, continued his depredations against the Saints. On the night of the 24th of October, 1838, this reverend captain with his force went to the home of Nathan Pinkham and took him and two other brethren prisoners, together with some horses and arms. The word reached Far West, and Judge Elias Higbee, the first judge of the County of Caldwell, ordered Lieutenant Colonel Hinkle, the highest officer in the militia at Far West, to send out a company to disperse the mobbers and release the prisoners. The trumpet sounded in the public square about midnight and the brethren assembled. Captain David W. Patten, was given command of a company and ordered to go on horseback to the scene of the difficulty. The history of what occurred is given as follows:

    "Fifteen of the company were detached from the main body while
    sixty continued their march till they arrived near the ford of
    Crooked River, where they dismounted, tied their horses and leaving
    four or five men to guard them, proceeded towards the ford, not
    knowing the location of the encampment. It was just at the dawning
    of light in the east, when they were marching quietly along the
    road, and near the top of the hill which descends to the river,
    that the report of a gun was heard, and young Patrick O'Banion
    reeled out of the ranks and fell mortally wounded. Thus the work of
    death commenced, when Captain Patten ordered a charge and rushed
    down the hill on a fast trot, and when within about fifty yards of
    the camp formed a line. The mob formed a line under the bank of
    the river, below their tents. It was yet so dark that little could
    be seen by looking at the west, while the mob looking towards the
    dawning light, could see Patten and his men, when they fired a
    broadside, and three or four of the brethren fell. Captain Patten
    ordered the fire returned, which was instantly obeyed, to great
    disadvantage in the darkness which yet continued. The fire was
    repeated by the mob, and returned by Captain Patten's company, who
    gave the watchword, 'God and Liberty.' Captain Patten then ordered
    a charge, which was instantly obeyed. The parties immediately came
    in contact, with their swords, and the mob were soon put to flight,
    crossing the river at the ford, and such places as they could
    get a chance. In the pursuit, one of the mob fled from behind a
    tree, wheeled and shot Captain Patten who instantly fell, mortally
    wounded, having received a large ball in his bowels.

    "The ground was soon cleared, and the brethren gathered up a wagon
    or two, and making beds therein of tents, etc., took their wounded
    and retreated towards Far West. Three brethren were wounded in the
    bowels, one in the neck, one in the shoulder, one through the hips,
    one through both thighs, one in the arm, all by musket shot. One
    had his arm broken by a sword. Brother Gideon Carter was shot in
    the head, and left dead on the ground so defaced that the brethren
    did not know him. Bogart reported that he had lost one man. The
    three prisoners were released and returned with the brethren to Far
    West. Captain Patten was carried some of the way in a litter, but
    it caused so much distress that he begged to be left by the way
    side. He was carried into Brother Winchester's, three miles from
    the city of Far West, where he died that night. Patrick O'Banion
    died soon after, and Brother Carter's body was also brought from
    Crooked River, when it was discovered who he was."[3]

The result of this conflict brought sorrow to the Church at Far West. Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight met the brethren on their return, at Log Creek, where they did all that could be done for Captain Patten before his death. "Brother Patten," said the Prophet, "was a very worthy man, beloved by all good men who knew him. He was one of the Twelve Apostles, and died as he had lived, a man of God, and strong in the faith of a glorious resurrection, in a world where mobs will have no power or place. One of his last expressions to his wife was--'what ever you do else, O do not deny the faith.' How different his fate to that of the apostate, Thomas B. Marsh, who this day vented all the lying spleen and malice of his heart towards the work of God, in a letter to Brother and Sister Abbot, to which was annexed an addendum by Orson Hyde." The funeral of Brothers Patten and O'Banion was held at Far West, Saturday, October 27, 1838. On that occasion the Prophet said of Elder Patten: "There lies a man that has done just as he said he would--he has laid down his life for his friends."

Apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh

Thomas B. Marsh, President of the council of the Twelve Apostles, suddenly left Far West in October, 1838, and went to Richmond in an ugly mood. He had been offended over a trivial matter and thereupon left the Church and made false accusations against his former brethren. Orson Hyde, in the same spirit, followed him on the 18th of October. On the 24th, Marsh went before Henry Jacobs, justice of the peace at Richmond, and made an affidavit the gist of which is as follows:

    "They have among them a company, considered true 'Mormons,' called
    the Danites, who have taken an oath to support the heads of the
    Church in all things that they say or do, whether right or wrong.
    Many, however, of this band are much dissatisfied with this oath,
    as being against moral and religious principles. On Saturday last,
    I am informed by the 'Mormons,' that they had a meeting at Far West
    at which they appointed a company of twelve, by the name of the
    'Destruction Company,' for the purpose of burning and destroying,
    and that if the people of Buncombe came to do mischief upon the
    people of Caldwell, and committed depredations upon the 'Mormons,'
    they were to burn Buncombe; and if the people of Clay and Ray made
    any movement against them, this destroying company were to burn
    Liberty and Richmond. . . . The Prophet inculcates the notion, and
    it is believed by every true 'Mormon,' that Smith's prophecies are
    superior to the laws of the land. I have heard the Prophet say
    that he would yet tread down his enemies, and walk over their dead
    bodies; and if he was not let alone, he would be a second Mohammed
    to this generation, and that he would make it one gore of blood
    from the Rocky Mountains to the Atlantic Ocean; that like Mohammed,
    whose motto in treating for peace was, 'the Alcoran or the Sword;'
    so should it be eventually with us, 'Joseph Smith or the Sword.'
    These last statements were made during the last summer. The number
    of armed men at Adam-ondi-Ahman was between three and four hundred.

    "Thomas B. Marsh."

    "Sworn to and subscribed before me, the day herein written.

    "Henry Jacobs, J. P., "Ray County, Missouri."

    * * * *

    "Richmond, Missouri, October 24, 1838."

    "Affidavit of Orson Hyde"

    "The most of the statements in the foregoing disclosure I know to
    be true; the remainder I believe to be true.

    "Orson Hyde."

    * * * *

    "Richmond, October 24, 1838."

    "Sworn to and subscribed before me, on the day above written.

    "Henry Jacobs, J. P."[4]

General Atchison's Report to Boggs

After the expulsion of the Saints from DeWitt, General Atchison reported the condition to Governor Boggs. He informed him that the mob was on the way to Daviess County to continue their ravages, "where it is thought," said the general in his communication, "the same lawless game is to be played over, and the 'Mormons' to be driven from that county, and probably from Caldwell County. Nothing, in my opinion, but the strongest measures within the power of the executive, will put down this spirit of mobocracy." Again, showing the spirit of disapproval of the course taken by the officials in the state, he wrote the governor and said: "I do not feel disposed to disgrace myself, or permit the troops under my command to disgrace the state and themselves by acting the part of a mob. If the 'Mormons' are to be driven from their homes, let it be done without any color of law, and in open defiance thereof; let it be done by volunteers acting upon their own responsibilities!" This was evidently intended as a rebuke, but it and other reports of like character were entirely ignored by Governor Boggs, who remained true to his colors as the advocate of mob rule.

Evil Reports

Governor Boggs preferred to believe--or more correctly, accepted contrary to his knowledge--the evil reports which flooded his office from the enemies of the Saints. In reporting to the governor the siege of DeWitt, General Samuel D. Lucas, referred to the Saints as "base and degraded beings," who would be exterminated if they dared to kill one of the mobbers besieging them; for such was the hatred of the people. Lucas was one of the most bitter of the enemies of the Church. Reverend Sashiel Woods and Joseph Dickson, October 24, 1838, reported to the governor that "Captain Bogart and all his company, amounting to between fifty and sixty men, were massacred by the 'Mormons' at Buncombe, twelve miles north of Richmond, except three." This false report was made about the time of the battle of Crooked River; and they added that it might be relied on as being true that the "Mormons" expected to lay Richmond in ashes that very morning. Their fiendish appeal ended with these words: "We know not the hour or minute we will be laid in ashes--our country is ruined--for God's sake give us assistance as quick as possible!" This was sent from Carrolton. Similar reports were sent by Amos Rees, formerly attorney for the Church in the Jackson trouble, and Wiley C. Williams, mobocrat, in a communication to Judge Ryland. Judge Ryland answered and said:

    "Since Mr. Morehead left Richmond, one of the company (Bogart's)
    has come in and reported that there were ten of his comrades
    killed, and the remainder were taken prisoners, after many of them
    had been severely wounded; he stated further that Richmond would
    be sacked and burned by the "Mormon" banditti tonight. Nothing can
    exceed the consternation which this news gave rise to. The women
    and children are flying from Richmond in every direction. . . .
    My impression is, that you had better send one of your number to
    Howard, Cooper and Boone counties, in order that volunteers may be
    getting ready. . . . They must make haste and put a stop to the
    devastation which is menaced by these infuriated fanatics, and they
    must go prepared and with the full determination to exterminate or
    expel them from the state en masse. Nothing but this can give
    tranquility to the public mind, and re-establish the supremacy of
    the laws. There must be no further delaying with this question
    anywhere. The 'Mormons' must leave the state, or we will, one and
    all, and to this complexion it must come at last" (Documentary
    History of the Church, vol. 3:172).

The Saints had no thought of making any attack on Richmond or any other place. This Judge Ryland must have known; but he evidently had become drunken with the bitter spirit of the times. His very letter refutes the falsehoods contained therein.

Atchison's False Report

Even General David R. Atchison, who previously had shown a spirit of justice and fair play, was overcome by the lying spirits abroad in the land. He permitted himself, under date of October 28, 1838, after the battle of Crooked River, to join that evil genius, Samuel D. Lucas, in a false report to Governor Boggs, as follows:

    "Sir: From late outrages committed by the Mormons, civil war is
    inevitable. They have set the laws of the country at defiance, and
    are in open rebellion. We have about two thousand men under arms
    to keep them in check. The presence of the commander-in-chief is
    deemed absolutely necessary, and we most respectfully urge that
    your excellency be at the seat of war as soon as possible."

    "Your most obedient servants,"

    "David R. Atchison, M. G. 3rd Div." "Samuel D. Lucas, M. G. 4th
    Div."

The surprising thing is that General Atchison would permit his name to be attached to such a document as this, which both these officers knew perfectly well was not true. But good men are at times overcome. Apparently he could not stand the pressure of the consolidated effort against the Saints, who were seeking merely to defend themselves and their rights against the aggressions of mobocracy. Nevertheless it appeared to be a capital offense for a weak and practically defenseless people to resist such invasion. For doing so they were guilty of causing a state of civil war!

General Atchison's conscience must have troubled him for thus yielding to the mob spirit, for, later, because he manifested a spirit of fairness towards the Saints, he was "dismounted" by the governor, and relieved of his command.

Boggs' Order to Clark

October 25, 1838, the Governor issued orders to General John B. Clark to raise sufficient troops to reinstate the inhabitants of Daviess County on their possessions, for, said he: "they [the "Mormons"] have burnt to ashes the towns of Gallatin and Millport in said county; the former being the county seat of said county, and including the clerk's office and all the public records of the county, and that there is not now a civil officer within said county." Two thousand men were to be raised, in addition to those already under arms, to "restore" these people, who had not been molested, in these towns.

The Order of Extermination

This first order to General Clark was followed by another the following day, the report of the battle of Crooked River having reached the ear of the governor. When he discovered that the "Mormons" were attempting to "fight it out," he had a great change of heart and issued his disgraceful "exterminating order," the greatest blot on the escutcheon of the state of Missouri. Others among the mob, and even officers of lesser dignity, had hinted at such a thing; but it remained for Lilburn W. Boggs, governor of the state of Missouri, without provocation or due investigation, to issue by authority of the great office which he held, to the militia of that commonwealth, an order to exterminate or drive from Missouri twelve thousand defenseless citizens who had done no wrong. And the execution of this shameful and wicked order was to be carried out in the dead of winter, which would bring to pass exposure and death of delicate women and innocent children, against whom there could have been no charge.[5]

A Match to the Flame

The Governor's order soon became generally known and the mobbers looked upon it, as well they might, as an approval of their unlawful course. Great excitement prevailed, and mobs assembled on every side. Marauders sallied forth, burning houses, driving off cattle, destroying property, ravishing women and threatening with death any who dared resist their fiendish deeds.

Notes

1. For the Prophet's reply to these charges see Documentary History of the Church, vol. 3:70.

2. These houses really belonged to the Latter-day Saints who had purchased them but had not taken possession.

3. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 3:170-1.

4. Orson Hyde returned to the body of the Church in June, 1839, at Commerce (Nauvoo) Illinois, and on the 27th of that month was reinstated in the council of the twelve. He was repentant, and in tears of humility begged forgiveness from his brethren for the unfortunate part he had taken in this lying report with Thomas B. Marsh. He had been overcome by the spirit of darkness and had borne false witness against his brethren while under that influence. After his return to the Church, he faithfully performed his part to the end. It was Orson Hyde, who, in the life time of Joseph Smith, was intrusted with the important mission of dedicating the land of Palestine for the return of the Jews. The consciousness of his guilt in this unfortunate act in Missouri, preyed upon his mind all his life, and many were the days he shed bitter tears because that chapter in his history could not be blotted out.

Thomas B. Marsh, at a later day (1857), also returned to the Church. On the 4th of September, 1857, he arrived in Salt Lake City with the immigrants of William Walker's company. He had crossed the plains from Harrison County, Mo. Two days after his arrival he addressed a congregation in the tabernacle and in his remarks said: "I can say, in reference to the quorum of the twelve, to which I belonged, that I did not consider myself a whit behind any of them, and I suppose that others had the same opinion; but let no one feel too secure; for before you think of it, your steps will slide. You will not then think nor feel for a moment as you did before you lost the Spirit of Christ; for when men apostatize, they are left to grovel in the dark. . . . But let me tell you, my brethren and friends, if you do not want to suffer in body and mind, as I have done; if there are any of you that have the seeds of apostasy in you, do not let them make their appearance, but nip that spirit in the bud; for it is misery and affliction in this world, and destruction in the world to come" (Deseret News, Sept. 16, 1857). He was a broken man in health and spirit and showed that the hand of affliction had been over him. "If you want to see the fruits of apostasy," he would say, "look at me!" He was later ordained a high priest.

The shadow of color for the report made by Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde, was in the fact that a Dr. Sampson Avard, who had shortly before joined the Church, did organize a band which he called "Danites." These Danites did subscribe to some oath of vengeance on their enemies. However, as soon as Joseph Smith discovered what was going on, he put a stop to it and Avard was excommunicated.

5. The exterminating order of Governor Boggs to General Clark is as follows:

    "Sir: Since the order of the morning to you, directing you to cause
    four hundred mounted men to be raised within your division, I have
    received by Amos Rees, Esq., and Wiley C. Williams, Esq., one of my
    aids, information of the most appalling character, which changes
    the whole face of things, and places the Mormons in the attitude
    of open and avowed defiance of the laws, and of having made open
    war upon the people of this state. Your orders are, therefore,
    to hasten your operations and endeavor to reach Richmond, in Ray
    County, with all possible speed. The Mormons must be treated as
    enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if
    necessary for the public good. Their outrages are beyond all
    description. If you can increase your force, you are authorized to
    do so, to any extent you may think necessary. I have just issued
    orders to Major-General Wallock, of Marion County, to raise five
    hundred men, and to march them to the northern part of Daviess and
    there to unite with General Doniphan, of Clay, who has been ordered
    with five hundred men to proceed to the same point for the purpose
    of intercepting the retreat of the Mormons to the north. They have
    been directed to communicate with you by express; and you can also
    communicate with them if you find it necessary. Instead, therefore,
    of proceeding as at first directed, to reinstate the citizens of
    Daviess in their homes, you will proceed immediately to Richmond,
    and there operate against the Mormons. Brigadier-General Parks, of
    Ray, has been ordered to have four hundred men of his brigade in
    readiness to join you at Richmond. The whole force will be placed
    under your command.

    "L. W. Boggs," "Governor and Commander-in-Chief."

    "To General Clark."
