Foreign Missionary Labors

1839-1841

The Foreign Mission of the Twelve

On the 26th day of April, 1839, a majority of the apostles took their leave of the Saints at Far West--then a hostile land--to go forth and declare the everlasting Gospel "over the great waters" as they had been commanded. The families of these brave men had been recently and ruthlessly banished from their homes, and were on their journey seeking shelter and a friendly habitation. It required the greatest courage and the highest quality of faith for men to go forth across the ocean to a foreign country to preach the Gospel without purse or scrip, leaving their families in poverty, homeless, destitute, and ill. Yet this was the test to which these brethren were put at this time. They did not fail, but manfully and nobly took up their cross and started on their missions. Other brethren, of the seventies, just as faithful, accompanied them on their journey to the foreign field.

No sooner was the main body of the Saints located in Iowa and Illinois, out of the reach of mobs, than most of the members of the council of the twelve started on their way to the British Isles. On the 2nd day of July, 1839, the presidency met with the apostles, and some others who were to accompany them, and gave them instructions pertaining to their labors. On this occasion many important items on doctrine, the Priesthood, and the deportment of missionaries in the field, were discussed. In the course of his instructions President Joseph Smith taught them to beware of self-sufficiency, and to observe charity and wisdom and to exercise the principle of mercy; for if we forgive our brother, or even an enemy, before he repent or ask forgiveness, our heavenly Father will be equally merciful unto us. He further instructed them that they were not sent out to be taught, but to teach, and to be honest, open and frank, in all intercourse with mankind. He closed his instructions with the following words:

    "I will give you one of the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom.
    It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all
    eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault
    with the Church, saying they are out of the way, while he himself
    is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high
    road to apostasy and if he does not repent will apostatize, as God
    lives. The principle is as correct as the one that Jesus put forth
    in saying that he who seeketh a sign is an adulterous person; and
    that principle is eternal, undeviating, and firm as the pillars of
    heaven; for whenever you see a man seeking after a sign, you may
    set it down that he is an adulterous man."

Items on Priesthood

About this time he also instructed the brethren on various matters of Priesthood, from which the following excerpts are taken:

    "The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First
    Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation.
    He obtained it in the creation, before the world was formed. . . .
    He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the scriptures. Then to
    Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the
    Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father
    of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These
    men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven.

    "The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God
    from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or
    end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the
    Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's
    authority.

    "Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he
    means the oldest man, our father, Adam, Michael; he will call his
    children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for
    the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human
    family, and presides over the spirits of all men and all that have
    had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may
    take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of
    Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion.
    Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was
    delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains
    his standing as head of the human family. . . .

    "The keys were first given to him and by him to others. He will
    have to give an account of his stewardship, and they to him.

    "The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave
    the keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were
    transfigured before him. . . .

    "Christ is the Great High Priest, Adam next."[1]

Epistle of the Twelve

After receiving their charge from the First Presidency, before their departure for their fields of labor, the members of the council of the twelve, wrote an epistle to the elders of the Church, the churches scattered abroad, and all the Saints, giving them instruction: and encouragement in their afflictions. To the Saints they said:

    "We wish to stimulate all the brethren to faithfulness; you have
    been, tried, you are now being tried; and those trials, if you
    are not watchful, will corrode the minds, and produce unpleasant
    feelings; but recollect that now is the time of trial; soon the
    victory will be ours. Now may be a day of lamentation--then will be
    a day of rejoicing. Now may be a day of sorrow--but by and by we
    shall see the Lord; our sorrow will be turned into joy, and our joy
    no man taketh from us."

To the elders they said:

    "God has called you to an important office. He has laid upon you
    an onerous duty. He has called you to an holy calling, even to be
    the priests of the Most High God, messengers to the nations of the
    earth; and upon your diligence, your perseverance and faithfulness,
    the soundness of the doctrines which you preach, the moral precepts
    that you advance and practice, and upon the sound principles that
    you inculcate, while you hold that Priesthood, hang the destinies
    of the human family. You are the men that God has called to spread
    forth his kingdom. He has committed the care of souls to your
    charge, and when you received this Priesthood, you became the
    legates of heaven; and the Great God demands it of you, that you
    should be faithful; and inasmuch as you are not, you will not be
    chosen; but it will be said unto you, 'Stand by and let a more
    honorable man than thou art take thy place and receive thy crown.'"

The Missionaries Depart

At a meeting held in Commerce, Sunday, July 7, 1839, Elders Brigham Young, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff and Orson Hyde, made their farewell remarks before their departure on their foreign mission. The following day Elders Taylor and Woodruff took up their journey toward their field of labor. Sunday, July 28, Elder Parley P. Pratt, who had arrived in Commerce on the 10th from his long confinement in Missouri prisons, made his farewell talk; so also did his brother Orson, who had assisted Parley in his escape. August 29, Elders Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt and Hiram Clark left Commerce on their missionary journey, and they were followed September 18, by President Brigham Young and Elder Heber C. Kimball. Elders George A. Smith, Reuben Hedlock and Theodore Turley, left three days later. William Smith, of the council of the twelve, failed to go. Willard Richards, not yet ordained an apostle, was in England where he had remained since the opening of the mission. Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page were shortly afterwards set apart for a mission to Palestine to dedicate the land for the return of the Jews, and there was one vacancy in the council caused by the death of David W. Patten, which was not filled until April, 1841, when Lyman Wight was chosen.

Circumstances under which these brethren departed were extremely distressing, as may be well imagined. Elder Heber C. Kimball thus reports the departure of President Brigham Young and himself on their missionary journey:

    "September 14, President Brigham Young left his home at Montrose
    to start on the mission to England. He was so sick that he was
    unable to go to the Mississippi, a distance of thirty rods, without
    assistance. After he had crossed the river he rode behind Israel
    Barlow on his horse to my house, where he continued sick until
    the 18th. He left his wife sick with a babe only three weeks old,
    and all his other children were sick and unable to wait upon each
    other. Not one soul of them was able to go to the well for a pail
    of water, and they were without a second suit to their backs, for
    the mob in Missouri had taken nearly all he had. On the 17th Sister
    Mary Ann Young got a boy to carry her up in his wagon to my house,
    that she might nurse and comfort Brother Brigham to the hour of
    starting.

    "September 18, Charles Hubbard sent his boy with a wagon and a
    span of horses to my house; our trunks were put into the wagon by
    some brethren; I went to my bed and shook hands with my wife who
    was then shaking with a chill, having two children lying sick by
    her side; I embraced her and my children, and bade them farewell.
    My only well child was little Heber P., and it was with difficulty
    he could carry a couple of quarts of water at a time, to assist in
    quenching their thirst.

    "It was with difficulty we got into the wagon, and started down
    the hill about ten rods; it appeared to me as though my very
    inmost parts would melt within me at leaving my family in such a
    condition, as it were almost in the arms of death. I felt as though
    I could not endure it. I asked the teamster to stop, and said to
    Brother Brigham, 'This is pretty tough, isn't it; let's rise up and
    give them a cheer.' We arose, and swinging our hats three times
    over our heads, shouted: 'Hurrah, Hurrah for Israel.' Vilate,
    hearing the noise, arose from her bed and came to the door. She
    had a smile on her face. Vilate and Mary Ann Young cried out to
    us: 'Goodby, God bless you.' We returned the compliment, and then
    told the driver to go ahead. After this I felt a spirit of joy and
    gratitude, having had the satisfaction of seeing my wife standing
    upon her feet, instead of leaving her in bed, knowing well that I
    should not see them again for two or three years" ("Life of Heber
    C. Kimball," p. 275).

The conditions of some of the other brethren were little better. Elders George A. Smith and companions upset their wagons in the soft ground before they got out of sight of the village of Commerce, and Elders Smith and Turley were so weak they could not get up, and Brother Hedlock had to lift them into the wagon again. Soon after, as they were on their way, some gentlemen passing them asked who had been robbing the burying ground; so miserable did they appear.[2] After passing through many hardships, traveling without purse or scrip, the Lord coming to their assistance many times in a miraculous way, these brethren finally reached their destination. Elders John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and Theodore Turley arrived in Liverpool, January 11, 1840, and were followed by President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith and Reuben Hedlock, who arrived April 6, after a stormy passage of twenty-eight days. At the time of sailing, President Young and Elder Kimball were still in poor health, and Elder George A. Smith was suffering extremely with ague. It was impossible for the brethren journeying on this mission to go together in a body, and inadvisable. Due to sickness they were detained many days, yet they pursued their course as rapidly as circumstances would permit. As President Young and party left the New York harbor, the shore resounded by the voices of the assembled Saints who had come to bid them farewell on their journey. They unitedly sang: "The Gallant Ship is under Way," composed by Elder William W. Phelps.

Ordination of Willard Richards

The first council meeting of the apostles on foreign soil was held in Preston, England, April 14, 1840, at the house of Elder Willard Richards, who on this occasion was ordained to the apostleship by President Brigham Young, and under the hands of all the brethren of the council who were present. Other business was transacted and the brethren assigned to fields of labor. On this occasion Brigham Young was also unanimously sustained by the brethren of the twelve as the president of that council. There were present: President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith and Willard Richards.

The Millennial Star

A general conference of all the Saints in the British Isles was held in Preston the following day, April 15, 1840, at which there were present, or represented, the following: elders, 36; priests, 45; teachers, 36: deacons, 11; members, 1686, all contained in 34 branches which had been raised up since the opening of that mission by Elder Kimball and companions in 1837. At this conference it was decided to publish a hymn book, and a monthly periodical under the direction and superintendency of the twelve, for the benefit and information of the members of the Church. The next day, in a council meeting of the apostles, Parley P. Pratt was chosen to edit the monthly periodical which was to be called "The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star," which soon made its appearance and has been issued continuously ever since. The committee selected to prepare for printing a book of hymns was Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor.

British Copyright of the Book of Mormon

It was also decided, agreeable to the counsel of the First Presidency previously obtained, that copyright of the Book of Mormon and of the Doctrine and Covenants be secured in England; and that editions of these books be printed. The first number of the Millennial Star was issued in Manchester, in pamphlet form of twenty-four pages, Wednesday, May 27, 1840. Later the place of publication was transferred to Liverpool, which became the headquarters for most of the publications of the Church, until comparatively recent years.

The First Patriarch in England

Under the labors of the twelve and their missionary companions, branches of the Church had sprung up in various parts of England, and the population of the Church was now growing rapidly. At another council meeting of the twelve, held April 16, 1840, it was decided that a patriarch be ordained, and the honor fell to the lot of Elder Peter Melling, a most worthy man, who was ordained in Preston the following day. Early in 1841, John Albiston was also ordained to this sacred calling.

Individual Labors of the Twelve

Elders John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and-Theodore Turley, the first of the missionaries to arrive in England, met in a special council Friday, January 17, 1840, with Joseph Fielding and Willard Richards of the presidency of the British Mission, and decided on their fields of labor. It was agreed that Elders Taylor and Fielding should go to Liverpool; Elder Hiram Clark, to Manchester, with Elder William Clayton; and Brother Richards to labor where the Spirit should direct. In Liverpool Elders Taylor and Fielding raised up a branch of about thirty members before the arrival from America of the other brethren of the twelve. This number rapidly increased and at the beginning of the year 1841, numbered more than two hundred souls. In March, 1842, the headquarters of the mission were transferred to Liverpool.

In Herefordshire

In the Potteries of Staffordshire, Elders Woodruff and Turley found a fruitful field. Elder Woodruff labored in Burslem, Hanley, Stoke, Lane End and the Potteries from the 22nd of January, 1840, to the 2nd of March, preaching every night in the week, and two or three times on the Sabbath day, and the people flocked to hear his words and many were baptized. While preaching on the Sabbath, March 1, which was the anniversary of his birth, the Lord manifested to him that he was to leave that part of the country and go to the south. Acting on the impression from the Spirit, he left on the 3rd of March and continued his journey to the farming communities of Herefordshire and stopped at the home of Mr. John Benbow, at Castle Frome, Ledbury. Mr. Benbow was a wealthy farmer, cultivating some three hundred acres of land. Elder Woodruff presented himself to this gentleman as a missionary from America and an elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who had been sent to preach the Gospel to him and his household and all the inhabitants of the land. Mr. Benbow rejoiced in the statements of Elder Woodruff, and informed him that there were in that place six hundred persons and more, who had broken off from the Methodists and had taken the name of "United Brethren." They had forty-five preachers and a number of meeting houses that were duly licensed according to the law of the land. They were searching for light and truth. Losing no time, on the morning of the 5th, Brother Woodruff stated he would like to begin his labors by preaching to the people. There was a large hall in the mansion of Mr. Benbow, which was available for that purpose, and the people were invited to come and hear the new message, from the new world across the sea. The people of the neighborhood deserted their ministers and came to hear this strange preacher, who, in the course of a short time, baptized over six hundred persons in that place. At the meeting held on March 8, a constable, sent through complaint of the parish rector, came to arrest him for "preaching to the people." Elder Woodruff said he had a license to preach as well as the rector, and if the constable would take a chair and sit beside him until the close of the meeting he would be at his service. He then launched forth on a discourse treating the first principles of the Gospel, and at the close of the meeting opened the door for baptism, and several came forward to be baptized; among the number were four preachers and the constable, who said, "Mr. Woodruff, I would like to be baptized." The constable went to the rector and told him that if he wanted Mr. Woodruff arrested, he must go himself and serve the writ, for he had heard him preach the only true Gospel sermon he had ever heard. The rector then sent two clerks of the Church of England as spies, and they were both baptized. The ministers and rectors of the Church of England then sent a petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to request Parliament to pass a law prohibiting the "Mormons" from preaching in the British nation, stating that they had baptized fifteen hundred persons, many of whom were members of the Church of England. But the Archbishop, knowing well that the laws of England permitted religious freedom, replied that the petitioners, if they had the worth of souls at heart as much as they valued ground where hares, foxes and hounds ran, they would not lose so many of their flock.

The other brethren also met with remarkable success. The field was ripe, ready for the harvest, and thousands of the house of Israel were soon gathered into the fold. At a conference of the Church in the British Isles held in October, 1840, there was reported a Church membership of about 4,000 souls, and in the meantime a number had emigrated to the United States.

The First Emigration to the United States

In June, 1840, a company of forty Saints sailed in the ship Britannia from Liverpool for New York, being the first Saints to leave England for Zion.

The Mission to Palestine

At the general conference of the Church held in Nauvoo, Hancock County, April 6-8, 1840, Elder Orson Hyde, who had not departed for England with the other apostles, was appointed to take a mission to Palestine to dedicate there the land for the gathering of the Jews. Elder John E. Page, who had also tarried at home, was called to accompany him. While addressing the congregation on the 6th, Elder Hyde remarked that it had been prophesied, some years before, that he had a great work to perform among the Jews; and that he had recently been moved by the Spirit of the Lord to visit that people, and gather all the information he could find respecting their movements, hopes and aspirations, and communicate them to the Church. He expressed the desire to visit the Jews in New York, London and Amsterdam, on his way to the field of his appointment. It was moved and carried that he proceed at once on his mission and that Elder John E. Page be given proper credentials and accompany him. On the 15th of April, Elder Hyde left Nauvoo for Jerusalem. Working his way across the country to New York, he sailed, after some delays, for Liverpool, on his way to Palestine, Saturday, February 13, 1841. He traveled alone, as Elder John E. Page had failed to make the journey.

Other Missionary Appointments

Other missionary appointments to foreign fields were made in these early days. In July, 1840, William Barrett, a boy seventeen years of age, was ordained an elder by Elders George A. Smith and Alfred Cordon, in Hanley, Staffordshire, England, and set apart to take a mission to Australia, to be the first missionary to that country. In August, following, Elder William Donaldson, of the British army, having been assigned to the field in India, was also blessed and set apart to labor for the Church in that land. The following year, at the conference of the Church, Elder Harrison Sagers was called to go to Jamaica; Elder Joseph Ball, to South America; Elder Simeon Carter to Germany; and Elder Arza Adams to Canada, where the Gospel had previously been preached.

The Return of the Apostles

On the 20th day of April, 1841, President Brigham Young and Elders Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith and Willard Richards, with a company of Saints left Liverpool on the ship Rochester, for New York. Parley P. Pratt continued in England to edit the Millennial Star and preside over the mission. After a period of one month upon the water they arrived safely in New York, and continuing their journey arrived in Nauvoo, July 1, 1841. Some eighteen or twenty months before, these brethren had left Nauvoo, poverty-stricken, afflicted and sorrowful of heart. Now they returned rejoicing and with gladness of heart, bearing the fruit of their labors. They started on their way without money, and returned with none. Yet, during their labors abroad, they had published an edition of five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon; and an edition of three thousand copies of the Hymn Book; over fifty thousand tracts and pamphlets; had established a permanent magazine, the Millennial Star; organized an emigration agency for the gathering of the Saints to Zion, and had been instrumental in the hands of the Lord in bringing thousands of the children of the House of Israel to a knowledge of the everlasting Gospel. Truly it was a marvelous work, worthy of all commendation.

The Prophet's Comments

Commenting on the labors of these members of the council of the apostles, the Prophet said:

    "All the quorum of the Twelve Apostles who were expected here this
    season, with the exception of Elders Willard Richards and Wilford
    Woodruff, have arrived. We have listened to the accounts which
    they give of their success, and the prosperity of the work of the
    Lord in Great Britain with pleasure. They certainly have been the
    instruments in the hands of God of accomplishing much, and must
    have the satisfaction of knowing that they have done their duty.
    Perhaps no men ever undertook such an important mission under such
    peculiarly distressing and unpropitious circumstances. Most of
    them when they left this place, nearly two years ago, were worn
    down with sickness and disease, or were taken sick on the road.
    Several of their families were also afflicted and needed their aid
    and support. But, knowing that they had been called by the God of
    Heaven to preach the Gospel to other nations, they conferred not
    with flesh and blood, but obedient to the heavenly mandate, without
    purse or scrip, they commenced a journey of five thousand miles
    entirely dependent on the providence of that God who had called
    them to such a holy calling. While journeying to the seaboard they
    were brought into many trying circumstances; after a short recovery
    from severe sickness, they would be taken with a relapse, and
    have to stop among strangers, without money and without friends.
    Their lives were several times despaired of, and they have taken
    each other by the hand, expecting it would be the last time they
    should behold one another in the flesh. However, notwithstanding
    their afflictions and trials, the Lord always interposed in their
    behalf, and did not suffer them to sink in the arms of death. Some
    way or other was made for their escape--friends rose up when they
    most needed them and relieved their necessities; and thus they
    were enabled to pursue their journey and rejoice in the Holy One
    of Israel. They truly 'went forth weeping, bearing precious seed,'
    but have returned with rejoicing, bearing their sheaves with them"
    (Documentary History of the Church, vol. 4: 390).

Notes

1. Documentary History of the Church, vol. 3:385-8.

2. Another incident worthy to relate is the following statement by Elder Wilford Woodruff:

    "Inasmuch as the devil had been thwarted in a measure by the twelve
    going to Far West and returning without harm, it seemed as though
    the destroyer was determined to make some other attempt upon us
    to hinder us from performing our missions; for as soon as any one
    of the apostles began to prepare for starting he was smitten with
    chills and fever, or sickness of some kind. . . .

    "On the 25th of July, I was attacked with chills and fever, for the
    first time in my life; this I had every other day, and whenever
    attacked I was laid prostrate. My wife, Phoebe, was also taken
    down with the chills and fever, as were quite a number of the
    twelve. . . .

    "Although feeble, I walked to the banks of the Mississippi River;
    there President Young took me in a canoe and paddled me across
    the river. When we landed, I lay down on a side of sole leather,
    by the post office, to rest. Brother Joseph, the Prophet of God,
    came along and looked at me. 'Well, Brother Woodruff,' said he,
    'you have started upon your mission.' 'Yes,' said I, 'but I feel
    and look more like a subject for the dissecting room than a
    missionary.' Joseph replied: 'What did you say that for? Get up,
    and go along; all will be right with you. . . .

    "Soon a brother came along with a wagon, and took us (Elders Taylor
    and Woodruff) in. As we were driving through the place, we came to
    Parley P. Pratt, who was stripped to his shirt and pants, with his
    head and feet bare. He was hewing a log, preparatory to building
    a cabin. He said: 'Brother Woodruff, I have no money, but I have
    an empty purse, which I will give you.' He brought it to me, and
    I thanked him for it. We went a few rods further and met Brother
    Heber C. Kimball, in the same condition, also hewing a log to build
    a cabin. He said: 'As Parley has given you a purse, I have got a
    dollar I will give you to put in it.' He gave me both a dollar and
    a blessing" (Wilford Woodruff--His Life and Labors, p. 108).
