Joseph Smith's Candidacy for President--Nauvoo Conspiracy

1843-1844

Threats of the Mob

Following the unsuccessful attempt to carry President Joseph Smith into Missouri, the hatred of his enemies became intense. Lying accusations were published in anti-"Mormon" papers and circulated against the Saints. Threats were made, both in Missouri and Illinois, of mob attacks and the legion was kept in readiness to withstand any mob assault. The governor was apprised of these conditions from time to time, and petitioned for protection, but refused to give credence to the rumors, or take any measures to repel any proposed invasion. This attitude increased the boldness of the enemies of the Saints, who declared, in reference to the governor, should he attempt to protect the "Mormons" in their rights: "If he opens his head we will punch a hole through him! He dare not speak! We will serve him the same sauce we will the 'Mormons!'"

Growth of Nauvoo

Through the gathering of converts from Great Britain as well as from various parts of the United States, Nauvoo had become the foremost city of Illinois. It had risen from a swamp and wilderness in 1839, to a commonwealth of some twenty thousand souls. The people were frugal, industrious and law-abiding. Many factories had been established, and measures were on foot, at the suggestion of President Smith, to dam the Mississippi for water power purposes. He also suggested that Congress be petitioned to build a canal around the Des Moines rapids to admit of the passage of boats for commercial purposes.[1] He instructed the Saints to be producers and to manufacture from the raw materials, rather than to be consumers only, and under his direction and inspiration the city prospered.

Jealousy of Other Towns

All this augmented the jealousy and hatred of the neighboring towns, where thrift and unity were lacking. Another thing that increased the opposition, especially of the politicians, was the fact that the Saints usually voted as a unit. It was this tendency which caused Cyrus Walker to seek the favor of Joseph Smith in the summer of 1843. However, the voting of the "Mormons" in this manner was not due to instruction from the leading councils of the Church, but from necessity and for self-preservation. Both the Whig and the Democratic office-seekers sought the support of the Saints, and when it was not forthcoming, hatred filled their breasts, and vengeance was threatened. The constant arrival of immigrants, who were instructed to gather at Nauvoo, was also looked upon as an attempt to lay plans to control the state. So strong were the Latter-day Saints that they held the balance of power in the elections and naturally threw their support to those most friendly to them, which aroused the animosities of their opponents to a murderous degree.

In the August (1843) election Robert D. Foster and George W. Thatcher were elected to county offices. They went to Carthage to give bonds and take their oaths and were threatened by Harmon T. Wilson and some fifteen or twenty others, who were armed with knives and pistols. The bonds, however, were accepted, and the mob gave notice of a meeting of anti-"Mormons" to consider the question of the "Mormons" holding office. At their meeting they made all manner of accusations and threats, stating that they "pledge themselves in the most determined manner" to aid Missouri should another demand be made for Joseph Smith, which gave encouragement to the enemies of the Saints within that state.

Near the close of the year 1843, they openly resorted to mob violence. Daniel Avery and his son Philander, were kidnapped and delivered to the Missourians. On false accusations they were imprisoned and brutally treated for some time. The son finally made his escape and the father was later released on habeas corpus proceedings.

Joseph Smith and the Presidency of the United States

From the time of the organization of the Church the Saints had suffered most cruelly at the hands of enemies. Governors and lesser state dignitaries, had aided in the persecutions. No redress, even from the government of the United States, could be obtained. Mobs still menaced them, and their chances for protection by lawful means were not the best, for the governor of Illinois was intimidated by mob threats. It was agreed, therefore, to inquire of the various candidates for the presidency of the United States what their feelings would be, if elected, towards the Latter-day Saints, and their course of action in relation to the cruel oppression the Saints had suffered. Accordingly letters were sent to the leading candidates. Only two, Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun, deigned to make reply. Their answers were so unsatisfactory that the "Mormon" people decided they could vote for neither of them. Clay replied that if he ever entered that high office he must go into it free and unfettered, with no guarantees but such as were to be drawn from his whole life, character and conduct, although he had sympathized with the Saints in their sufferings under injustice. Calhoun was more frank, stating that the case of the Saints in Missouri, candor compelled him to say, "did not come within the jurisdiction of the Federal Government, which is one of limited and specific powers."

Under these conditions the citizens of Nauvoo felt that the only consistent step they could take was to place their own candidate in the field. Consequently, at a political convention held in Nauvoo, January 29, 1844, Joseph Smith was nominated as a candidate for the presidency of the United States, and on May 17, a state convention was held in Nauvoo where his nomination was sustained. There was no thought on the part of President Joseph Smith or the Saints that he would be elected, but it gave to them an opportunity to express their feelings, and to sustain a candidate who would advocate their rights against oppression. In the Times and Seasons (Feb. 15) an editorial was published entitled: "Who Shall be our Next President?" in which the reasons for selecting their own candidate were clearly and emphatically stated by the editor (John Taylor) in behalf of the Latter-day Saints.

James Arlington Bennett, of New York, was asked to become their candidate for the vice-presidency, but as he was born in Ireland, was not eligible. Sidney Rigdon, who had moved from Nauvoo to Pittsburgh--contrary to revelation and to the feelings of the Prophet--was selected for that place.

Views on the Powers and Policy of the Government

In February, 1844, Joseph Smith published to the world his "Views on the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States." After speaking of the greatness and glory of the United States under the early presidents he says that "'since the fathers have fallen asleep,' wicked and designing men have unrobed the government of its glory." He advocated the reduction of the number of congressmen by two-thirds; the pardoning of prisoners in state prisons; the making of laws to provide for useful employment of prisoners on roads, public works or elsewhere, where they may be taught more wisdom and more virtue, and only murderers should be confined or put to death. He would turn the prisons into seminaries of learning; and petition the inhabitants of the slave states to abolish slavery by 1850, or before, "and save the abolitionist from reproach and ruin, infamy and shame." This should be done by Congress paying every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the revenue from the sale of public lands, and deducted pay from members of Congress, that liberty may be granted to all men. He would abolish the practice of trying men by court martial for desertion, and if a man deserts send him his pay with instructions that his country will never trust him more and that he has forfeited his honor. Make honor the standard with all men; render good for evil, "and the whole nation, like a kingdom of kings and priests, will rise up in righteousness." He advocated more economy; less taxes; greater equality, and less distinction among the people. Also the establishment of a national bank, with branches in each state and territory, the net revenue therefrom to be applied to government interests. The president should have full power to send an army to suppress mobs, and there should be a repeal of the requirement for governors to petition the president for troops in cases of invasion or rebellion. A governor himself may be a mobber and power should be given the president to protect citizens in such an event. Oregon, by right, and with the consent of the Indian, should belong to the United States, and he would invite Texas, Canada, Mexico, to join the sons of liberty, and let the Union spread.

Such, in brief, is the platform of Joseph Smith, and when it was circulated throughout the United States, it created much commotion and favorable comment for its direct and fearless advocacy of principles which other candidates, for policy's sake, dared not express.

The Contemplated Expedition to the West

The rising tide of persecution portended a repetition of the cruel Missouri scenes. President Joseph Smith knew full well, even in the face of continued urging of the Saints to build Nauvoo and make her towers glorious, that the time would come when they would have to seek a new home in the wilderness. The prophecy of August 6, 1842, had stamped this fact upon the minds of others, and the Prophet had referred to it from time to time. He records in his history under date of February 20, 1844, the following:

    "I instructed the Twelve Apostles to send out a delegation and
    investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt
    out a good location, where we can remove to after the temple is
    completed, and where we can build a city in a day, and have a
    government of our own, get up into the mountains, where the devil
    cannot dig us out, and live in a healthful climate, where we can
    live as old as we have a mind to."

The next day another meeting was held in the mayor's office, in Nauvoo, most of the twelve were present, and Jonathan Dunham, Phineas H. Young, David D. Yearsley, and David Fullmer, volunteered to go. Alphonzo Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt and Daniel Spencer were requested to go, and another meeting was called to meet on February 23, to further discuss matters pertaining to this expedition. On that date President Smith and the twelve met again. Patriarch Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon were also present. The Prophet instructed them saying he wanted an exploration of all the mountain country. Perhaps it would be best for them to go by way of Santa Fe. "Send twenty-five men," he said, "let them preach the Gospel wherever they go. Let that man go that can raise $500, a good horse and mule, a double-barrel gun, one barrel rifle and the other smooth bore, a saddle and bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie-knife, and a good sabre. Appoint a leader and let them beat up for volunteers. I want every man that goes to be a king and a priest. When he gets on the mountains he may want to talk with his God; when with the savage nations, have power to govern. If we don't get volunteers, wait till after the election." On this occasion, Samuel Bent, Joseph A. Kelting, Samuel Rolf, Daniel Avery and Samuel W. Richards were added to the expedition and others joined from time to time. Sunday, February 25, the Prophet predicted that within five years the Saints would be out of the power of their old enemies, whether they were apostate or of the world, and commanded the brethren to write it down "that when it comes to pass they need not say they had forgotten the saying."

Memorial to Congress

March 26, 1844, a memorial was prepared by President Joseph Smith asking Congress to pass an ordinance for the protection of citizens of the United States emigrating to the territories and that indefinite country known as California and Oregon. He asked for authorization to raise a company of one hundred thousand volunteers, at such times and places as he might find necessary for this purpose. At this time Oregon was a disputed territory, unsettled, and held by the United States and Great Britain jointly by treaty. Texas was asking for admission into the United States, but had been denied. Orson Pratt and John E. Page and later Orson Hyde, were sent to Washington to urge the consideration of the scheme. Most of the Illinois delegation favored it. For political reasons no official action was ever taken, but the general sentiment of the politicians, who were afraid to act openly, was in favor of the proposition.

Traitors From Within

It was not so much from Missouri and among the mobocrats of Illinois, that the Prophet had cause to fear, but from traitors within the councils of the Church. In the highest quorums, men were found who secretly plotted against his life. He remarked in a discourse in October of 1843: "This generation is as corrupt as the generation of the Jews that crucified Christ; and if he were here today, and should preach the same doctrine he did to them they would put him to death. I defy all the world to destroy the work of God; and I prophesy they never will have power to kill me till my work is accomplished, and I am ready to die." In January, 1844, it became necessary to increase the police force for the protection of the city. Joseph Smith, as mayor, addressed these newly appointed officers of the peace, and instructed them in their duties. In the course of his remarks he said:

    "I am exposed to far greater danger from traitors among ourselves
    than from enemies without, although my life has been sought for
    many years by the civil and military authorities, priests, and
    people of Missouri; and if I can escape from the ungrateful
    treachery of assassins, I can live as Caesar might have lived, were
    it not for a right-hand Brutus. I have had pretended friends betray
    me. All the enemies upon the face of the earth may roar and exert
    all their power to bring about my death, but they can accomplish
    nothing, unless some who are among us and enjoy our society, have
    been with us in our councils, participated in our confidence, taken
    us by the hand, called us brother, saluted us with a kiss, join
    with our enemies, turn our virtues into faults, and, by falsehood
    and deceit, stir up their wrath and indignation against us, and
    bring their united vengeance upon our heads. All the hue-and-cry of
    the chief priests and elders against the Savior, could not bring
    down the wrath of the Jewish nation upon his head, and thereby
    cause the crucifixion of the Son of God, until Judas said unto
    them, 'Whomsoever I shall kiss, he is the man; hold him fast.'
    Judas was one of the Twelve Apostles, even their treasurer, and
    dipt with their Master in the dish, and through his treachery, the
    crucifixion was brought about; and we have a Judas in our midst."

"The Wicked Flee"

These remarks gave offense to William and Wilson Law, William Marks, Leonard Soby, Dr. Foster and others. William Law was the Prophet's second counselor, and his brother had been honored with the position of major general of the Nauvoo Legion, and was also prominent in the Church. William Marks was president of the Nauvoo Stake of Zion. Commenting on their fears, President Joseph Smith stated: "What can be the matter with these men? Is it that the wicked flee when no man pursueth . . . or that Presidents Law and Marks are absolutely traitors to the Church, that my remarks should produce such excitement in their minds? Can it be possible that the traitor whom Porter Rockwell reports to me as being in correspondence with my Missouri enemies is one of my quorum?[2] The people in the town are astonished, almost every man saying to his neighbor, "Is it possible that Brother Law or Marks is a traitor, and would deliver Brother Joseph into the hands of his enemies in Missouri? If not what can be the meaning of all this? The righteous are bold as a lion."

Councils of Apostates

It soon developed that some of these men were secretly plotting the death of the Prophet and the destruction of the Church, claiming that he had fallen from his high and holy calling. Among them were those who had been tinctured by the wickedness of John C. Bennett, from which they did not recover. Others had been guilty of immoral conduct within more recent months and had been exposed. Their vengeance was directed against President Joseph Smith towards whom they now entertained a murderous spirit.

Experience of Scott and Harris

In the spring of 1844, a number of secret meetings were held by these conspirators, to which all whom they could trust among the disaffected spirits, were invited. Two young men, Denison L. Harris and Robert Scott, the latter living with the family of William Law, were invited to attend. Young Harris was also asked to invite his father, Emer Harris. The boys pondered over the invitation and then consulted with Emer Harris, who concluded to lay the matter before President Joseph Smith. After hearing the story the Prophet advised the father to stay away, but said he would like to have the boys attend, but they must first receive some advice from him. As they were instructed, they attended the first two meetings and each time made their report to the Prophet. These gatherings were given over to abuse and falsehood affecting President Smith, and the discussion of future plans. When the young men reported the second time, Joseph was in doubt whether they should go again and asked them to visit him for further instructions just before the third meeting, which, like the others, was to be held on the Sabbath day. When the time came he said to them: "This will be the last time that they will admit you into their councils. They will come to some determination, but be sure that you make no covenant, nor enter into any obligations whatever with them." Arriving at the place of meeting the young men were astonished to see it guarded by men with muskets, and after due scrutiny they were admitted. In the meeting the Prophet and his brother Hyrum and others were accused of the most wicked acts. Joseph was called a fallen prophet, and his death was said to be necessary to save the Church. An oath had been prepared which each member present was required to take. The candidate would step forward to the table, where Francis M. Higbee, a justice of the peace, was stationed, and he would ask: "Are you ready?" Receiving a favorable reply he administered the following oath:

"You solemnly swear, before God and all holy angels, and these your brethren by whom you are surrounded that you will give your life, your liberty, your influence, your all, for the destruction of Joseph Smith and his party, so help you God!"

The person being sworn would then say "I do," after which he would lay down the Bible on which the oath was taken, and sign his name to a written copy of the oath in a book, which would then be acknowledged by the justice of the peace.

The boys sat in amazement wondering how these men, formerly faithful in the councils of the Church, could fall so low. In this manner the oath was administered to about two hundred, among whom were three women, heavily veiled.

Their Lives Threatened

Presently the turn for the two youths came to take the pledge, and they both manfully refused, stating that Joseph Smith had done them no harm and they were too young to understand these things. This aroused the anger of the conspirators, and when coaxing and argument failed, they threatened them with death. "Come boys," they said, "do as we have done. You are young, and will not have anything to do in the affair, but we want you should keep it a secret, and act with us; that's all." "No," they replied, "we cannot take an oath like that against any man who has never done us any injury." They tried to pass out, but one of the band stopped them saying: "No, not by a--! You know all our plans and arrangements, and we don't propose that you should leave in that style. You've got to take the oath, or you'll never leave here alive." The boys were surrounded by these evil conspirators, who with drawn swords and knives, were determined to take their lives. The leaders, no less determined, concluded that the deed of blood could not be committed there, as the house was too near the street. So the young men were taken to the cellar and preparations were made for their murder. At this point, however, as if by an act of Providence, someone spoke up and said it was evidently known by the parents of these boys that they were there, and if they did not return a search would be put on foot that might prove to be very dangerous to the plotters. The result was that after some consultation they were released, with a strict injunction, and many threats, not to reveal to any one what they had heard, or they would be killed, and under a guard they were permitted to depart. They immediately took their course towards the river in the opposite direction from their homes, conveying the impression to their enemies by word and act, that they would keep their secret. On the river bank they met the Prophet and an elder brother of Robert Scott, and to them they told their story (Contributor, vol. 5:25).

On the 27th day of March, 1844, Abiathar B. Williams and M. G. Eaton, each made affidavit before Daniel H. Wells, justice of the peace, confirming the story of these young men, and implicating Chauncy L. Higbee, Robert D. Foster, Joseph H. Jackson and Wilson and William Law, as the leaders among the plotters. Shortly afterwards (April 18, 1844) the two Laws and Robert D. Foster, were excommunicated from the Church. Others prominent in this conspiracy were Austin Cowles, Francis M. Higbee, Charles Ivins and Charles A. Foster.

Apostates Attempt to Organize a Church

An attempt was made by these apostates to organize a church of their own, patterned after the Church of Christ, with William Law at the head. Their following was small and the attempt was a failure. They soon joined hands openly with the most bitter enemies of the Saints and aided them in all their anti-"Mormon" persecutions. They advocated the repeal of the Nauvoo Charter; insulted the officers of the city and maliciously violated the ordinances, endeavoring to bring the city into ill-repute. Their evil deeds they laid at the door of others, and with lying tongues made brutal accusations against the innocent, and openly threatened the life of the Prophet.

Plot to Kill Joseph Smith

May 25, 1844, William Law, Robert D. Foster and Joseph H. Jackson, had Joseph Smith indicted at Carthage on the charge of polygamy and perjury. Two days later Joseph left for Carthage, accompanied by a number of his friends, and voluntarily gave himself up for trial. He secured legal assistance and endeavored to have his case tried, but the opposition insisted on the case going over until the next term of court. On the way to Carthage, Charles A. Foster overtook the Prophet and his company, and had some conversation. When they reached their destination Foster called Joseph Smith aside and informed him of a conspiracy against his life. His brother Robert D., with tears in his eyes, also said there were persons there who had planned to kill the Prophet before he left that town. The spark of repentance kindled in their breasts, however, soon died out, and these two men again banded with the conspirators in Nauvoo, to bring to pass the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

The "Nauvoo Expositor"

To better advance their malicious course, the conspirators of Nauvoo procured a press and proposed the publishing of a paper to be called the Nauvoo Expositor. The object of the paper, as set forth in the prospectus was, to advocate "the unconditional repeal of the Nauvoo City Charter, to restrain and correct the abuses of the unit power, to ward off the iron rod which is held over the devoted heads of the citizens of Nauvoo . . . to advocate an unmitigated disobedience to political revelations, and to censure and decry gross moral imperfections wherever found, either in plebeian, patrician or self-constituted Monarch--to advocate the pure principles of morality." In plain words to attack the Church and destroy the protection of the Saints guaranteed by the Charter of Nauvoo.

The first and only number of the Expositor appeared June 7, 1844, filled with vile and malicious slanders against the Prophet and the leading citizens of Nauvoo. In attacking the charter, these wicked conspirators knew they were taking a course which would gain them the sympathy and aid of all the enemies of the Church, as nothing else could do. The charter, with its liberal provisions, had aroused the hatred of anti-"Mormons" because it prevented their sinister and diabolical designs. These same evil actors had lived under the charter from the beginning, and had been loud in its praise and defense, until Satan entered their hearts and their minds became darkened. They knew that the Latter-day Saints, without the charter would be a prey to their enemies, and at the mercy of their apostate persecutors, the small minority of the population, who could wreak vengeance upon their former brethren without restraint.

The circulation of the first number of this paper filled the hearts of the people with righteous indignation. Their liberty was attacked, their lives threatened, and the prospect, from the circulation of falsehoods within their city, and bitter hatred without, was another expulsion from their homes. Were they to submit peaceably to such attacks?

The Expositor Declared a Nuisance

At a meeting of the city council held June 10, after full consideration, the Expositor was declared a public nuisance and was ordered to be abated. The city marshal John P. Greene was instructed to proceed to the printing office and carry out the order of the council. Taking with him a few men he proceeded to inform the proprietors of his mission and demanded entrance into the building which was denied. With little effort he opened the door, pied the type, carried out the press and burned the printed papers that were found. He then reported to the mayor who immediately forwarded an account of the proceeding to the governor of Illinois.

In a rage the conspirators set fire to the building and hastened to Carthage, stating that their lives were in danger and they had been driven from their homes. The fire was discovered and extinguished before any damage had been done, but the falsehoods circulated aroused the people of Carthage and other towns. Indignation meetings were held and mobs began to gather under arms.

Notes

1. Such a canal was built, and completed in 1877, at a cost to the government of more than four million dollars.

2. It was later discovered that William Law was in league with the Missourians.
