The Succession of the Twelve Apostles--Preparation to Leave Nauvoo

1844-1846

A Crisis in the Church

The martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith came as a terrible shock to the members of the Church. The thought that the Prophet was to be taken from them had not entered their minds, notwithstanding the many predictions he had made regarding his approaching death. He was only in his thirty-ninth year. His constitution was strong and he was possessed of exceptional vitality. The Lord had saved him so many times from perils and threatened death, that the Saints fully expected the same power to shield him always.

His death brought about a crisis in the Church, for it was the first disorganization of the presiding quorum of the Priesthood. Very little thought had been given to the subject of succession in the Presidency, even by the leading brethren, for such a contingency seemed to them to be very remote. The revelations were clear on that point, but there had been no occasion for consideration of the subject. In the revelation on Priesthood, given to the apostles in 1835 (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 107), the Lord said that the council of the apostles was equal in authority with the First Presidency, and Joseph Smith stated that its place was second only to the presidency of the Church, and where there was no First Presidency, the apostles would preside. When the Saints were left without the guiding hand of the Prophet, they were in confusion, not fully understanding this order of the Priesthood. Sidney Rigdon, first counselor to President Joseph Smith, had lost the spirit of the work. Contrary to the direct command of the Lord in a revelation (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 124:108-9) he moved his residence to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he was of little assistance as a counselor in the presidency. For many months before his death, Joseph Smith had suspected Sidney Rigdon of being in league with his enemies. The Prophet openly accused Sidney of being guilty of such treacherous action, from which accusation he was not entirely cleared. He had manifested much sympathy for John C. Bennett, the arch-traitor, although he denied any direct communication with him. At the October conference, 1843, the Prophet refused to sustain Sidney Rigdon as a counselor, but through the merciful pleadings of Hyrum Smith and others, he was sustained. On that occasion the Prophet said: "I have thrown him off my shoulders, and you have put him on me; you may carry him, but I will not." Amasa M. Lyman had been chosen to act as a counselor in his stead. William Law, Joseph's second counselor, had been excommunicated for apostasy, and was one of those who brought to pass the martyrdom.

Sidney Rigdon's Attempt to be "Guardian to the Church"

Most of the apostles were in the Eastern States on missions at the time of the martyrdom. Only two were at Nauvoo, and one of them seriously wounded. As soon as Sidney Rigdon heard of the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, he hastened to Nauvoo, where he arrived Saturday, August 3, 1844. Elders Parley P. Pratt and George A. Smith had arrived a few days before. The apostles invited Sidney Rigdon to meet with them the following morning, at eight o'clock at the home of John Taylor, where they might discuss the affairs of the Church, which Sidney Rigdon promised to do. Instead of doing so he met with William Marks and a few others, and endeavored to lay plans for the appointment of a trustee-in-trust and a "guardian" for the Church, before others of the apostles could arrive. At ten o'clock a public meeting was held and Sidney Rigdon preached declaring that a "guardian" must be appointed, "to build up the Church unto Joseph," and stating that he, Sidney, was the identical man spoken of by the ancient prophets to do the work they had spoken of in prophecy. Another meeting was held in the afternoon, at which Elder William Marks, president of the Nauvoo Stake, announced that there would be a special meeting of the Church on Thursday, August 8th, "for the purpose of choosing a guardian." Sidney Rigdon had requested that the meeting be held on the 6th, but William Marks announced it for the 8th, which was providential, for President Brigham Young and most of the other apostles arrived in Nauvoo on the evening of the 6th. The next morning the apostles held a council meeting at the home of Elder Taylor. At four o'clock the apostles met with the high council of Nauvoo and the high priests. Sidney Rigdon was invited to express his views. He spoke at some length, relating a vision he claimed to have had, and stating that there could be no successor to Joseph Smith, but that the Church must be built up to him. He, Sidney, had been called to be a spokesman to Joseph Smith, and he proposed to be a guardian to the Church, if the people would receive him.

President Young's Remarks

President Brigham Young said he did not care who presided over the Church, but one thing he would have to know and that was what the Lord said about it. "Joseph conferred upon our heads," he said, "all the keys and powers belonging to the apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away, and no man or set of men can get between Joseph and the twelve in this world or in the world to come. How often has Joseph said to the twelve: 'I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests.'"

The Special Meeting of Thursday, the 8th of August

Thursday, August 8, 1844, the special meeting called by William Marks in behalf of Sidney Rigdon was held at 10 o'clock. Sidney Rigdon, from a position in a wagon in front of the stand in the grove, addressed the vast assembly for about one hour and a half. He presented himself to them as a "guardian" for the Church, that it might be built up unto Joseph Smith. The longer he talked, the more the people were convinced that he was without the inspiration of the Lord, and they left the meeting feeling that his was not the voice of the true shepherd.

Transfiguration of Brigham Young

At the close of the morning meeting, President Brigham Young, made a few remarks and announced that there would be another meeting at 2 o'clock. At the appointed time a great multitude of Saints assembled. The various quorums of the Priesthood were arranged in order before the stand, and after the opening exercises President Brigham Young addressed the congregation. He spoke with great power and the people were convinced that the authority and power of presidency was with the apostles. When he first arose to speak the people were greatly astonished, for President Young stood transfigured before them and they beheld the Prophet Joseph Smith and heard his voice as naturally as ever they did when he was living. It was a manifestation to the Saints that they might recognize the correct authority. Following his remarks in the afternoon, Amasa M. Lyman, William W. Phelps and Parley P. Pratt each spoke endorsing the remarks of President Young.

The Apostles are Sustained

After the other brethren had spoken President Young arose and was about to put the question to the assembly whether or not they wanted Sidney Rigdon for a leader and to be a "guardian" for the Church, but at the request of Elder Rigdon the question of supporting the apostles as the presiding quorum of the Church was presented first by President Young as follows:

    "I will ask you as quorums: Do you want Brother Rigdon to stand
    forward as your leader, your guide, your spokesman? President
    Rigdon wants me to bring up the other question first, and that is:
    Does the Church want, and is it their only desire to sustain the
    twelve as the First Presidency of this people?

    "Here are the apostles, the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine
    and Covenants--they are written on the tablet of my heart. If the
    Church want the twelve to stand as the head, the First Presidency
    of the Church, and at the head of this kingdom in all the world,
    stand next to Joseph, walk up into their calling, and hold the keys
    of this kingdom, every man, every woman, every quorum is now put in
    order, and you are now the sole controllers of it.

    "All that are in favor of this, in all the congregation of the
    Saints manifest it by holding up the right hand."

There was a universal vote, after which President Young called for the negative as follows:

    "If there are any of the contrary mind, every man and every woman
    who does not want the twelve to preside, lift up your hands in like
    manner."

There were no hands raised, and President Young then remarked that since the vote was unanimous it superseded the other question of presenting Sidney Rigdon as "guardian" and also trying the vote by quorums. In this manner the apostles, who were the rightful authorities according to the revelations of the Lord, were sustained by the vote of the people and by common consent, as the Lord had commanded that all things should be done. The matter of succession was properly and rightfully decided, and was now binding on the members of the Church. At the close of the services the Saints returned to their homes, their minds at rest, for they were, with very few exceptions, no longer in doubt regarding the authority of the Priesthood and the presidency of the Church.

Excommunication of Sidney Rigdon

Manifesting a bitter spirit and great disappointment, Sidney Rigdon returned to Pittsburgh. However, before he left Nauvoo he gave expression to his feelings declaring that the Church had not been led by the Spirit of the Lord for a long time, and he refused to sustain the apostles in their calling. A charge was made against him and his case was presented before the high council, with Bishop Newel K. Whitney presiding. After a lengthy hearing he was cut off the Church by the unanimous vote of the council. His case was then presented to the congregation of the Saints, and they sustained the action of the high council, only ten persons voting in the negative. After his return to Pittsburgh, he organized a church with officers after the order of the Church of Jesus Christ. He published a paper and prophesied that all who followed the apostles would go with them to destruction. He gathered around him a few of the disaffected spirits from Nauvoo, but his organization did not prosper and soon came to an end.

Action Against William Marks

At the October conference, 1844, the apostles were again sustained as the presiding quorum of the Church by a united vote of the members. When the name of William Marks, president of the Nauvoo Stake, was presented, objection was raised and he was rejected, only two persons voting to sustain him. He had favored the claim of Sidney Rigdon, although he supported the apostles, but his spirit was no longer in the work and he was found in rebellion. He later left the Church and followed James J. Strang[1] and others, and was excommunicated.

Trial of the Murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith

In October, 1844, a grand jury selected by the Hancock County circuit court, brought into court two bills of indictment against nine individuals for the murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The trial took place in May, 1845, but proved to be nothing but a farce. The sentiment throughout the country was so bitter against the Saints that no attempt was made to obtain justice, which the governor had faithfully promised them. The jurors were instructed by the court to bring in a verdict of "not guilty," which was accordingly done. Yet every man in the place, including the court and jury, knew that the defendants were among those who committed the murder. The blood of the martyrs was left unavenged to cry from the ground against their enemies, and with the blood of all the martyrs, shall continue to cry until the Son of Man shall come "red in his apparel" to take vengeance upon the ungodly.

Growth of the Work

After the question of the presiding quorum was decided, the Saints settled down to their usual duties, and the progress of the Church continued with greater strides than ever before. At the October conference in 1844, a great deal of important business was transacted. At that time and subsequently many brethren were ordained to the ministry, a number of quorums of seventy were organized, and missionaries were called to go to various parts of the United States and abroad with the message of salvation. The building of the temple was continued with renewed diligence, and prosperity was manifest in the settlements of the Saints. On the 6th of December 1844, the last of the thirty capitals on the temple was erected, and the following April, the capstone was laid amidst solemn and enthusiastic services. Each room was dedicated separately as it was finished, and ordinance work for the Saints, as well as baptisms for the dead, were performed.

Mob Activities Renewed

The enemies of the Latter-day Saints thought that the murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith would be the end of "Mormonism." They rejoiced in the accomplishment of their frightful deed of blood, and boasted of the downfall of the Church. To their great surprise the blood of the martyrs was the seed of the Church. The object they hoped to gain was not attained; therefore their anger was rekindled against the Church. Other leaders had arisen and the progress of the work was steady and onward. Those who had caused the death of the Prophet and the Patriarch now turned their attention to the destruction of the entire "Mormon" people. Through their papers, the Warsaw Signal, Alton Telegraph, Quincy Whig and others, they circulated all manner of false reports. They accused the Saints of theft and every other abominable crime in order to stir up the populace against them. Schemes were launched to provoke the "Mormons" to commit some overt act, that it might be seized upon as a pretext to gain the aid of the officials of the state under color of law; yet by the anti-"Mormons" the laws were constantly broken without restraint. Their malicious and murderous threats passed unnoticed so far as any check upon such actions was concerned.

Attitude of Governor Ford

During all the trouble Governor Thomas Ford went out of his way to inform the Saints that they were bitterly hated, and that the great majority of the citizens of the state rejoiced in the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Notwithstanding his bitterness, he made an investigation of the charges circulated against the Saints and reported that--

    "On my late visit to Hancock County I was informed by some of their
    (the 'Mormons') violent enemies, that their larcenies had become
    unusually numerous and insufferable. They indeed admitted that but
    little had been done in this way in their immediate vicinity. But
    they insisted that sixteen horses had been stolen by the Mormons in
    one night, near Lima, in the County of Adams. At the close of the
    expedition, I called at this same town of Lima, and upon inquiry,
    was told that no horses had been stolen in that neighborhood, but
    that sixteen horses had been stolen in one night in Hancock County.
    This last informant being told of the Hancock County story, again
    changed the venue to another distant settlement in the northern
    edge of Adams County."

In his message to the legislature he said in reference to this subject:

    "Justice, however, requires me to say, that I have investigated
    the charge of promiscuous stealing, and find it to be greatly
    exaggerated. I could not ascertain that there were a greater
    proportion of thieves in that community, than in any other of the
    same number of inhabitants; and perhaps if the city of Nauvoo were
    compared with St. Louis, or any other western city, the proportion
    would not be so great."

The leaven of opposition, however, was at work, and the citizens were aroused. Nothing but the departure of the "Mormon" people from the state would satisfy their unjust and iniquitous demands. They appealed to the governor to aid them in expelling the people who had done nothing to provoke opposition, but who were unpopular because of their faith. While the governor informed them he could take no legal action warranting such expulsion, yet he privately advised the Saints to depart peaceably towards the West, as the Prophet Joseph Smith had contemplated doing, and there, said he, they could set up an independent government of their own. So lacking was he in the disposition to enforce the law and protect the innocent, that the enemies of the Church were encouraged in their unlawful course.

Repeal of the Nauvoo Charter

The city charter of Nauvoo had proved a protection to the Saints, and guaranteed safety against the plottings of the wicked. It was the aim of the Nauvoo conspirators to cause its repeal. The first attempt to do this, as we have learned, failed. Now, however, the opposition had become so strong that the enemies of the Latter-day Saints accomplished their purpose. The charter was repealed by the legislature in January, 1845. Some of the murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith sat in that body and violently denounced the "Mormons," although it was well known that their hands were stained with innocent blood. After the repeal of the charter, and without hope of protection from the officers of the state, the Saints were at the mercy of their enemies. The prediction of the Prophet Joseph that after they had shed his blood they would seek the lives of every soul in whom was found the testimony of the Gospel, was literally fulfilled. The plots of the wicked were now turned against President Brigham Young and the leading brethren, who were forced to go into hiding from time to time.

Attacks Upon the Saints

In September, 1845, the scattered families of Saints were sorely persecuted. Many were driven from their homes, which were burned. Sheriff J. B. Backenstos endeavored to perform his duty, and took a determined stand against mob law. For his pains he was arrested on the charge of murder, as a mobber had been killed, but violence against the "Mormons" was permitted to go unchecked. Governor Ford had promised and pledged his word, that the murderers of the Prophet and Patriarch should be brought to justice. When he appealed to the citizens of Warsaw to sustain him in this pledge, they positively informed him that they would do nothing of the kind. Similar answers were given by other citizens, who not only took a stand in opposition to the trial of the murderers, but brazenly appealed to the governor to give his aid in expelling the "Mormons" from the state. That weak and pusillanimous individual, by his subsequent actions, acknowledged his defeat and the abdication of government in Illinois.

The Quincy Mass Meeting

September 22, 1845, a mass meeting was held in Quincy to take action against the Saints. Their removal from Illinois was advocated. Those who assembled fully understood that the Prophet Joseph Smith had contemplated a removal to the West, and that plans were on foot early in 1844 to send an exploring expedition out to locate a site for a new home in the Rocky Mountains. A committee was appointed by this mass meeting to wait upon the authorities of the Church and ascertain their intentions regarding a removal from the state of Illinois, and to impress upon the brethren that such a move was determined upon by the citizens. Following the meeting the Quincy Whig made this statement in this boasted land of liberty:

    "It is a settled thing that the public sentiment of the State is
    against the 'Mormons,' and it will be in vain for them to contend
    against it; and to prevent bloodshed, and the sacrifice of many
    lives on both sides, it is their duty to obey the public will and
    leave the State as speedily as possible. That they will do this
    we have a confident hope and that too, before the next extreme is
    resorted to--that of force."

The Reply of the Saints

The committee appointed waited upon President Brigham Young and the apostles, and acquainted them with the action of the mass meeting and desired a reply. On the 24th, the reply was given in a written communication. The persecutions of the Saints were mentioned and the statement made that the "Mormons" had endeavored to live in peace and desired to do so with all men. In relation to their removal they answered as follows:

    "We would say to the committee above mentioned and to the
    Governor, and all the authorities, and people of Illinois, and the
    surrounding states and territories, that we propose to leave this
    country next spring, for some point so remote that there will not
    need to be any difficulty with the people and ourselves, provided
    certain propositions necessary for the accomplishment of our
    removal shall be observed, as follows, to wit:

    "That the citizens of this and surrounding counties, and all men,
    will use their influence and exertion to help us to sell or rent
    our properties, so as to get means enough that we can help the
    widow, the fatherless and the destitute to remove with us.

    "That all men will let us alone with their vexatious lawsuits so
    that we may have time, for we have broken no law; and help us to
    cash, dry goods, groceries, good oxen, beef-cattle, sheep, wagons,
    mules, horses, harness, etc. in exchange for our property, at a
    fair price, and deeds given at payment, that we may have means to
    accomplish a removal without the suffering of the destitute to an
    extent beyond the endurance of human nature.

    "That all exchanges of property shall be conducted by a committee,
    or by committees of both parties; so that all the business may be
    transacted honorably and speedily.

    "That we will use all lawful means, in connection with others,
    to preserve the public peace while we tarry; and shall expect,
    decidedly, that we be no more molested with house-burning, or any
    other depredations, to waste our property and time, and hinder our
    business.

    "That it is a mistaken idea, that we have proposed to remove in six
    months, for that would be so early in the spring that grass might
    not grow nor water run; both of which would be necessary for our
    removal. But we propose to use our influence to have no more seed
    time and harvest among our people in this country after gathering
    our present crops; and that all communications to us be made in
    writing.

    "By order of the Council,"

    "Brigham Young,""President."

    "W. Richards.""Clerk."

Decision of the Quincy Citizens

The Quincy citizens accepted the proposition of the Church authorities to move, but very graciously declined to make any promise to buy or to assist in the purchase of the abandoned property of the Saints. Why should they put themselves out to do such a thing, when the property would naturally fall into their hands when it was abandoned?[2]

The Carthage Convention

On the 1st and 2nd of October another convention of citizens from nine counties adjacent to Hancock, was held at Carthage. Resolutions were adopted in which the "Mormons" were accused of depredations upon the persons and property of the other citizens of Hancock County, and adjudged guilty, in spite of the personal investigation of the governor, himself unfriendly to the Latter-day Saints. Much bitterness of spirit was manifested at this meeting, which decided that it was too late to settle any difficulties between the "Mormons" and the other inhabitants, and only one thing would suffice and that was the removal of the "Mormons" from the state. They declared that the "Mormons" were not being persecuted, but were suffering for their dishonest acts; at the same time they declared that from "long acquaintance with the old citizens of Hancock County," they could vouch for their "honor, integrity, and strict observance of the laws of their country," notwithstanding it was universally known that these same citizens had taken part in the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith by mob force and contrary to law; moreover, that these same law-abiding citizens within the past few weeks had driven "Mormons" from their homes and burned their houses to the ground; had forced them from their fields where they had gone to gather crops; had whipped their men and stolen their cattle without any protest. It appeared that the old citizens, like the king, could do no wrong, if their depredations were committed against the Latter-day Saints. A most regrettable feature in connection with these troubles is the fact that O. H. Browning, Stephen A. Douglas and others, who had defended the Prophet Joseph Smith, now gave their influence to the mob and assisted in bringing to pass the expulsion of the "Mormon" people from Illinois. Bitter feelings against the Saints increased. Judges were intimidated, and even the officials of the state dared not raise a voice in protest above a whisper, or invoke the majesty of the law.

Duplicity of Governor Ford

The anti-"Mormons" of Illinois became impatient for the removal of their enemies before spring arrived. Their agreements were violated, and the Saints were not permitted to dwell in peace. Vexatious lawsuits, based on falsehoods, were planted against the apostles to embarrass them and hinder the progress of their work. Even Governor Ford, fearing that the Saints would not leave the state within the stipulated time, resorted to duplicity to force them from the borders of Illinois. December 29, 1845, he wrote to Sheriff Backenstos stating that indictments in the United States Court had been found against the leading "Mormons" which would bring them for the first time in collision with the United States. "If the 'Mormons' remain in the state," he wrote, "a strong force will be ordered to Nauvoo by the Secretary of War," and he thought the government at Washington would interfere and prevent the "Mormons" from going west of the Rocky Mountains, as many intelligent persons believed that they would there join the British, and "be more trouble than ever." He thought that this consideration was likely to influence the government. He later sent word by Sheriff Backenstos that he had turned against the Saints and Major Warren was making calculations to prevent their going away. In his History of Illinois, Governor Ford admitted that he had resorted to deceit to make the "Mormons" believe that they would be prevented from going west, in order to hasten their departure.

President Young's Reply

Commenting on the governor's letter to the sheriff, President Young remarked:

    "Should Governor Ford's speculations and suppositions in relation
    to U. S. troops prove correct, and the government send a regular
    force to arrest us, we will run no risks of being murdered by them
    as our leaders have been; and as to fearing a trial before the
    courts, it is all gammon, for our danger consists only in being
    held still by the authorities while mobs massacre us, as Governor
    Ford held Joseph and Hyrum Smith, while they were butchered."

Loyalty to the Government

Answering the charge that when they got away from the borders of the United States, the Latter-day Saints would join the forces of some other nation which might be at war with the American Government--a thought which rightfully might have been entertained after the treatment the "Mormon" people had received within the borders of that land--the high council and authorities of the Church replied:

    "We also further declare for the satisfaction of some who have
    concluded that our grievances have alienated us from our country,
    that our patriotism has not been overcome by fire, by sword, by
    daylight nor by midnight assassinations which we have endured;
    neither have they alienated us from the institutions of our country.

    "Should hostilities arise between the Government of the United
    States and any other power, in relation to the right of possessing
    the territory of Oregon, we are on hand to sustain the claim of
    the United States Government to that country. It is geographically
    ours, and of right; no foreign power should hold dominion there;
    and if our services are required to prevent it, these services
    will be cheerfully rendered according to our ability. We feel the
    injuries that we have sustained, and are not insensible of the
    wrongs we have suffered; still we are American."

Preparations to Leave Nauvoo

During the fall and winter months preparations went steadily on for the removal of the entire body of the Latter-day Saints in the spring. Work on the temple continued with increased diligence, as if there was no thought of a removal, until that structure was completed. January 1, 1846, the work of finishing the assembly room for dedication was nearing completion. The general conference of the Church was held in the building in October, 1845, according to the commandment of the Lord through Joseph Smith in October, 1841. In December, the ordinance work in the temple was commenced, and thereafter the building was occupied both day and night to afford the Saints the opportunity to receive their endowments. This continued until most all of the Saints had departed on their westward journey. May 1, 1846, after the majority of the people had departed from the city, the temple was publicly dedicated in the presence of about three hundred persons.

In the meantime every available building in Nauvoo had been converted into a shop where wagons, harness and other necessary articles could be manufactured for the journey. The timber for the wagons was cut and brought to Nauvoo, where it was prepared and boiled in salt and water or kiln dried. Teams were sent to various parts of the country to procure iron; and blacksmiths, wheelwrights, carpenters and other workmen were kept busy night and day. There was very little sale of property because of the opposition of the citizens of the country, who used their influence to discourage sales by making threats against the new settlers as well as harassing the Saints.

Notes

1. James J. Strang, a man of some ability and commanding presence, joined the Church shortly before the martyrdom. After the death of the Prophet and Patriarch he claimed to have been chosen and appointed by Joseph Smith as his successor. He exhibited a letter which purported to have been written by the Prophet, in which such appointment was claimed to be set forth. He gathered quite a following of the discontented element at Nauvoo and established himself on Beaver Island, in Lake Michigan, where later he was crowned "king." He was shot and killed by one of his followers, and his organization soon afterwards crumbled to pieces. Out of its fragments some years later there arose another organization known as the "Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," unto which there were gathered the majority of those who had become disaffected and had been excommunicated from the Church.

2. Dr. Conyers, in his Hancock County Mob, makes the following comment on the action of the Quincy citizens:

    "The first one [resolution] in our opinion, is unique. They
    accepted and recommended to the people of the surrounding counties
    to accept an unconditional proposition to remove. But understand,
    Mr. Mormon, though we accept it and recommend the surrounding
    counties to do so likewise, [reprobate you, unconditionally] we do
    not intend to bring ourselves under any obligation to purchase your
    property, or to furnish purchasers; but we will be very kind and
    obliging, and will in no way hinder or obstruct you in your efforts
    to sell, provided, nevertheless this shall not be so construed as
    to prevent us from running off the purchaser. But we expect this
    small favor of you, viz., that you must dispose of your property
    and leave at the appointed time."

Part Five

The Settlement in the Rocky Mountains
