The Mormon Battalion

1846-1847

Captain Allen's Circular

When Captain James Allen arrived in the Camps of the Saints, he issued a "Circular to the 'Mormons,'" which read as follows:

    "I have come among you, instructed by Colonel S. W. Kearny, of
    the U. S. Army, now commanding the Army of the West, to visit the
    'Mormon' Camp, and accept the services for twelve months of four or
    five companies of 'Mormon' men who may be willing to serve their
    country for that period in our present war with Mexico; this force
    to unite with the Army of the West at Santa Fe, and be marched
    thence to California, where they will be discharged.

    "They will receive pay and rations, and other allowances, such as
    other volunteers or regular soldiers receive, from the day they
    shall be mustered into the service, and will be entitled to all
    comforts and benefits of regular soldiers of the Army, and when
    discharged, as contemplated, at California, they will be given
    gratis their arms and accoutrements, with which they will be fully
    equipped at Fort Leavenworth. Thus is offered to the 'Mormon'
    people now--this year--an opportunity of sending a portion of their
    young and intelligent men to the ultimate destination of their
    whole people, and entirely at the expense of the United States, and
    this advance party can thus pave the way and look out the land for
    their brethren to come after them.

    "The pay of a private volunteer is seven dollars per month, and the
    allowance for clothing is the cost price of clothing of a regular
    soldier.

    "Those of the 'Mormons' who are desirous of serving their country
    on the conditions here enumerated, are requested to meet me without
    delay at their principal camp at the Council Bluffs, whither I am
    now going to consult with their principal men, and to receive and
    organize the force contemplated to be raised.

    "I will receive all healthy, able men of from eighteen to
    forty-five years of age.

    "J. Allen, Captain 1st Dragoons."

    "Camp of the 'Mormons,' at Mount Pisgah, one hundred and thirty
    miles east of Council Bluffs, June 26th, 1846."

Scarcity of Able-Bodied Men

When this call came a great part of the young men of the ages required were scattered over the plains. Many had gone to St. Louis and other points for employment to obtain means to help them carry their families to the west. All of the Saints were poor, and some in dire want. Those who were able to travel were under the necessity of helping along the weak, the aged and infirm, who could not be left behind. Among the teamsters were found mere children, who had been forced into such service because of the limited number of men.

The Equipment of the Battalion

At Fort Leavenworth the battalion was equipped.[1] They received one tent for every six privates and were provided with flint-lock muskets, a few cap-lock yauger rifles for sharp-shooting and hunting, and other camp accoutrements. July 5, they drew their check for clothing, forty-two dollars each, paid one year in advance. A goodly portion of this money was sent back for the support of their families and the gathering of the poor from Nauvoo. They also contributed to help Elders Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor on their way to Great Britain and Elder Jesse C. Little to return to his field in the Eastern States. The paymaster was much surprised to see every man of the battalion able to sign his name to the roll, whereas only about one out of every three of the Missouri volunteers, who previously had received their pay, could put his signature to the document.

Death of Colonel Allen

Captain James Allen, the recruiting officer for the battalion, was selected by General Stephen W. Kearny, to take command of the "Mormon" troops, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel of volunteers. At Fort Leavenworth Colonel Allen was taken ill, and on the 12th of August, ordered the battalion to take up its march while he remained for a few days to recuperate, but on the 23rd, he died. He was much lamented by the battalion members, for they had learned to love him for his kindness.

Lieutenant Smith in Command

After the death of Colonel Allen, the command devolved upon Captain Jefferson Hunt, of Company "A." The promise had been made to President Young, by Colonel Allen, that no officers would be chosen for the battalion, except himself, outside of their ranks. On what authority the promise was made, does not appear. However, shortly afterwards Lieutenant A. J. Smith, of the regular army, was given command, contrary to the wishes of the men. With Lieutenant Smith there came Dr. George B. Sanderson, whom Colonel Allen had appointed to serve with the battalion as surgeon. According to the journals of the men, they were caused to suffer considerably because of the "arrogance, inefficiency and petty oppressions" of these two officers. Sanderson was from Missouri, and perhaps was none too friendly towards the troops; however, the enforcement of discipline, to which they were not accustomed, may have magnified the ill-treatment in their eyes to some extent. The heat of the summer was excessive, their rations were reduced, and through the drinking of brackish water, many were taken with malaria. They had already become weakened from their long marches across the plains of Iowa, in inclement weather, without proper food and shelter, so that they were more susceptible to disease. Dr. Sanderson prescribed calomel and arsenic, refusing to permit the men to resort to their own simple remedies, and evincing skepticism in the laying on of hands and their exercise of faith.

The Line of March

Their line of march from Fort Leavenworth had taken them across the Kansas River and then westward to the Arkansas, which they followed upstream for about one hundred miles. From that point they journeyed southwest to the Cimarron River and passed near what is now the junction of the states of Kansas, Colorado and Oklahoma, on a southwesterly course to the old Spanish town of Santa Fe. From Santa Fe their route was by way of the Rio Grande, southward near the present city of El Paso, and thence to the west, through the city of Tucson--which was deserted by its garrison as the battalion approached--across the Gila and Colorado to San Diego.

The Families Ordered to Pueblo

As the battalion was leaving the Arkansas River, the commanding officer gave orders that a number of families which had accompanied the troops to that point, should be detached and sent to Pueblo, a Mexican town situated at the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains. There was some protest because it was contrary to a promise given at the beginning of the march; but it was really a necessary action. For the families of members of the battalion to travel with the companies was a hindrance to the rapid progress they were called upon to make. Captain Nelson Higgins and a guard of ten men were detailed to make the journey to Pueblo. They departed September 16, 1846, and on the way one of their number, Norman Sharp, was accidentally killed.

Colonel Cooke Takes Command

Leaving the Arkansas the battalion resumed its journey to Santa Fe. On the 2nd of October they crossed Red River where they were divided into two divisions the following day. The strongest and most able-bodied men pushed on with all speed and arrived at Santa Fe on the 9th of that month. Here they were received with a salute of one hundred guns by Colonel Alexander Doniphan, the post commander. On October 12, the second division arrived, and immediately afterward Captain Phillip St. George Cooke, an officer of dragoons, succeeded to the command with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, by appointment of General Kearny. The appointment of Col. Cooke was another disappointment to the men, who still hoped for the appointment of Captain Hunt; but they learned to respect and honor this rugged officer who was a thorough soldier and just and honorable. Lieutenant A. J. Smith remained with the battalion as acting commissary, and Dr. Sanderson continued to administer his calomel and arsenic to the men.

The Sick Sent to Pueblo

At Santa Fe a council of officers was held with Colonels Doniphan and Cooke, and it was decided to send all the sick together with the remaining women and children in the camp, to Pueblo for the winter, with the privilege of journeying towards the main body of pioneers in the spring, at government expense. Colonel Cooke detailed Captain James Brown and Lieutenant Elam Luddington to take charge of this company on the march to Pueblo. October 18, 1846, Captain Brown left Santa Fe with nearly ninety men reported as incapable of undertaking the journey to California because of physical ailments. Accompanying them were a number of women and children. Sanderson, the physician, discharged some of these men without pay or means to procure conveyance to the states, whereupon Colonel Doniphan, in charge of the post, went to Col. Cooke and countermanded the order with the statement that General Kearny would never discharge a man under circumstances of that kind, and ordered the men with the laundresses and others, to be sent to Pueblo and to draw their pay. Their journey took them over a rough country a distance of some two hundred miles. Several died on the way and others succumbed after Pueblo was reached. They arrived November 17 and selected a place for winter quarters near the encampment of Captain Higgins and a company of Saints who had previously arrived in Pueblo from Mississippi, on their way to the Rocky Mountains. November 10, 1846, Lieutenant William W. Willis was also ordered back to Pueblo with another company of sick--fifty-six men--from a point about one hundred miles out from Santa Fe. They commenced their journey with one wagon, four yoke of oxen, and rations barely sufficient to last them five days, on a march of three hundred miles. After a most severe and toilsome journey, in which they all suffered many privations and some laid down their lives, the company arrived in Pueblo, in an emaciated condition, December 24, 1846.

The March From Santa Fe

The march of the battalion from Santa Fe was taken up October 19, 1846. They had not traveled very far before they were reduced to the extremity of using their poor oxen, which were barely skin and bones, for food. Even their raw hides were cut in small pieces and made into soup. At times they crossed deserts where water could not be found to quench their thirst, and their tongues became swollen and their lips parched until their strength failed them.

Colonel Cooke's Comment

Writing of the condition of the battalion when he took command, Colonel Cooke made a report in the following words:

    "Everything conspired to discourage the extraordinary undertaking
    of marching this battalion eleven hundred miles, for the much
    greater part through an unknown wilderness, without road or trail,
    and with a wagon train.

    "It was enlisted too much by families; some were too old--some
    feeble, and some too young; it was embarrassed by many women; it
    was undisciplined; it was much worn by traveling on foot, and
    marching from Nauvoo, Illinois; their clothing was very scant;
    there was no money to pay them, or clothing to issue; their mules
    were utterly broken down; the quartermaster department was without
    funds, and its credit bad; mules were scarce. Those procured were
    very inferior, and were deteriorating every hour for lack of forage
    or grazing. . . .

    "With every effort, the quartermaster could only undertake to
    furnish rations for sixty days; and, in fact, full rations, of only
    flour, sugar, coffee and salt; salt pork only for thirty days, and
    soap for twenty. To venture without pack-saddles would be grossly
    imprudent, and so that burden was added."[2]

A Battle with Wild Bulls

A short distance northwest of the site of the present city of El Paso the course of the march was towards the west. On the San Pedro River they encountered herds of wild cattle, and were viciously attacked by ferocious bulls. The troops had been ordered to travel with unloaded guns, but now they were hastily forced to load without waiting the command. These vicious animals, as if resenting the encroachment on their domain, made a charge upon the camp. This constituted the only fighting the troops were called upon to do on their long and toilsome march. When the battle was over the casualties revealed a number of gored mules and overturned wagons, and among the "enemy" perhaps some sixty of the charging animals were killed. Resuming their journey they camped on the 16th of December, near the Mexican pueblo of Tucson. On their way they met three Mexican soldiers bringing a message from the governor of Tucson to Colonel Cooke, informing him that he must pass around the town, or else he would have to fight. Colonel Cooke was not to be frightened by such an order. His route would take him through the village, and hither he resumed his march. The following day he passed through Tucson without meeting opposition, as the soldiers and a great many of the citizens had fled on his approach. Before arriving at that place he instructed his men that they came not to make war on Sonora, and less still to destroy an important outpost of defense against Indians. "But," said he, "we will take the straight road before us and overcome all resistance, but shall I remind you that the American soldier ever shows justice and kindness to the unarmed and unresisting? The property of individuals you will hold sacred: the people of Sonora are not our enemies."

The Journey From Tucson

Leaving Tucson, the battalion crossed an extensive desert, where, for seventy-five miles, they were without water for their mules. By hard marching they reached the Gila River and intersected General Kearny's trail, which they had left 474 miles behind in the valley of the Rio Grande. They were now in the land of the Pima and Maricopa Indians who inhabited a fertile territory. These were a superior race of Indians with peaceful tendencies, who spent their time tilling the soil, and in weaving rather than bearing arms. While passing through these villages Colonel Cooke remarked to Captain Jefferson Hunt that this might be a good place for the settlement of the "Mormon" people. Hunt proposed such a thing to the natives who received it favorably, and this may have lent its weight to the colonizing of these valleys by the Latter-day Saints in later years.

At this point they were met by pilots sent back by General Kearny to conduct them to the Pacific coast. Most of the distance on the remaining journey was over deserts with alternating stretches of deep sand and miry clay. January 9, 1847, they crossed the Colorado, near the junction of the Gila, and continued their march under great difficulties over the coast range down the Pacific slope. January 27, 1847, they passed San Luis Rey, and two days later arrived at the San Diego Mission where they located one mile below the Catholic mission, and about five miles from the seaport town of San Diego, where General Kearny had his quarters.

"Orders No. 1"

On the day after their arrival at San Diego, Colonel Cooke issued the following orders, which were read to the men:

    "Headquarters 'Mormon' Battalion,"Mission of San Diego,"January 30,
    1847."

    "(Orders No. 1.)

    "The Lieutenant-Colonel commanding, congratulates the battalion
    on their safe arrival on the shore of the Pacific Ocean, and the
    conclusion of their march of over two thousand miles.

    "History may be searched in vain for an equal march of infantry.
    Half of it has been through a wilderness where nothing but savages
    and wild beasts are found, or deserts where, for want of water,
    there is no living creature. There, with almost hopeless labor, we
    have dug deep wells, which the future traveler will enjoy. Without
    a guide who had traversed them we have ventured into trackless
    table-lands where water was not found for several marches. With
    crowbar and pick and axe in hand, we have worked our way over
    mountains, which seemed to defy aught save the wild goat, and
    hewed a passage through a chasm of living rock more narrow than
    our wagons. To bring these first wagons to the Pacific, we have
    preserved the strength of our mules by herding them over large
    tracts, which you have laboriously guarded without loss. The
    garrison of four presidios of Sonora concentrated within the
    walls of Tucson, gave us no pause. We drove them out, with their
    artillery, but our intercourse with the citizens was unmarked by a
    single act of injustice. Thus, marching half naked and half fed,
    and living upon wild animals, we have discovered and made a road of
    great value to our country.

    "Arrived at the first settlement of California, after a single
    day's rest, you cheerfully turned off from the route to this point
    of promised repose, to enter upon a campaign, and meet, as we
    supposed, the approach of the enemy; and this, too, without even
    salt to season your sole subsistence of fresh meat.

    "Lieutenants A. J. Smith and George Stoneman, of the First
    Dragoons, have shared and given invaluable aid in all these labors.

    "Thus, volunteers, you have exhibited some high and essential
    qualities of veterans. But much remains undone. Soon you will turn
    your attention to the drill, to system and order, to forms also,
    which are all necessary to the soldier.

    "By order,

    "Lieut. Col. P. St. George Cooke,

    "P. C. Merrill, Adjutant."

Duties on the Coast

For some time the battalion performed garrison duty at San Diego, San Luis Rey and Los Angeles. While stationed at the latter place they were called upon to guard the Cajon Pass, in the Sierra Nevada mountains, against hostile Indians. At San Diego they were employed digging wells, making brick and building houses. Their frugality and industry won the admiration of the other troops, except the Missourians of General Fremont's command, who endeavored to create prejudice against them.

The Discharge of the Battalion--Stevenson's Insult

July 16, 1847, all of the battalion at Los Angeles were mustered out of service by Captain Smith. The time of their enlistment had expired and the prophecy of President Brigham Young that they would not be called upon to fight, had been fulfilled. Some of the men, at the request of Colonel Stevenson, of the New York Volunteers, re-enlisted for six months. Others might have done so, but he insulted them by saying: "Your patriotism and obedience to your officers have done much towards removing the prejudice of the government and the community at large, and I am satisfied that another year's service would place you on a level with other communities."

The Journey to Salt Lake Valley

On the 20th of July most of the members of the battalion, who did not enlist, organized preparatory to going to the Rocky Mountains to the gathering place of the Saints. They went by way of Sutter's Fort and the Sacramento River, intending to follow Fremont's trail across the Sierras. Near Lake Tahoe, they met Samuel Brannan and Captain Brown of the Pueblo detachment who were on the way to California, and learned that the pioneers had entered the Salt Lake Valley. Captain Brown carried with him an epistle from the apostles advising all members of the battalion who had no means, to remain in California for the winter, and journey to the Salt Lake Valley in the spring. Acting on this advice about one half of the members obtained employment at Sutter's Fort, where they were employed at the time of the discovery of gold. The others pushed on to the Salt Lake Valley where they arrived October 16, 1847.

Notes

1. The five companies of the battalion were commanded respectively as follows: Company A, Jefferson Hunt; Company B, Jesse D. Hunter; Company C, James Brown; Company D, Nelson Higgins; Company E, Daniel C. Davis. Before they left Winter Quarters, a farewell ball was given them in "Father Taylor's Bowery," where the afternoon was spent in dancing and such merriment as the sadness of the approaching parting would admit.

2. Conquest of New Mexico and California, by P. St. George Cooke, p. 91-2.
