A boy sticks his tongue out at you. What should you do? This happened to Elder Wayne S. Peterson of the Seventy while he was waiting in his car. What do you think he did? Elder Peterson remembered how important it is to choose the right. He explains: “I waved at the little boy. He stuck his tongue out at me again. I smiled and waved again. This time he waved back. Soon he was joined … by a little brother and sister. [When their car] pulled away, my newfound friends continued to wave for as long as I could see them” (“Our Actions Determine Our Character,” Liahona, January 2002, 96).

Elder Peterson showed faith in Jesus Christ by following His teachings. The Savior taught, “Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them” (3 Ne. 14:12). Elder Peterson felt good because he had chosen the right. When we choose the right, we show our love for Heavenly Father and prepare for temple ordinances.

If we choose to do something wrong, we feel bad and know we need to repent. Heavenly Father has provided a way for us to be forgiven so we can be worthy to be with Him.

If we show our faith in Jesus Christ by choosing the right and by repenting when we do wrong, the Holy Ghost can guide us. As we take the sacrament each week, we can renew our baptismal covenants to remember the Savior and keep His commandments. If we keep these covenants, when we are old enough we will be worthy to attend the temple. Going to the temple is an important step we must take to live with Heavenly Father again.

Sharing Time Ideas

1.  Invite four adults to give short talks on faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Before each talk, have the children sing a song or hymn about the principle of that talk. Write phrases from the fourth article of faith on separate pieces of paper, and give each class a phrase to memorize. Have each class choose someone to present its phrase. While the entire Primary repeats the fourth article of faith, have the class representatives put themselves in the correct order. Repeat this process until the children have memorized the article of faith.

2.  Tell the story of Alma the Younger’s conversion (see Mosiah 27; Alma 36). Select passages from the story that illustrate and explain the process of repentance, and write them on separate pieces of paper. Have each child choose a passage and illustrate it. Review the process of repentance: feel sorry, ask for forgiveness, right the wrong, and don’t repeat the wrong. Sing a song or hymn about repentance. Use the children’s pictures to tell the story of Alma the Younger again. Help the children see how Alma and the sons of Mosiah repented.

Instructions: Cut out the door hanger, fold it along the broken line, and glue the backs together. Place the hanger where it can remind you to choose the right. When you make a good choice, turn the hanger over to show that you have faith to choose the right.

I Have Shown Faith to Choose the Right
Today I Will Choose the Right
