This message is to express my gratitude for the quality of L’Etoile (French). I particularly appreciate the 1998 issues. The design is increasingly nice; impressive illustrations and photographs accompany inspirational articles.

Thank you for the reappearance of the Questions and Answers section and also for the articles “The Man Adam” and “No Other Gods before Me” in the February 1998 issue.

Jacques Demeyere,
Mouscron Ward, Lille France Stake

I have been an avid reader of the Liahona (Spanish) for many years. I have collected issues of the magazine since my baptism in 1972. I compliment you on the magazine and thank you for it.

I also am grateful for the Melchizedek Priesthood and Relief Society curriculum for 1998. The fourth Sunday lessons consist of counsel from President Gordon B. Hinckley and other Church leaders. This counsel is absolutely necessary in improving our lives.

Carmen T. de Ruscitti,
El Marquéz Ward, Caracas Venezuela Stake

The Liahona (Spanish) is a wonderful traveling companion. My job requires me to take long trips, and fortunately I can depend on the magazine to make them more pleasant. I feel great joy as I learn about my brothers and sisters in other countries and am reminded that we are all embraced by the love of our Heavenly Father.

Beatriz Bustamante,
Cuauhtémoc Ward, Chihuahua Mexico Chuviscar Stake

The Liahona (English) has helped me to feel happy. Whenever I read a Liahona, my mood brightens. As the only member of the Church in my school, I share gospel messages from the magazine with my classmates and friends.

Mariden Aranas,
Naga Branch, Talisay Philippines Stake

Each time I receive the Liahona (Spanish), I devote myself to reading the messages of President Hinckley and the other General Authorities. These messages and the other articles bring me strength in difficult times. Our Father in Heaven fills my life with blessings, and I know that this is his true Church.

Ana María Martínez Rollano,
Old Town (Spanish) Branch, Mount Vernon Virginia Stake
