Hyrum L. Andrus, Divine Patriarchal Order ( 1972)

Home Teacher

This great family order was instituted on this earth in the days of Adam. We have, in Section 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants, a revelation which speaks of the patriarchal order in the period of time before the flood. The Prophet wrote: "This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in the following manner." He then speaks of the descent of that order, stating that it came down from "Adam to Seth, who was ordained [a patriarch] by Adam at the age of sixty-nine years, and was blessed by him [Adam] three years previous to his [Adam's] death, and received the promise of God by his father [note this] , that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth." (D&C 107:41-42.) Seth was what I refer to as the first "Abraham," that is the first person who received the blessings, rights, and promises which the Lord later gave to Abraham. The first person under Adam to receive the appointments which pertain to the eternal family order was Seth. He received the promise, among other things, that the divine patriarch order would be built up among his decendents, and that all other families on earth, as they embraced the gospel, would be sealed into his family. That was the nature of this patriarchal system.

From Seth the program was passed down to Cainan, Mahaleel, Jared, Enoch and other patriarchs to Noah. When Adam was about to pass from this mortal state, he called the great patriarchs of this divine family order together, with the righteous of their posterity into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. In this great council, they honored Adam in his role as a father spiritually under Christ. The revelation states: "And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel." (D&C 107:54.) I expect that in this great council they also checked the record of those sacred ordinances by which the divine patriarchal may be built up and perpetuated in eternity. This Adam would want to do before leaving this mortal state, for only in the divine family order could he be exalted and acquire a fulness of glory in eternity.

This program, as I intimated earlier, is not merely a family program in the sense of family home evening and the patriarchal program in general, but when fully developed it is also a political system in which those who are righteous become kings and priests unto God. A king is a political figure, and each worthy man is anointed to become such by and through the sacred ordinances of the temple. The Prophet Joseph Smith once explained, as he spoke of the temple: "As soon as the Temple and baptismal font are prepared, we calculate the give the Elders of Israel...those last and most effective ordinances, without which we cannot obtain celestial thrones...and be made kings and priests unto the most High God." (HC, VI, p. 319.)

The temple is the place where a divine family order is built up in which sanctified man become both priests and kings unto God.

In the latter sense, the eternal family will eventually become a divine political order. For example, when Christ comes, he will reign as King of kings and Lord of lords. Now ask yourself this question, "Who are the kings over whom he is going to reign as King?" The answer is those who have been anointed kings in the house of the Lord. It follows that before Christ's millennial kingdom can be instituted, Israel must be gathered and the patriarchal order established.

This kind of system was built up before the time of the flood, and it was a political system in that day. In the Book of Abraham, chapter one, Abraham speaks about the first dynasty of Egypt after the flood and states: "Now the first government of Egypt was established by Pharoah, the eldest son of Egyptus, the daugher of Ham." He is speaking of a political system, the first government of Egypt. Continuing, he says: "It was after the manner of the government of Ham, which was patriarchal." Having made this point clear, Abraham then explained: "Pharoah, being a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that order established by the fathers." Now what kind of an order did he establish? He established a patriarchal system of government and sought earnestly to imitate the order which the fathers had established "in the first generations in the days of the first patriarchal reighn, even in the reign of Adam, and also of Noah." (Abraham 1:25-26.)

Who, for example, was Noah in his day, in the sense of the offices which he held? He was a prophet - the Lord's prophet, seer and revelator. He was also the presiding patriarch in a patriarchal society; and, as such, he reigned as king over the earth, at least over those who sustained to a degree the order that prevailed on earth before the flood. Noah was the king, having received the ordinances of the holy priesthood which are administered in the temple of the Lord.

After the flood, the Lord sought to build up the divine patriarchal order through Abraham and his elect decendents. Here may be seen the mission and purpose of the house of Israel.

To the end that the eternal family order might be built up among Abraham's elect posterity, the Lord gave the great patriarch the rights and promises of the divine order. He was given the promise of a numerous posterity, both in and out of the world in the resurrection. (See D&C 132:30.) This promise could only be fulfilled within the divine patriarchal order which will continue in eternity.

To Abraham's elect posterity was also given the right to be adopted into the eternal family of Jesus Christ, and the right to receive the covenants of the temple by which they could be organized and exalted within that divine family. (See TPJS, p. 189.)

Along with the above rights, the Lord gave Abraham the promise that his elect descendants would be natural heirs in the flesh to the priesthood and its rights. Actually this includes the rights of the temple of which I have just spoken. Concerning the pristhood, the Lord said to Abraham: "And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in they seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abraham 2:11.)

With these rights and promises, Abraham's elect descendants were given the obligation to build up the divine patriarchal order, to be an ensign and a standard to the world, and to preach the gospel to all other families of the earth, that true believers among all nations might be made the seed of Abraham by being born into the eternal family of Jesus Christ. Here the Lord promised the great patriarch: "And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father." (Abraham 2:10.)

After Abraham, the rights and promises of the divine patriarchal order were given to Isaac, then to Jacob. Under Jacob, the right of the first born in the eternal family should have gone to Reuben, but because of his transgression this right was given to Joseph and then, by special appointment, to Ephraim, so that the tribe of Ephraim is the birthright tribe in the house of Israel. This means that Ephraim has the right to minister the spiritual blessings and powers which lead to eternal life and exaltation to the other tribes of Israel. This is why Ephraim is being gathered first in this despensation, and why the other tribes of Israel will come to Zion to receive the higher rites and ordinances of the gospel from the children of Ephraim. (See D&C 133:32.)

Here it may be noted that the spiritual line of descent predominates over the mere physical. Just because a man is a father physically does not mean that he is going to be a father in the eternal family order in the resurrection. If he is not also a father spiritually, what will happen to his children in the resurrection, if they are worthy of eternal life? They will be given to someone who is a father in eternal life. The determining factor is whether or not a man is a father spiritually, in developing the blessings of the Holy Spirit in his children. If he does not acquire the ability to teach and sanctify his children, he will lose his rights as a father. The genealogical lines in the divine patriarchal order will follow the divine order, not just the order of the flesh. Seth, for example, was not the first son of Adam, was he? But, he became Adam's firstborn by virtue of the program of the patriarchal order. Come down to the days of Abraham. He was not the firstborn of his father, but he got the appointment while his father Terah apparently lost any provileges he had in the divine family order. Solomon was not the first born of David, but he got the appointment to be king of Israel after David, in the patriarchal order of Israel.

In building up the divine patriarchal order in ancient Israel, the Lord gave certain rights pertaining to the eternal family order to specific tribes and branches of Israel. The ancient record states:

"Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, (For he was the firstborn: but, forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright [physically].

For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief fuler; but the birthright was Joseph's.)." (I Chronicles 5:1-2.)

This statement mentions the appointments which were given to two of the tribes of Israel: Joseph and Judah. From Joseph, the birthright over Israel was given to Ephraim, and the Lord therefore said through Jeremiah: "I am a father by re-birth to Israel, and Ephriaim is my firstborn." (Jeremiah 31:9.)

To Judah was given the right to direct the political functions of the divine patriarchal order. Within the eternal family order, every man is made a king as well as a priest over his family. But in order to give central direction to the political functions of the whole system, there was a "chief ruler" appointed. King David, for example, was anointed to be the chief ruler in Israel in his day, and the anointing which he received was a sacred priesthood rite like that which pertains to the temple of God. Except for David's transgression, he would have reigned as king in Israel forever - on earth during his mortal life, among the faithful of Israel in the spirit world, and, finally, in the divine patriarchal order in the celestial society of the resurrection. (See TPJS, p. 339.)

Through Judah also came Jesus Christ, the great Chief Ruler over the whole patriarchal order for this earth. This was part of the political appointment which was given to that tribe if Israel. Within this divine family order, Jesus will be King of kings and Lord of lords, when it is built up and perfected in preparation for his millennial reign on earth. The millennial kingdom will be the consumation of the great family order which the Lord tried anciently to establish in Israel. It will not be a new program, but the old program built up, perfected, and sanctified, having its center in the house of the Lord.

The promise which the Lord gave to the tribe of Judah, and to the house of David within that tribe, was to continue from generation to generation to their descendants. Read what is said, for example, in II Samuel, chapter 7, and in the 89th Psalms. In the latter chapter, the Lord said of David:

My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him.

His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.

If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; then I will visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.

Nevertheless my loving-kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

One have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lies unto David.

His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. (Psalms 89:28-36.)

The tribe of Levi, with Aaron and his sons at their head, was also given a significant appointment within the divine patriarchal order of Israel. This was the right to administer the preparatory gospel and to be the center of that program by which people are brought into the divine patriarchal order, to become the sons and daughters of Christ and be prepared for the greater revelations of the gospel which are given to those who enter into this eternal family order. The program of the preparatory gospel, which is administered in the spirit of Elias, is family oriented. It is designed to bring people into the divine patriarchal order where they can receive the greater revelations of gospel truth and power. For example, it was said of John the Baptist, who held the keys of these functions in his day: "He shall go before him Christ in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." (Luke 1:17.) When people come unto Christ, they become his sons and daughters in the divine patriarchal order. To prepare a people for the Lord is to prepare them to enter this eternal family order. Within it, the righteous are organized into individual family units under Christ and the patriarch's of old, where men are fathers spiritually as well as physically. John's mission, therefore, was "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children." (Idem.)

The rights and promises which were given to the tribe of Levi, and to Aaron as their head, were to continue from generation to generation in Israel. To Moses the Lord said:

And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be a holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations. (Exodus 30:30-31.)

Again:

And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:

and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. (Exodus 40:13-15.)

Having quoted these two statements in a discourse which he delivered, Joseph Smith commented: "The Levitical Priesthood is forever hereditary - fixed on the head of Aaron and his sons forever, and was in actual operation down to Zacharias the father of John." (TPJS, p. 319.)

As Latter-day Saints we often speak of the fact that in this dispensation there will be a restoration of all things in the last days. This great restoration, contrary to the views of some people, has not yet taken place. It is still something to be accomplished in the future. Through Joseph Smith there was a restoration of the keys, power, and doctrine by which this restoration will be brought to pass, but the restoration of all things in its true and full program entails the building again on this earth of the Lord's true system of society—the divine patriarchal order. And that eternal family order is established and given authority and power to govern the world, the restoration of all things will not be . . . . Speaking of the rights and promises which were given to the elect seed, Joseph Smith said: "The election of the promised seed still continues, and in the last day, they shall have the Priesthood restored unto them, and they shall be the 'saviors on Mount Zion', the ministers of our God." (TPJS, p. 189.)

A central factor in building the divine patriarchal order in the last days was the appointment which was given to Joseph Smith by virute of his lineage in the flesh. To him the Lord said: "And as I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I say unto my servant Joseph: In thee and in they see shall the kindred of the earth be blessed." (D&C 124:58.) By the ministration of Elias, or Noah, in the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet was given the same appointment which God formerly gave to Abraham. (See D&C 110:12.) Joseph Smith is the Abraham of this dispensation. This means, I believe, that every person who is born into the family of Christ in this dispensation will eventually be sealed into the family of the Prophet, and will rise up and call him their father.

To restore all things, Israel must be gathered in the last days, and the divine patriarchal order must be built up among the gathered remnants. Ephraim's birthright must be honored; he must give the blessings of the eternal family order to the other tribes of Israel.

There must be a modern David anointed by a modern Samuel, and he must reign as a king over latter-day Israel. With this understanding, Joseph Smith said: "Although the ancient David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood: and the Priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David i.e., the appointment he received to political power in the divine patriarchal order is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." (TPJS, p. 339.)

Ordinarily a king's political power ends at death, but David's would have continued on into the resurrection, except for his transgression. The latter-day David, who will be raised up out of the lineage of the ancient king, will not only reign over gathered Israel when the divine patriarchal order is re-established upon the earth, but he will inherit the throne that the ancient David would have received in the resurrection.

The full rights and powers of the Lesser Priesthood must also be given to the sons of Aaron in the latter days. Speaking of the rights and powers which God appointed to them, Joseph Smith said: "Here is a little of law which must be fulfilled." (TPJS, p. 319.) This means, for example, that the Presiding Bishop of the Church must eventually be a literal decendant of the first born son of Aaron.

As the man chosen and raised up to be the head of that dispensation of the fulness of times, when the divine patriarchal order will be built up and sanctified in preparation for the millennial reign of Jesus Christ, Joseph Smith was a natural heir in the flesh to the major powers - patriarchal and political - of the eternal family order. (See, for example, D&C 113:1-6.) He is the Abraham, not merely the Ephraim, of the kingdom of God in our day. A revelation implied that he and his associates possessed by right that which was necessary to build up the divine patriarchal order when it said to them: "The priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your father - for ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God - therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things, spoken by the mouth's of all the holy prophets since the world began." (D&C 86:8:10.) The fact that the priesthood to which they were lawful heirs was to remain through them and their lineage until the restoration of all things (the full establishment of the divine patriarchal order on earth) implied that, essentially, they were heirs to all that was necessary to bring about that great restoration. It was not, however, to be consumated in their day, but the necessary rights and promises were to continue in them and in their seed until it was brought to pass. Again, the restoration of all things was not to be accomplished in Joseph Smith's lifetime.

There are, according to the Prophet, three major features to the building of the divine patriarchal order: (1) that which is done under the spirit of Elias, (2) that which is done under the spirit of Elijah, and (3) that which Christ does as he comes to his temple in the office and power of Messiah, as foretold by Malachi. Joseph Smith explained:

The spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, and the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the Temple i.e., the divine patriarchal order of which the temple is here made a symbol to the capstone, placing the seals of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His Temple, which is last of all.

Messiah is above the spirit and power of Elijah, for He made the world, and was that spiritual rock unto Moses in the wilderness. Elijah was to come and prepare the way and build up the patriarchal kingdom before the coming of the great day of the Lord, although the spirit of Elias might begin it. (TPJS, p. 340.)

The spirit of Elias is the spirit by which the preparatory gospel is administered, by which people are brought into the family of Jesus Christ-the divine patriarchal order. Under the spirit of Elijah two things are done: First, those who have entered into the family of Christ by baptism are organized into individual family units in which husbands and wives are made fathers and mothers both physically and spiritually over their children, and the respective family units in the divine patriarchal order are connected to their progenitors back to the ancient patriarchs. Second, under the spirit and power of Elijah, "the seals of the Melchizedek Priesthood" can be placed upon the several family units within the divine patriarchal order, thereby making their calling and election sure to exaltation in the celestial kingdom. (Idem. See also TPJS, pp. 321, 330, 338.)

All this must be done and the divine patriarchal order of which the temple is an appropriate symbol must be built up to the capstone before Christ comes to His temple in the New Jerusalem, as foretold by Malachi, to exercise his rights in the office of Messiah and place the capstone on the completed system.

Moroni clarified some major points regarding the Lord's coming to His temple, when he appeared to the Prophet on the hill Cumorah the day after his initial visits in September, 1823. He first spoke of the Saints building up the Center Place of Zion, which we know will be in Jackson County, Missouri, and there receiving "an inheritance where the glory of God shall rest upon them" To receive these great spiritual endowments, the Saints must establish their lives fully upon the celestial law of Zion, which is the law by which the divine patriarchal order is built up, for Zion is a patriarchal society. Continuing, Moroni said: "When this takes place, and all things are prepared, the ten tribes of Israel will be revealed in the north country, whither they have been for a long season."

The ten tribes will then be made part of the great patriarchal order which the Saints - the children of Ephraim - will have built up in their midst. A revelation states that the ten tribes will come to Zion and "be crowned with glory...by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim." (D&C 133:32.) This no idle expression. They will receive the higher sealing ordinances of the priesthood and the full law and program of the divine patriarchal order by which they, like the Saints, can be endowed with the glory of God - the cloud and smoke by day and the pillar of fire by night which Isaiah prophecied would come upon latter-day Zion. (See Isaiah 4:5.)

Having spoken of the Saints being endowed with glory and of the coming of the ten tribes to Zion, Moroni finally declared: "When this is fulfilled will be brought to pass that saying of the prophet - 'And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.' " (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ In America, I, p. 100.)

Now can you see what must be done in order to prepare a people for the coming of the Lord? And can you see why the Lord is inspiring the Brethren to emphasize the family and its importance in the Gospel program? I believe we are now seeing programs instituted in the church which will witness in their full fruition the redemption of Zion and the establishment of the divine patriarchal order on earth in preparation for Christ's millennial reign. But even after Christ comes to his temple, the Jews must be made part of this great patriarchal order. They will be the last tribe of Israel to become part of the great millennial order, for it is said of Israel in the last days, that the first must be last and the last must be first. (Ether 13:12.) The Jews were the first to have the opportunity to receive Christ when he came in the meridian of time. They will be the last to become part of his great family kingdom when he comes in the last days.

As Latter-day Saints, we are key figures in this great work of building up the kingdom of God. We must first establish the great patriarchal order in our midst before the other tribes of Israel are brought into the program. I have a personal witness that this is God's work, and that we are vital figures in the development of His purposes in the earth. I know better than I know that I live that Christ lives and that He, personally, is directing the building up of His kingdom. This I know by means that go beyond the general manifestations of the Holy Ghost to man, and I bear you this testimony humbly, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
