As a young boy growing up in Cameroon, Vicky Levannresky Kamlemo loved playing football. He found himself frequently on the football pitch and the game was a major part of his life—even when he was studying in school.

He played for the Galaxy Football Club at the age of 14, and by 16 he was playing at a professional level. Upon receiving his baccalaureate, he was presented with an opportunity to travel and play professionally in Saudi Arabia, North Sudan, and Iran.

But football is a difficult profession—especially for young men who do not have financial means. Playing abroad is also not very easy, and Vicky’s living conditions were not what he wanted, so he decided to return home.

It was then that he became acquainted with the restored gospel of Jesus Christ through his Aunt, Hortense Dajeu, who was visiting from Virginia, USA and through his close friend, Yannick Njampou. Later, Vicky saw his return to Cameroon and baptism into the Church as a way through a great trial; and he believes all this happened by the grace of the Lord.

Today, he has found a greater and more wonderful passion than football as he serves a full-time mission in Cote d’Ivoire.

“I left everything to serve a mission,” Elder Kamlemo says. “Many people think of me as someone who does not know what he is looking for in his life since I decided to leave my football career behind. But I am proud to have made this decision to devote these next two years of my life to serving the Lord. Even my coaches did not appreciate my decision to serve a mission because they are not members of the Church. They want to see me playing for big teams and signing a professional contract.

“I also received criticism from my paternal family, who were at first opposed to my mission choice. But today, my father has accepted my decision and has given me his blessing—this to my great delight.”

He continued: “I know that Jesus Christ saved me by giving His life for me. Giving part of my life to do this work is the most important thing for me to do right now. Today, my joy is so great being able to serve a mission, and there is no other work that can bring greater joy at this moment.

“The Savior instructed his disciples, ‘But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness’ [Matthew 6:33]. I feel am serving a mission because my duty is to love and serve my Savior, for I am an instrument in His hands. If God has chosen you, do His will; don’t seek anything else.

“After making the decision to serve a full-time mission—and as I was waiting for my mission call—I received an opportunity from a well-known coach who wanted to send me a plane ticket and a visa so I could go play in Iran. I took three long days to think about the coach’s offer; but on the first day, I knew I already had the answer to my prayer—and that answer was to serve the Lord.

“I can truthfully say that I believe in my future and that serving a mission will help me make the dream come true.”
