On the third day after Jesus was crucified, two of his disciples were walking from Jerusalem to a nearby village called Emmaus. (See Luke 24:13–32.) As they walked, they talked about Jesus and about how he had been taken by the Roman soldiers. They talked about how he had been crucified by the Romans and then tenderly placed in the sepulchre, or burying place, by his friends. They were confused because Mary Magdalene and some other women had told the disciples that the stone had been rolled away from the sepulchre, which was guarded by soldiers, and that Jesus’ body was gone.

As they walked, another traveler joined them. He asked them what they were talking about and why they were so sad. One of the disciples, Cleopas, couldn’t believe that the traveler had not heard about the crucifixion of Jesus. Cleopas told the traveler that the women had gone to the sepulchre and found it empty.

Then the traveler began to talk. He reminded them of all the scriptures that prophesied that a Savior would come, teach people how to live, then die and rise from the dead, or be resurrected, so that all people could live again. As evening approached, the men neared the village of Emmaus. The two disciples asked the traveler to spend the night with them. He agreed. As they ate together, the two disciples realized that the traveler was the resurrected Jesus. He had been teaching them that he had risen from the dead, just as the scriptures said he would. As soon as they understood this, he vanished from their sight.

“And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?” (Luke 24:32).

Cleopas and his friend had reverent feelings when they remembered Jesus Christ and what he had taught them during that day.

Just as his disciples of old felt reverent when they were with him, we will feel reverent when we remember Jesus Christ during the sacrament. In the sacrament prayers, we are told that if we will always remember Jesus Christ and keep his commandments, we will have his spirit with us. When we partake of the sacrament reverently, we are worshipping Heavenly Father and Jesus.

Remove the next page from the magazine and glue it on a piece of cardboard. Cut the puzzle apart along the dotted lines. When you put the puzzle together again, you will have pictures and the words to a song that will help you to remember Jesus Christ during the sacrament.

To Think about Jesus

It shouldn’t be hard to sit very still

And think about Jesus, his cross on the hill,

And all that he suffered and did for me;

It shouldn’t be hard to sit quietly.

It shouldn’t be hard, even though I am small,

To think about Jesus, not hard at all.

(Children’s Songbook, page 71.)

1.  As you tell the story of the two disciples on the road to Emmaus, ask three children to act out the story. Discuss the kind of feelings the disciples might have had after their conversation with Jesus.

2.  Show several pictures of children whose arms are folded. On the back of each picture write what the child may be thinking about. Have the children guess what the children in the pictures may be thinking about. Then turn the pictures over to reveal the answers. Make the point that “reverence is more than just quietly sitting.” (See “Reverence Is Love,” Tambulilit, February 1992, page 5.)

3.  Have younger children draw a picture and older children write one sentence identifying something specific that they will think about during sacrament meeting. Hang all of these on a mobile for display.
