Various General Authorities, Daniel H. Ludlow, Latter-day Prophets Speak: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Church Presidents ( 1948)

Foreword

LATTER-DAY PROPHETS SPEAK, compiled and edited by Daniel H. Ludlow, is an outstanding contribution to Latter-day Saint Church literature. During recent years various writers have compiled and published in book form the most important doctrinal writings and teachings of six out of the eight Presidents who have presided over the Church of Jesus Christ. All of these books have been valuable additions to our writings, providing the Saints opportunities to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the Plan of Salvation. However, our people have had for many years a definite need for a one-volume work in which the principal doctrinal teachings of all the eight men who have presided over the Church of Jesus Christ are correlated and made available for church use. This task has now been accomplished in this book in a very commendable way by Brother Ludlow.

The author is one of the capable and faithful young men of the Church. He made an enviable record while attending the Utah State Agricultural College. For two years in succession he had the honor of being president of the student body. At the present time he is a teacher at his Alma Mater. His first interest, however, has always been the Church. With the hope in his heart of helping to proclaim the Gospel, he assigned himself the task of compiling this book, a work which consumed sixteen-months' time.

In preparing this volume pertinent teachings on definite Gospel subjects have been culled from the numerous sermons and writings of the Presidents of the Church and placed in their proper places under appropriate subject titles. Whenever it was possible, the compiler has presented a typical relevant statement under each subject head from each of the Latter-day Prophets, thereby giving the authoritative church viewpoint on each of those subjects. Furthermore, all superfluous and irrelevant statements have been omitted, thus avoiding confusion and waste of time of the reader. This factor in itself makes the book a convenient and excellent medium for the purpose of studying the Gospel. viii

Since this volume is entirely devoted to the religious teachings of God's mouthpieces on earth in the last dispensation of the Gospel-the dispensation of the fullness of times-and since the Saints have a high regard for modern revelation and the teachings of the Prophets of God, this book should take its place as one of the valuable and great works of the Church of Jesus Christ.

A glance at the table of contents shows how extensive the coverage of the Gospel doctrine is in this volume and how carefully the various topics have been outlined. The thirty-nine chapters are divided into five sections which Brother Ludlow calls "books." The first seven chapters present the theme of eternal progression from our pre-existent state to the time of our gaining exaltation. Then the author sets forth in ten chapters the principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the conditions necessary for men and women to come back into the presence of God. A section is devoted to Priesthood and church government. Book Four tells the story of the conditions and accomplishments during the last days, including the millennial reign of the Lord Jesus Christ. The last section is entitled "General Church Doctrines and Practices." In twelve excellent chapters such basic doctrines as "The Godhead," "Prophecy and Revelation," Temple Marriage," "The Word of Wisdom," Missionary Work," Education," and other pertinent doctrines are discussed.

This book presents such a complete coverage of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as taught by the Presidents of the Church in the latter days and is so logically and conveniently compiled and outlined that it could serve well as an excellent course of study for church groups. This volume will continue for many years to hold a high place among other volumes of church literature as one of the principal Latter-day Saint reference books on church doctrine.

MILTON R. HUNTER

Of the First Council of the Seventy ix
