Various General Authorities, Daniel H. Ludlow, Latter-day Prophets Speak: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Church Presidents ( 1948)

27

The Story of the Earth

THE EARTH'S POSITION IN THE GREAT PLAN

THIS EARTH is our home, it was framed expressly for the habitation of those who are faithful to God and who prove themselves worthy to inherit the earth when the Lord shall have sanctified, purified and glorified it and brought it back into His presence, from which it fell far into space. When the earth was framed and brought into existence and man was placed upon it, it was near the throne of our Father in heaven. And when man fell, the earth fell into space and took up its abode in this planetary system, and the sun became our light. When the Lord said—"Let there be light," there was light, for the earth was brought near the sun that it might reflect upon it so as to give us light by day and the moon to give us light by night. This is the glory the earth came from, and when it is glorified it will return again into the presence of the Father, and it will dwell there, and these intelligent beings that I am looking at, if they live worthy of it, will dwell upon this earth.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 17:143, July 19, 1874

We begin to find out that we are earthly, we came from the earth, our feelings cling to it, when we die we return to the earth, and when we come forth in the resurrection it win be as immortal beings to dwell on a celestial earth; it will be renovated and so will the people that dwell on it. It is a natural desire for us to possess the earth, and for this thousands of persons have been laid low, in order to gain possession of it, but the Savior has promised that the meek shall inherit it.

—John Taylor, Millennial Star 16:49, October 8, 1853

When sin and iniquity are driven from the earth, and the spirits that now float in this atmosphere are driven into the place prepared for them; and when the earth is sanctified from the effects of the fall, and baptized, cleansed, and purified by fire, and returns to its paradisiacal state, and has become like a sea of glass, a Urim and Thummim; when all this is done, and the Savior has presented the earth to His Father, and it is placed in the cluster of the celestial kingdoms, and the Son and all His faithful brethren and sisters have received the welcome plaudit—"Enter ye into the joy of your Lord," and the Savior is crowned, then and not till then will the Saints receive their everlasting inheritances. I want you to understand this.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 17:117, June 28, 1874

The earth is very good in and of itself and has abided a celestial law, consequently we should not despise it nor desire to leave it, but rather desire and strive to obey the same law that the earth abides and abide it as honorably as does the earth.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 2:302-303, June 3, 1855

CONCERNING THE CREATION OF THE EARTH

All this vast creation was produced from element in its unorganized state; the mountains, rivers, seas, valleys, plains, and the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms beneath and around us, all speaking forth the wonderful works of the Great God. Shall I say that the seeds of vegetables were planted here by the Characters that formed and built this world—that the seeds of every plant composing the vegetable kingdom were brought from another world? This would be news to many of you. Who brought them here? It was some Being who had power to frame this earth with its seas, valleys, mountains, and rivers and cause it to teem with vegetable and animal life.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 7:285, October 9, 1859

It is true that the earth was organized by three distinct characters, namely, Elohim, Jehovah, and Michael, these three forming a quorum, as in all heavenly bodies and in organizing element, perfectly represented in the Deity as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 1:51, April 9, 1852

Though we have it in history that our Father Adam was made of the dust of this earth and that he knew nothing about his God previous to being made here, yet it is not so; and when we learn the truth we shall see and understand that he helped to make this world and was the chief manager in that operation.

He was the person who brought the animals and the seeds from other planets to this world and brought a wife with him and stayed here. You may read and believe what you please as to what is found written in the Bible. Adam was made from the dust of an earth, but not from the dust of this earth. He was made as you and I are made, and no person was ever made upon any other principle.

Do you not suppose that he was acquainted with his associates, who came and helped to make this earth? Yes, they were just as familiar with each other as we are with our children and parents.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 3:319, April 20, 1856

Things upon the earth, so far as they have not been perverted by wickedness, are typical of things in heaven. Heaven was the prototype of this beautiful creation when it came from the hand of the Creator and was pronounced "good."

—Joseph F. Smith, Journal of Discourses 23:175, June 18, 1882

THE EARTH TO RECEIVE ITS PARADISIACAL GLORY

The Lord never created this world at random; He has never done any of His work at random. The earth was created for certain purposes; and one of these purposes was its final redemption and the establishment of His government and kingdom upon it in the latter days, to prepare it for the reign of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose right it is to reign. That set time has come, that dispensation is before us, we are living in the midst of it.

—Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses 15:8, April 6, 1872

The Prophet asked the Lord whether there would ever be a time when the earth should rest; and the Lord answered that in the dispensation of the fullness of times the earth would fill the measure of its days and then it would rest from wickedness and abominations, for in that day He would establish His kingdom upon it, to be thrown down no more forever.

—Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses 17:245, October 9, 1874

Who placed the dark stain of sin upon this fair creation? Man. Who but man shall remove the foul blot and restore all things to their primeval purity and innocence? But can he do this independently of heavenly aid? He can not. To aid him in this work heavenly grace is here; heavenly wisdom, power, and help are here, and God's laws and ordinances are here; the angels and spirits of just men made perfect are here; Jesus Christ, our Great High Priest, with prophets, apostles, and Saints, ancient and modern, are here to help man in the great work of sanctifying himself and the earth for final glorification in its paradisiacal state. All this will be accomplished through the law of the Holy Priesthood.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 10:301, June 4, 1864

THE EARTH TO BE CELESTIALIZED

This earth, after wading through all the corruptions of men, being cursed for his sake and not permitted to shed forth its full lustre and glory, must yet take its proper place in Gods creations; be purified from that corruption under which it has groaned for ages and become a fit place for redeemed men, angels, and God to dwell upon.

—John Taylor, The Government of God; p. 82, published August, 1852

This earth is the property of our Heavenly Father. Some day it will be cleansed and purified by fire. All disease and sorrow will be banished from it and it will become the celestial kingdom.

—George Albert Smith, Deseret News Church Section, June 17, 1944

This earth in its present condition and situation, is not a fit habitation for the sanctified; but it abides the law of its creation, has been baptized with water, will be baptized by fire and the Holy Ghost, and by-and-by will be prepared for the faithful to dwell upon.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 8:83, June 12, 1860

The earth, also, abideth the law and filleth the measure of its creation and though it shall die, it shall be resurrected in glory, a sanctified creation suitable for the residence of celestial beings. The elements will be burned and purified and be renewed; but not one atom of earth's organism will be lost; for that which is governed by law shall be preserved by law.

—Brigham Young, Liahona, or Elder's Journal 1:155, 1875

The earth will abide its creation and will be counted worthy of receiving the blessings designed for it, and it will ultimately roll back into the presence of God who formed it and established its mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. These will all be retained upon the earth, come forth in the resurrection, and abide for ever and ever.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 8:8, March 4, 1860

When that time comes [the resurrection] this earth will have been cleansed by fire and purified, all sickness, sorrow and disease will have been banished, all those who dwell here will be glorified immortal beings, men, women and children, who will dwell in the presence of our Heavenly Father throughout the ages of eternity.

—George Albert Smith, Deseret News Church Section, March 17, 1945

God has said if we will honor Him and keep His commandments—if we will observe His laws He will fight our battles and destroy the wicked, and when the time comes He will come down in heaven—not from heaven—but He will bring heaven with Him—and this earth upon which we dwell will be the celestial kingdom.

—George Albert Smith, Conference Reports, p. 49, October, 1942

The whole earth is the Lord's. The time will come when it will be translated and be filled with the spirit and power of God. The atmosphere around it will be the spirit of the Almighty. We will breathe that Spirit instead of the atmosphere that we now breathe.

—Lorenzo Snow, Millennial Star 61:546, May 8, 1899

I suppose this is one of the lowest kingdoms that ever the Lord Almighty created and on that account is capable of becoming exalted to be one of the highest kingdoms that has ever had an exaltation in all the eternities. In proportion as it has been reduced so it will be exalted, with that portion of its inhabitants who in their humiliation have cleaved to righteousness and acknowledged God in all things.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 10:175, May 24, 1863

THE EARTH AS A BODY OF LIGHT

When we are in eternity we shall be on this earth, which will be brought into the immediate presence of the Father and the Son. We shall inhabit different mansions, and worlds will continue to be made, formed, and organized, and messengers from this earth will be sent to others. This earth will become a celestial body—be like a sea of glass, or like a Urim and Thummim; and when you wish to know anything you eau look in this earth and see all the eternities of God. We shall make our home here and go on our missions as we do now, but at greater than railroad speed.

-Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 8:200, October 6, 1860

I remarked to my family and friends present that when the earth was sanctified and became like a sea of glass, it would be one great Urim and Thummim, and the Saints could look in it and see as they are seen.

—Joseph Smith, Jr. Documentary History of the Church 5:279, February 18, 1843

By and by the Lord will purify the earth, and it will become pure and holy, like a sea of glass; then it will take its place in the rank of the celestial ones and be recognized as celestial, but at the present time it is a dark, little speck in space.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 14:136, May 21, 1871

And this world, when it becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light.

—Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 7:163, June 5, 1859
