Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith's Idea of the Gospel ( 1961)

Footnotes

At an early age my mind was exercised upon religious subjects, although I never made a profession until 1830. I did not then join any church, for the reason that I could not find any denomination whose doctrines, faith or practice, agreed with the Gospel of Jesus Christ, or the ordinances and gifts which the apostles taught. Although the ministers of the day taught that the faith, gifts, graces, miracles and ordinances, which the ancient Saints enjoyed, were done away and no longer needed, I did not believe it to be true, only as they were done away through the unbelief of the children of men. ("History of Wilford Woodruff," [from his own pen], Millennial Star, XXVII, 182.)

In the beginning of August, I, in company with my wife, went to make a visit to Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., who then resided at Harmony, Penn. We found him and his wife well, and in good spirits. We had a happy meeting. It truly gave me joy to again behold his face. As neither Emma, the wife of Joseph Smith, nor my wife had been confirmed [members of the Church], we concluded to attend to that holy ordinance at this time, and also to partake of the sacrament. ...

We prepared some wine of our own make, and held our meeting, consisting of only five persons, namely, Joseph Smith and wife, John Whitmer, and myself and wife. We partook of the sacrament, after which we confirmed the two sisters into the Church, and spent the evening in a glorious manner. The Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon us. We praised the God of Israel and rejoiced exceedingly.-(Journal History, August, 1830.)

The gift of tongues here spoken of was first exercised in one of the Pennsylvania branches; next at Mendon, where the Youngs and Kimballs resided; then in the branches between Mendon and Kirtland; then in Kirtland under the circumstances above related, and shortly afterwards it was a gift quite generally exercised by the Saints in Ohio. "And it came to pass," writes John Whitmer in his history of the Church (chap. X), "that in the fall of 1832, the disciplesin Ohio received the gift of tongues, and in June, 1833, we received the gift of tongues in Zion." (DHC, I, 296-297.)

This statement seems to deny the expression of the gift of tongues at Kirtland in the fall of 1830, as reported by John Corrill. It might be noted in Corrill's defense that neither Joseph Smith nor John Whitmer had arrived in Kirtland at the time he mentioned.

I am, with others, a witness that these gifts did follow many in the branch of the Church which was raised up in Pontiac. Among them was Deacon Samuel Bent of the Presbyterian Church, who was the first one baptized (and who afterwards became President of the High Council in Nauvoo, Illinois). His daughter, Mary, was the first one who spoke in tongues in this branch. Besides Mary Curtis, Joseph Wood, Elijah Fordham and others also enjoyed that gift. We felt that we were blessed above kings, rulers, and potentates of the earth, and truly we were a happy branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Our souls were full of joyous thanksgiving, and our songs of gladness rejoiced the heart by day, dispelled the gloom of night and welcomed the coming morn. (Ibid.)

Brother Orson Pratt and myself were called upon to visit a very sick woman; she could not turn herself in bed. We anointed her with oil in the name of the Lord, and she was healed and made whole. She did not belong to the Church, nor her husband; but in two days after she and her husband were baptized, and fourteen others. (Whitney, op. cit., X, February 1, 1882, 130.)
