Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith's Idea of the Gospel ( 1961)

II. Philosophical Foundations of the Gospel.

The Mormon idea of the gospel is founded upon the Latter-day Saint concept of Deity and their view of mortal man, as a fallen creature in need of spiritual regeneration by which he can ultimately come back into the presence of God. To Joseph Smith, God is a personal Being in form and stature as man. He taught further that there are three distinct personages that constitute the Godhead to which man is now responsible. Of these personages, he said: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit." [^1]

But members of the Godhead are more than Beings of tabernacle; they are Beings of magnificent glory. In the Wentworth Letter, the Prophet wrote of his first vision, stating: "While fervently engaged in supplication, my mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded, and I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision, and saw two glorious personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day." [^2] The brilliant light associated with Deity is scripturally designated as God's glory, a term that has several synonyms. It is referred to as "eternal fire," as "everlasting burnings," as "circling flames of fire," as "light," and as "light and heat." [^3] But a revelation to Joseph Smith gave the most basic and fundamental insight into the nature of God's glory when it stated: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." [^4] Thus, the Prophet held that God is a personal Being in whom the spiritual forces of light and truth—or intelligence—in the universe are centered.

One who is enveloped in and quickened by these great spiritual powers of light and truth is in the presence of God. Moses, for instance, was caught up unto an exceedingly high mountain where he saw God face to face. Explained a revelation to Joseph Smith: "And the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure His presence." [^5] Glory is here equated with God's presence. Later, the same revelation said: "And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that His glory was not upon Moses." [^6]

Joseph Smith's view of the gospel is based upon the assumption that, before the fall, Adam resided in the presence of God and, consequently, was enveloped in the life-giving, quickening powers that constitute God's glory or presence. In this condition, his whole being was filled with intelligence and life, and corruption in every form was foreign to his nature. In the words of the Prophet, "All corruption is devoured by the fire." [^7]

This status of glory Joseph Smith called paradisiacal. To it the earth will largely be restored during the millennium. With the initial manifestation of Christ's glory at the opening of that era, "every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed." Even the "elements shall melt with fervent heat." By the power of this refining fire "all things shall become new," that God's "knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth." Since love and peace are major attributes of God's glory, the enmity of all flesh shall then cease, the forces of corruption that now bring disintegration and death will largely be abolished, and life will bloom in perpetual youth. [^8]

From this blessed condition Adam fell, and sin entered the world. With sin came corruption and death, so that in mortality man finds himself in the midst of a battlefield where he must struggle against the mighty effects of the fall upon the flesh. As man enters mortality, however, there are certain restrictions placed upon the power of the fall. A revelation to the Prophet stated that because God "redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." [^9] Here the atonement is said to have a dual effect upon man. First, by its power man's spirit is free and innocent, and thus uninhibited in its inclination to do good. But, more than this, the atonement affects the whole person, as he enters mortality. Men in their "infant state" are thereby said to be innocent, not just that man's spirit is innocent while his body is in its infant state.

But this condition of innocence in which the atonement checks the power of the fall does not abolish the fact that the effects of Adam's transgression and of man's subsequent transgressions are transmitted in the flesh and are thus inherent therein at conception. It is said in a revelation that no less personage than God explained this fact to Adam. After observing that the atonement took care of the legalities of the "original guilt," God said: "Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good." [^10] Observe that it is when children begin to grow up that sin conceives in their hearts; and this because they are initially conceived in sin. Not that the act of conception, properly regulated, is sin, but the conditions of corruption resulting from the fall are inherent in the embryo at conception. For a time the power of the atonement holds them in abeyance; but, as children grow up and begin to act upon their own initiative, sin conceives in their hearts, "and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good." [^11]

From this statement it is plain that men are not merely born into a world of sin. Instead, the effects of the fall and the corruption that has subsequently become associated with the flesh are transmitted to each new embryo at conception. As the physical body develops, these elements of corruption manifest themselves by diverting the individual's drives and emotional expressions toward vanity, greed, lust, etc. These elements of corruption are in the flesh. For this reason Lehi warned his sons not to "choose eternal death, according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate" and bring people "down to hell." [^12] It should be observed in passing that it is through this avenue that Satan approaches the individual and entices him away from the paths of righteousness.

Other scriptural statements coming through the Prophet Joseph Smith bear a similar testimony. While Nephi exulted in the mercy of God, he nevertheless exclaimed: "O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities." He expressed further the conflict within himself by asking, "And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh?" [^13] Similarly, the brother of Jared excused himself and his fellow men for their weaknesses, stating that "because of the fall our natures have become evil continually." [^14] And to King Benjamin an angel explained that if men heed the natural impulses of their nature in mortality they "drink damnation to their own souls, ... For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam." [^15]

But besides the flesh and the devil, there are other factors that effect man in mortality. By his atonement, Christ paid the total debt of justice for the transgressions of men. And having done so, he thereby, without robbing justice, cushions man's spiritual fall by extending elements of his light and truth to man, to quicken and sustain his life and to provide the means by which man can overcome the corruption in the flesh and the enticements of the Adversary, and return to God's presence. Furthermore, Christ paid the debt of justice by descending below all things, that in him the fulness of the Father's glory might reside. His experiences in mortality were necessary to this end. To men he then became the perfect expression, manifestation and revelation of this eternal, divine power of intelligence or light and truth. A revelation that speaks of Christ and the manifestation of his glory referred to the fact that he "ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth." [^16] For this reason Christ is the light and the life of the world, and it is said that in him dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily.

As Christ went from grace to grace until he received the fulness of the Father's glory, so also can men be glorified through Christ, that in them may dwell the Father's intelligence and power. This is the purpose of their existence. It is indispensable that this point be understood, for here is the central theme of Joseph Smith's concept of the gospel. Therein lies the key to true and intelligent worship. A revelation on the subject emphasized:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. [^17]

To the Mormon Prophet, the birth process opens the door repeatedly to growth and development, by which ultimately man can become a being of like nature and glory to Christ. Through birth man was organized as a pre-mortal child of God, with a body composed of pure, refined spirit. Through procreation that spirit is tabernacled in a physical body and subjected to the probationary proving grounds of mortality. Finally, by being born again into the kingdom of God, man is given access to those powers of light and truth by which he may ultimately be glorified. In emphasizing that through this channel can man receive and have developed within himself the powers of God's glory, a revelation in December, 1830, said of those who are born again:

Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment. [^18]

Here many synonyms for God's glory are expressed, and it is pointedly declared that through the channel of birth into the kingdom of God the powers that constitute God's glory are to be developed within man. With emphasis on this point, the revelation concludes: "This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten." [^19]

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. "Diaries of William Huntington," typewritten copy in the Brigham Young University Library, in "Mormon Diaries," XVI, pp. 1-2.
[^2] 2. Journal of Discourses, XXI, 171-172. Woodruff wrote:
[^3] 3. Ibid., V, 193.
[^4] 4. Ibid., XXII, 240-241; XXIII, 31-32; XXV, 171-172.
[^5] 5. "History of Zerah Pulsipher, 1789-1872," as written by himself, typewritten copy in the Brigham Young University Library, pp. 5-7.
[^6] 6. Testimonies for the Truth: A Record of the Power of God, Miraculous and Providential, Witnessed in the Travels and Experiences of Benjamin Brown, published by S. W. Richards, 15 Wilton Street, Liverpool, England, 1853, pp. 5-7.
[^7] 7. John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of the Latter-day Saints (Jefferson City, Missouri, 1839), p. 6.
[^8] 8. Smith 2:19.
[^9] 9. Messenger and Advocate, October, 1835.
[^10] 10. Moroni 10:19; see also Mormon 9:20-26.
[^11] 11. Moroni 7:38.
[^12] 12. Published in London, in 1841.
[^13] 13. Documentary History of the Church, IV, 538; hereafter cited DHC. For instance, Newel Knight gave the following account of a visit to Harmony, Pennsylvania, in August, 1830:
[^14] 14. Journal History, November 5, 1830.
[^15] 15. Ibid., November 7, 1830.
[^16] 16. Corrill, op. cit., pp. 8-9.
[^17] 17. Journal History, March 19, 1833.
[^18] 18. Millennial Star, XXV, 439.
[^19] 19. Taken from Kimball's Journal, cited by his daughter Helen mar Whitney, in "Early Reminiscences," Woman's Exponent, Salt Lake City, IX (August 1, 1880), p. 39. This incident occurred in the evening when the Prophet called upon Brigham Young to pray. (See Millennial Star, XXV, 439.) Joseph Smith confirmed the fact that this was the first time he had witnessed that particular "gift among the brethren." B. H. Roberts has written:
