Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith's Idea of the Gospel ( 1961)

III. The Gospel of Jesus Christ.

To Joseph Smith, the gospel was the specifically defined program through which man can come into spiritual union with Christ and thereby be glorified, even as Christ has been glorified in the Father. To achieve this end, Jesus first paid the debt of justice for erring men and established evidence and testimony of his divine mission, that men may ponder the need of redemption and exercise faith in him as their Savior. To those who consider these testimonies and evidences in faith, Christ manifests his spirit, even the Holy Ghost, as a witness of truth. In this way men are born again to see the kingdom of God, and those who see have the responsibility to then be born of water and of the spirit to enter officially therein.

The Prophet emphasized this sequence in the rebirth process, as he explained the teachings of Jesus to Nicodemus, that one must first be born again to see the kingdom of God and thereafter be born of water and of the spirit to enter therein. [^1] On another occasion he said: "Being born again, comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances." [^2]

Joseph Smith also distinguished between being born of water and being born of the spirit. In the first, one is baptized by immersion for the remission of sins and enters thereby into personal covenant with Christ, promising to walk in newness of life by the aid of the Holy Spirit. Under these circumstances, Christ allows his atonement to cover the past transgressions of the newborn creature and extends to him further manifestations of his power.

Baptism is largely founded in the requirements of eternal law. By sincere compliance with this ordinance the penitent sinner is vindicated or acquitted of all sin. In other words, he thereby stands justified before the bar of God. Since the atonement pays the demands of broken law, man is justified in the legal sense by the mercy or grace of Christ and not by his own works.

Joseph Smith stated: "We know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true." [^3] The individual's faith and godly works are important, however, if he is to comply with the set conditions by which the atonement will pay the debt of justice in his behalf. As an unearned gift, Christ's grace must be merited by the kind of faith that expresses itself in godly works and brings the individual into spiritual union with Christ. In this sense, men are justified by faith. But in the sense that the Spirit brings men into union with Christ so that he thereby pays their debt of transgression, justification comes by the Spirit. Justification by grace, by faith, and by the Spirit are all either pointedly taught by the Prophet or are inherent within his views of the gospel.

The principles and ordinances associated with the doctrine of justification are referred to in Joseph Smith's thought as the preparatory gospel, [^4] which largely clears the way for the greater and more meaningful manifestation of Christ's power to the individual. In the more complete sense, Joseph Smith's concept of the gospel can be explained in the meaning and context of three terms: justification, sanctification, and sealing. Having briefly discussed the first of these terms, attention will now be centered upon the second and third.

To be sanctified is to be made pure and holy. There is more than the legal satisfaction of divine law involved in achieving this end. While in justification one is freed from the demands of broken law, in sanctification the effects of sin upon the soul are removed and the individual is filled with the light and truth of God's Spirit. Sanctification is thus achieved by coordinating the power of the atonement to forgive sins with the power of the Spirit to purge the effects of sin from one's soul. In the sense that the atonement is involved, sanctification is achieved by the blood of Christ; but, in the sense that the Spirit is the active agent therein, men are sanctified by its powers. Revelations through Joseph Smith make use of both expressions.

Man of himself does not have the power to cleanse his soul of the effects of sin. Nor can he fill himself with the divine intelligence by which his life can be stabilized in virtue and brought into full spiritual union with Christ. The renovating, regenerating and enlightening powers by which these things are made possible must come from God. And here the grace of Christ is again involved as a basic part of the gospel. The Mormon Prophet wrote: "We know ... that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength." [^5]

Here again Christ's grace is made contingent upon man's faith and dedication to righteousness. In this sense, a revelation declared to Joseph Smith that those who receive the priesthood and magnify "their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies." [^6] Another revelation referred to the endowments of light and truth that were given to Christ, were positively moved upon by the spirit of revelation, as the keys to center the initiating action in man had not yet been restored to earth.

With the restoration of the full sealing powers by Elijah, in the Kirtland Temple, the doctrine and practices of this phase of the gospel were expanded. The Prophet explained that men were not only to be sealed up individually, but that the power of the priesthood was to be used to perpetuate in righteousness the family unit into eternity. Joseph Smith then cited II Peter, chapter 1, as an admonition for the Saints to add to their faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, patience, godliness and brotherly kindness, and strive in this way to receive the more sure word of prophecy and thereby make their calling and election sure. In an official statement, the Prophet said: "The more sure word of prophecy means a man's knowing that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy, through the power of the Holy Priesthood." [^7] From this statement it is apparent that the spirit of revelation and the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood are essential to the end of sealing up a person to eternal life. Of the need for the latter, the Prophet said: "The anointing and sealing is to be called, elected and made sure." [^8]

Those who are sealed unto eternal life enter into the Lord's rest and thereby enjoy the living manifestations of his glory. The term "rest," as the Prophet understood it, seems to have at least two connotations. First, it implies victory over the flesh and the corruption that is inherent therein, by the sanctifying powers of the gospel. Rest here means the secession of conflict, in victory by the Spirit. The manifestation of God's glory to the individual is also associated with the idea of rest. In this sense, it no doubt has reference to the fact that one who has received the Second Comforter of Promise, even the promise of eternal life, is then entitled by faith to the Second Comforter of Presence, or the right to come into the presence of the Lord. The Prophet makes use of both ideas in reference to the Second Comforter. Herein lie the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood, he explained in a revelation:

To have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant. [^9]

On another occasion, Joseph Smith spoke of the means by which these blessings are attained as "the established order of the kingdom of God." In short, here is the way by which fallen man can develop spiritually and where he can come back into the presence of God and enjoy the power and communion of the celestial world. until step by step he received the fulness of the Father's glory. Therein John bore record that Jesus "received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness." In the same way men are to receive of the Father's fulness through Christ. [^10] To receive grace for grace implies that as one gives grace he in turn receives the grace of God.

The sanctifying powers of the Holy Spirit are given to men through the gift of the Holy Ghost, bestowed upon baptized believers by the imposition of hands of those acting in the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood. By utilizing the spiritual powers made available through this channel, the individual can become sanctified, in direct proportion to the degree that he yields his heart to God.

The most distinct attribute of the pure intelligence that constitutes Christ's glory is love, spoken of in Mormon scriptures as charity—the pure and perfect love of Christ. By union with the Spirit this love is developed in man. In a sense, the genuine believer in Christ receives it as an endowment. For instance, Mormon wrote to Moroni that "the visitation of the Holy Ghost" fills men "with hope and perfect love." [^11] Without this love that is born of the Spirit, man cannot be saved in the presence of God. By the power of the Spirit man's soul must be purified, developed and refined to where he partakes of the divine nature and grows unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.

The gifts of the Holy Ghost also come as the natural by-products of the spirit in the lives of regenerated men. The Prophet likened these gifts unto the food one must partake of to grow and mature physically. So also must one partake of the gifts of the Spirit if he is to grow up spiritually in Christ. The manifestation of spiritual gifts thus serves as a barometer measuring the degree of saving faith possessed by the individual. The Book of Mormon position on the importance of spiritual gifts has already been cited, that if these things have ceased then faith has ceased and men are as though there had been no atonement made.

The doctrine of sealing is the final stage of the gospel, as it applies to men in mortality. In a general conference, held October 25, 1831, Joseph Smith "said that the order of the High Priesthood was, that they have power given them to seal up the Saints unto eternal life." But, said he: "Until the Saints had perfect love they were liable to fall. When they had a testimony that their names were sealed in the Lamb's Book of Life, they had perfect love, and then it was impossible for false Christs to deceive them." [^12]

As early as November, 1831, a revelation said of the sealing functions of the gospel: "And as many as the Father shall bear record, to you shall be given power to seal them up unto eternal life." [^13] From these instructions and from the historical evidence at hand, it seems that this function of the gospel was only carried out in the early days of the Church when the elders

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. "Diaries of William Huntington," typewritten copy in the Brigham Young University Library, in "Mormon Diaries," XVI, pp. 1-2.
[^2] 2. Journal of Discourses, XXI, 171-172. Woodruff wrote:
[^3] 3. Ibid., V, 193.
[^4] 4. Ibid., XXII, 240-241; XXIII, 31-32; XXV, 171-172.
[^5] 5. "History of Zerah Pulsipher, 1789-1872," as written by himself, typewritten copy in the Brigham Young University Library, pp. 5-7.
[^6] 6. Testimonies for the Truth: A Record of the Power of God, Miraculous and Providential, Witnessed in the Travels and Experiences of Benjamin Brown, published by S. W. Richards, 15 Wilton Street, Liverpool, England, 1853, pp. 5-7.
[^7] 7. John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of the Latter-day Saints (Jefferson City, Missouri, 1839), p. 6.
[^8] 8. Smith 2:19.
[^9] 9. Messenger and Advocate, October, 1835.
[^10] 10. Moroni 10:19; see also Mormon 9:20-26.
[^11] 11. Moroni 7:38.
[^12] 12. Published in London, in 1841.
[^13] 13. Documentary History of the Church, IV, 538; hereafter cited DHC. For instance, Newel Knight gave the following account of a visit to Harmony, Pennsylvania, in August, 1830:
