I lived in South Africa for a little more than two years. One of the things I learned is the necessity of having a way to help me reach all my daily destinations. I found GPS to be vital. It’s an electronic map that allows me to move around to fulfil my duties, whether they are family related, professional obligations, or my ecclesiastical responsibilities.

Whenever I paid attention to this electronic map, I would reach my destinations on time and quickly return home to my family. But, when I missed a roundabout or a crossroads, the GPS would take me down very long roads and I would sometimes be delayed in getting to my destination—or get completely lost on the way to another unknown destination.

As pilgrims on this earth—to enable us to both sail through the challenges of this mortal life and to return to our heavenly home—God has provided the Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ. It enables us to achieve our goal of abiding in tune with the Holy Ghost and prepares us for our heavenly inheritance.

Like a GPS leads us to the destinations we wish to reach, the Book of Mormon guides us each day on the path toward a relationship with our Heavenly Father and the companionship of His Holy Spirit. It is our duty to refer to it as it directs our lives each day.

In the light of its value and vital role in all aspects of the lives of God’s children, President Russell M. Nelson asked a number of questions that require deep reflection from each of us. He said, “My brothers and sisters, how precious is the Book of Mormon to you? If you were offered diamonds or rubies or the Book of Mormon, which would you choose? Honestly, which is of greater worth to you?”

His questions allowed me to reflect on what my life would be like if I had not known Jesus Christ as the Saviour and Redeemer of the world, and what I would be like without the ordinances and covenants as taught by the prophets in the Book of Mormon and as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith in our dispensation.

President Nelson continued: “Something powerful happens when a child of God seeks to know more about Him and His Beloved Son. Nowhere are those truths taught more clearly and powerfully than in the Book of Mormon.”

I would like you to think about the following three questions President Nelson urged leaders in Chile to consider.

“First, what would your life be like without the Book of Mormon? Second, what would you not know? And third, what would you not have?”

President Ezra Taft Benson (1899-1994) said: “The Book of Mormon is the instrument that God designed to ‘sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out [His] elect.’ This sacred volume of scripture needs to become more central in our preaching, our teaching, and our missionary work.

“At present, the Book of Mormon is studied in our Sunday School and seminary classes every fourth year. This four-year pattern, however, must not be followed by Church members in their personal and family study. We need to read daily from the pages of the book that will get a man ‘nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book.’”

My brothers and sisters, the Book of Mormon has real power and influence in the lives of those who study it with real intent. It brings peace to the soul that seek for it, unites homes and families in dislocation and restores relationships between people when it is placed at the centre of every relationship, because it brings Christ in the midst of His people.

In 4 Nephi 1:15–18 we read:

“And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

“And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

“There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God.

“And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land.”

Since the first time I came across the Book of Mormon more than 35 years ago, I have continued to read it each day and my life has become more meaningful as a disciple of Christ. I have a clear understanding of my relationship with my Heavenly Father and my fellow man.

In my family we have a Book of Mormon study plan with our children. The influence that it continues to have in their lives is truly noteworthy and we are happy to see them applying the principles of the gospel that they understand so clearly.

Elie K. Monga was named an Area Seventy in April 2017. He resides in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo. He is married to Vianney Mwenze and they are the parents of four children.
