Oliver Cowdery Becomes the Prophet's Scribe—the Translation of the Plates Continued.

Oliver Cowdery.

On the 5th day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery[1] came to my house, until which time I had never seen him. He stated to me that having been teaching school in the neighborhood where my father resided, and my father being one of those who sent to the school, he went to board for a season at his house, and while there the family related to him the circumstance of my having received the plates, and accordingly he had come to make inquiries of me.[2] Two days after the arrival of Mr. Cowdery (being the 7th of April)[3] I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he began to write for me, which having continued for some time, I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and obtained the following:

Revelation given April, 1829, to Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith, Jun.[4]

Witness of the Spirit to Cowdery.

After we had received this revelation, Oliver Cowdery stated to me that after he had gone to my father's to board, and after the family had communicated to him concerning my having obtained the plates, that one night after he had retired to bed he called upon the Lord to know if these things were so, and the Lord manifested to him that they were true, but he had kept the circumstance entirely secret, and had mentioned it to no one; so that after this revelation was given, he knew that the work was true, because no being living knew of the thing alluded to in the revelation, but God and himself.

The Mission of John the Apostle.

During the month of April I continued to translate, and he to write, with little cessation, during which time we received several revelations. A difference of opinion arising between us about the account of John the Apostle, mentioned in the New Testament, [5] as to whether he died or continued to live, we mutually agreed to settle it by the Urim and Thummim and the following is the word which we received:

Revelation, given to Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, in Harmony, Pennsylvania, April, 1829, when they desired to know whether John, the beloved disciple, tarried on earth or died. Translated from parchment, written and hid up by himself.[6]

Oliver Desires to Translate.

Whilst continuing the work of translation, during the month of April, Oliver Cowdery became exceedingly anxious to have the power to translate bestowed upon him, and in relation to this desire the following revelations were obtained:

Revelation, given April, 1829.[7]

Revelation, given to Oliver Cowdery, April, 1829.[8]

### Footnotes
