Prospects of the Church at the Opening of the Year 1831—Removal of the Prophet Joseph from New York to Ohio—Doctrinal Development.

Prospects of the Church—1831.

The year 1831 opened with a prospect great and glorious for the welfare of the kingdom; for on the 2nd of January, 1831, a conference was held in the town of Fayette, New York, at which the ordinary business of the Church was transacted; and in addition, the following revelation was received:

Revelation, given January 2nd, 1831.[1]

James Covill.

Not long after this conference of the 2nd of January closed, there was a man came to me by the name of James Covill, who had been a Baptist minister for about forty years, and covenanted with the Lord that he would obey any command that the Lord would give to him through me, as His servant, and I received the following:

Revelation to James Covill, given at Fayette, New York, January 5th, 1831.[2]

Why Covill Rejected the Commandment.

As James Covill rejected the word of the Lord, and returned to his former principles and people, the Lord gave unto me and Sidney Rigdon the following revelation, explaining why he obeyed not the word:

Revelation given at Fayette, New York, January 6, 1831.[3]

The Prophet Removes to Ohio.

The latter part of January, in company with Brothers Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, I started with my wife for Kirtland, Ohio, where we arrived about the first of February, and were kindly received and welcomed into the house of Brother Newel K. Whitney.[4] My wife and I lived in the family of Brother Whitney several weeks, and received every kindness and attention which could be expected, and especially from Sister Whitney.

The Branch of the Church at Kirtland.

The branch of the Church in this part of the Lord's vineyard, which had increased to nearly one hundred members, were striving to do the will of God, so far as they knew it, though some strange notions and false spirits had crept in among them. With a little caution and some wisdom, I soon assisted the brethren and sisters to overcome them. The plan of "common stock," which had existed in what was called "the family,"[5] whose members generally had embraced the everlasting Gospel, was readily abandoned for the more perfect law of the Lord; and the false spirits were easily discerned and rejected by the light of revelation.

The Lord gave unto the Church the following:

Revelation, given at Kirtland, Ohio, February 4th, 1831.[6]

Revelation Giving the Law of the Church.

On the 9th of February, 1831, at Kirtland, in the presence of twelve Elders, and according to the promise heretofore made,[7] the Lord gave the following revelation, embracing the law of the Church:

Revelation, given February, 1831.[8]

74.[11] Behold, verily I say unto you, that whatever persons among you, having put away their companions for the cause of fornication, or in other words, if they shall testify before you in all lowliness of heart that this is the case, ye shall not cast them out from among you;

Pretentions of a Woman to Revelations, etc.

Soon after the foregoing revelation was received, a woman[12] came making great pretensions of revealing commandments, laws and other curious matters; and as almost every person has advocates for both theory and practice, in the various notions and projects of the age, it became necessary to inquire of the Lord, when I received the following:

Revelation given at Kirtland, February, 1831.[13]

A Special Conference, 3rd-6th of June.

The latter part of February I received the following revelation, which caused the Church to appoint a conference to be held early in the month of June ensuing:

Revelation to Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon, given at Kirtland, February, 1831.[14]

### Footnotes
