The Amherst Conference—The Vision of the Degrees of Glory in Man's Future Life.

The Labors of the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon.

After Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer had departed for Jackson county, Missouri, I resumed the translation of the Scriptures, and continued to labor in this branch of my calling with Elder Sidney Rigdon as my scribe, until I received the following:

Revelation, given December 1st, 1831.[1]

The Prophet's Earnest Labors in Kirtland.

Knowing now the mind of the Lord, that the time had come that the Gospel should be proclaimed in power and demonstration to the world, from the Scriptures, reasoning with men as in days of old, I took a journey to Kirtland, in company with Elder Sidney Rigdon on the 3rd day of December, to fulfil the above revelation. On the 4th, several of the Elders and members assembled together to learn their duty, and for edification, and after some time had been spent in conversing about our temporal and spiritual welfare, I received the following:

Revelation, given December 4th, 1831.[2]

Effectiveness of the Prophet's and Sidney Rigdon's Labors.

From this time until the 8th or 10th of January, 1832, myself and Elder Rigdon continued to preach in Shalersville, Ravenna, and other places, setting forth the truth, vindicating the cause of our Redeemer; showing that the day of vengeance was coming upon this generation like a thief in the night; that prejudice, blindness and darkness filled the minds of many, and caused them to persecute the true Church, and reject the true light; by which means we did much towards allaying the excited feelings which were growing out of the scandalous letters then being published in the Ohio Star, at Ravenna, by the before-mentioned apostate, Ezra Booth.[3] On the 10th of January, I received the following revelation making known the will of the Lord concerning the Elders of the Church until the convening of the next conference.[4]

Revelation of January 10th, 1832.[5]

Translation Renewed.

Upon the reception of the foregoing word of the Lord, I recommenced the translation of the Scriptures, and labored diligently until just before the conference, which was to convene on the 25th of January. During this period, I also received the following, as an explanation of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, 7th chapter, 14th verse:

Revelation.[6]

The Amherst Conference.

A few days before the conference was to commence in Amherst, Lorain county, I started with the Elders that lived in my own vicinity, and arrived in good time. At this conference much harmony prevailed, and considerable business was done to advance the kingdom, and promulgate the Gospel to the inhabitants of the surrounding country.[7] The Elders seemed anxious for me to inquire of the Lord that they might know His will, or learn what would be most pleasing to Him for them to do, in order to bring men to a sense of their condition; for, as it was written, all men have gone out of the way, so that none doeth good, no, not one. I inquired and received the following:

Revelation, given January, 1832.[8]

Revelation on the Degrees of Future Glory.

Upon my return from Amherst conference, I resumed the translation of the Scriptures. From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body the term "Heaven," as intended for the Saints' eternal home must include more kingdoms than one. Accordingly, on the 16th of February, 1832, while translating St. John's Gospel, myself and Elder Rigdon saw the following vision:

Vision of the Glories.[9]

The Prophet's Views on the Foregoing Revelation.

Nothing could be more pleasing to the Saints upon the order of the kingdom of the Lord, than the light which burst upon the world through the foregoing vision. Every law, every commandment, every promise, every truth, and every point touching the destiny of man, from Genesis to Revelation, where the purity of the scriptures remains unsullied by the folly of men, go to show the perfection of the theory [of different degrees of glory in the future life] and witnesses the fact that that document is a transcript from the records of the eternal world. The sublimity of the ideas; the purity of the language; the scope for action; the continued duration for completion, in order that the heirs of salvation may confess the Lord and bow the knee; the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments for sins, are so much beyond the narrow-mindedness of men, that every honest man is constrained to exclaim: "It came from God."

A Key to St. John's Book of Revelation.

About the first of March, in connection with the translation of the Scriptures, I received the following explanation of the Revelation of St. John:

Revelation, given at Hiram, Portage County, Ohio.[10]

A. It is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal and eternal state.

A. They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator John, in describing Heaven, the Paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual, being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal, in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created.

A. They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings, in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity.

A. Their eyes are a representation of light, and knowledge; that is they are full of knowledge; and their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, &c.

A. We are to understand that these Elders whom John saw, were Elders who had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; who belonged to the seven churches,—and were then in the Paradise of God.

A. We are to understand that it contains the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God; the hidden things of His economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence.

A. We are to understand that the first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh.

A. We are to understand that they are four angels sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting Gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness.

A. We are to understand that the angel ascending from the east, is he to whom is given the seal of the living God, over the twelve tribes of Israel; wherefore, he crieth unto the four angels having the everlasting Gospel, saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads; And, if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and restore all things.

A. They are to be accomplished in the sixth thousandth year, or the opening of the sixth seal.

A. We are to understand that those who are sealed are High Priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting Gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn.

A. We are to understand that as God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day He finished His work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth; even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things, except that which He hath not put into His power, when He shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of His work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years; the preparing of the way before the time of His coming.

A. They are to be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ.

A. We are to understand that it was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold this is Elias; who, as it is written, must come and restore all things.

A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews, after they are gathered, and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers.

Sundry Revelations.

Besides the work of translating, previous to the 20th of March, I received the four following revelations:—

Revelation, given March, 1832. The Order given of the Lord to Enoch, [Joseph Smith, Jun.,][11] for the purpose of establishing the poor.[12]

Revelation, given March, 1832.[13]

Revelation, given March, 1832.[14]

Revelation, given March, 1832.[15]

### Footnotes
