The Enjoyment of Spiritual Blessings in the Church—The Word of Wisdom.

The Enjoyment of Spiritual Gifts.

This winter [1832-33] was spent in translating the Scriptures; in the School of the Prophets; and sitting in conferences. I had many glorious seasons of refreshing. The gifts which follow them that believe and obey the Gospel, as tokens that the Lord is ever the same in His dealings with the humble lovers and followers of truth, began to be poured out among us, as in ancient days;—for as we, viz.: Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, Newel K. Whitney, Hyrum Smith, Zebedee Coltrin,[1] Joseph Smith, Sen., Samuel H. Smith, John Murdock, Lyman E. Johnson,[2] Orson Hyde, Ezra Thayer, High Priests; and Levi Hancock,[3] and William Smith,[4] Elders, were assembled in conference, on the 22nd day of January, I spoke to the conference in another tongue, and was followed in the same gift by Brother Zebedee Coltrin, and he by Brother William Smith, after which the Lord poured out His Spirit in a miraculous manner, until all the Elders spake in tongues, and several members, both male and female, exercised the same gift. Great and glorious were the divine manifestations of the Holy Spirit. Praises were sung to God and the Lamb; speaking and praying, all in tongues, occupied the conference until a late hour at night, so rejoiced were we at the return of these long absent blessings.

Ordinance of the Washing of Feet.

On the 23rd of January, we again assembled in conference; when, after much speaking, singing, praying, and praising God, all in tongues, we proceeded to the washing of feet (according to the practice recorded in the 13th chapter of John's Gospel), as commanded of the Lord. Each Elder washed his own feet first, after which I girded myself with a towel and washed the feet of all of them, wiping them with the towel with which I was girded. Among the number, my father presented himself, but before I washed his feet, I asked of him a father's blessing, which he granted by laying his hands upon my head, in the name of Jesus Christ, and declaring that I should continue in the Priest's office until Christ comes. At the close of the scene, Brother Frederick G. Williams, being moved upon by the Holy Ghost, washed my feet in token of his fixed determination to be with me in suffering, or in journeying, in life or in death, and to be continually on my right hand; in which I accepted him in the name of the Lord.

The Elders Pronounced Clean.

I then said to the Elders, As I have done so do ye; wash ye, therefore, one another's feet; and by the power of the Holy Ghost I pronounced them all clean from the blood of this generation; but if any of them should sin wilfully after they were thus cleansed, and sealed up unto eternal life, they should be given over unto the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. Having continued all day in fasting, and prayer, and ordinances, we closed by partaking of the Lord's supper. I blessed the bread and wine in the name of the Lord, when we all ate and drank, and were filled; then we sang a hymn, and the meeting adjourned.

Revision of the New Testament Completed.

I completed the translation and review of the New Testament, on the 2nd of February, 1833 and sealed it up, no more to be opened till it arrived in Zion.[5]

An Epistle

Of the First Presidency, to the Church of Christ in Thompson, Geauga County, Ohio.

Kirtland, February 6th, 1833.

Dear Brethren,

We salute you, by this our epistle, in the bonds of love, rejoicing in your steadfastness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: and we desire your prosperity in the ways of truth and righteousness, praying for you continually, that your faith fail not, and that you may overcome all the evils with which you are surrounded, and become pure and holy before God, even our Father, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

It has seemed good unto the Holy Spirit and unto us, to send this our epistle to you by the hand of our beloved Brother Salmon Gee, your messenger, who has been ordained by us, in obedience to the commandments of God, to the office of Elder to preside over the Church in Thompson, taking the oversight thereof, to lead you and to teach the things which are according to godliness; in whom we have great confidence, as we presume also you have, we therefore say to you, yea, not us only, but the Lord also, receive him as such, knowing that the Lord has appointed him to this office for your good, holding him up by your prayers, praying for him continually that he may be endowed with wisdom and understanding in the knowledge of the Lord, that through him you may be kept from evil spirits, and all strifes and dissensions, and grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Brethren beloved, continue in brotherly love, walk in meekness, watching unto prayer, that you be not overcome. Follow after peace, as said our beloved brother Paul, that you may be the children of our Heavenly Father, and not give occasion for stumbling, to Saint or sinner. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that we may be enabled to do the work whereunto we are called, that you may enjoy the mysteries of God, even a fulness; and may the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

Joseph Smith, Jun.,

Sidney Rigdon,

Frederick G. Williams.

John Murdock's Message to the Thompson Branch.

The following letter was written by John Murdock, a High Priest, (who had previously been with the Church in Thompson), to Salmon Gee, Elder of the Church in Thompson:

Kirtland, February 11, 1833.

Beloved brethren and sisters in the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I beseech you in the bowels of mercy to remember the exhortation which I gave you while I was yet present with you, to beware of delusive spirits. I rejoice that our Heavenly Father hath blessed you greatly, as He also has me, in enabling me to speak the praises of God and the mysteries of the kingdom in other tongues according to promise: and this without throwing me down or wallowing me on the ground, or any thing unbecoming or immoral; also, without any external operation of the system, but it is the internal operation and power of the Spirit of God, so that I know that those odd actions and strange noises are not caused by the Spirit of the Lord as is represented by Brother King. Therefore in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Spirit of the living God, according to the authority of the Holy Priesthood committed to me, I command Brother Thomas King, (as though I were present), to cease from your diabolical acts of enthusiasm, and also from acting as an Elder in this Church of Christ, until you come and give full testimony to the High Priests in Kirtland, that you are worthy of that holy calling; because those are the things of God, and are to be used in the fear of God: and I now not only command you, but exhort you in behalf of your soul's salvation, to submit, and let Brother Gee be upheld by the prayer of faith of every brother and sister, and if there be this union of spirit, and prayer of faith, every false spirit shall be bound, and cast out from among you.

My beloved children in the bonds of the Gospel, and the bowels of mercy, which is the everlasting love of God, I do beseech you to live faithful and in obedience to the commandments of God; and in the name of the Lord Jesus, I say, the blessings of God shall attend you.

John Murdock.

Concerning the Prophet's Communication to Seaton.

February 12.—Having received Seaton's paper, from Rochester, New York, containing a part of my communication, written on the 4th of January, I wrote as follows:

To N. E. Seaton, Rochester.

Dear Sir:—I was somewhat disappointed on receiving my paper with only a part of my letter inserted in it. The letter which I wrote you for publication, I wrote by the commandment of God, and I am quite anxious to have it all laid before the public, for it is of importance to them: but I have no claim upon you, neither do I wish to urge you, beyond that which is reasonable, to do it. I have only to appeal to your extended generosity to all religious societies that claim that Christ has come in the flesh; and also to tell you what will be the consequence of a neglect to publish it.

Some parts of the letter were very severe upon the wickedness of sectarianism, I acknowledge; and the truth, remember, is hard and severe against all iniquity and wickedness, but this is no reason why it should not be published, but the very reason why it should be. I lay the ax at the root of the tree, and I long to see many of the sturdy oaks, which have long cumbered the ground, fall prostrate. I now say unto you, that if you wish to clear your garments from the blood of your readers, I exhort you to publish that letter entire; but if not, the sin be upon your head. Accept, sir the good wishes and tender regard of your unworthy servant,

Joseph Smith, Jun.

Case of Burr Riggs.

February 13.—A council of High Priests assembled to investigate the proceedings of Brother Burr Riggs, who was accused of failing to magnify his calling as High Priest, and had been guilty of neglect of duty, of abusing the Elders, and of treating their admonitions with contempt. After the council had considered the case, Brother Riggs agreed to make satisfaction, but did not show much humility.

February 15.—In a council I ordained Harpin Riggs, and Isaac McWethy Elders.

February 17.—In conference I ordained John Johnson to the office of Elder.

Consideration of Missouri Correspondence of the 11th and 12th of January.

February 26.—A special council of High Priests assembled in Zion, to take into consideration my letter to Brother Phelps, of the 11th of January, and the revelation called the Olive Leaf, referred to in my letter, and the epistle of Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith of the 14th of January, in behalf of the conference of High Priests: and Oliver Cowdery, William W. Phelps, and John Corrill were appointed a committee to write an epistle from the conference to the brethren in Kirtland; which was written and sanctioned by the conference.

Excommunication of Burr Riggs.

The same day a conference of High Priests was again called in Kirtland, concerning Brother Burr Riggs, who was accused of neglecting to make satisfaction to the Church as he had agreed, and disgracing the High Priesthood by neglect of duty, and saying he did not care how soon he was cut off from the Church. He was cut off by a unanimous vote of the council.

February 27.—I received the following revelation:

The Word of Wisdom.[6]

A Word of Wisdom, for the benefit of the council of high priests, assembled in Kirtland, and the church; and also the Saints in Zion. To be sent greeting; not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all Saints in the last days; given for a principle with promise, adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all Saints, who are or can be called Saints.

A Word of Comfort to the Prophet

March 8.—I received the following revelation:

Revelation.[7]

The Apocrypha.

March 9.—Having come to that portion of the ancient writings called the Apocrypha, I received the following:

Revelation.[8]

A Mission to the East Appointed.

March 12.—A council of High Priests assembled in the school room and decided that Horace Cowin and Zerubbabel Snow, Amasa M. Lyman[9] and William F. Cahoon, Jenkins Salisbury and Truman Wait, journey east on a mission, two by two, paired as their names are written. Brothers Cowin and Salisbury were ordained at the same time.

Case of Brother Lake.

March 15.—A council was called to consider the case of Brother Lake, from Wooster, Wayne county, Ohio, who came professing to have received revelations. On investigation, it was unanimously agreed, that said Brother Lake was under the influence of an evil spirit, and that his license as Priest be taken from him.

The same day I received the following:

Revelation to Enoch (Joseph Smith, Jun.,) given to the Saints in Kirtland.[10]

### Footnotes
