Cherry B. Silver, Anne C. Pingree, Mary Ellen Edmunds, Carol L. Clark, Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s ( 1991)

Preface

In our Relief Society sisterhood, everyone counts. Each woman matters. The mission of Relief Society reflects our desire that each of our sisters feels her eternal value as she enjoys the fruits of full gospel living.

The Mission of Relief Society

Build Personal Testimony (First Article of Faith)

Each woman is a daughter of God. She uses her agency to build her testimony and the testimonies of her family and others by being a thoughtful disciple, a student of the scriptures, and a prayerful, spiritual witness of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Bless the Individual Woman (D&C 18:10)

Each woman lives righteously and joyfully as she stays true to her covenants with the Lord, shares in the blessings of the priesthood, values the diversity of others, and uses her abilities to extend, exemplify and teach.

Develop and Exercise Charity (Moroni 7:47)

Because "charity never faileth," charity is the keystone of Relief Society's mission statement. Each woman rejoices in truth as she develops and exercises qualities of charity in all aspects of her life.

Strengthen Families (D&C 88:119)

Each woman in each circumstance makes a home. She creates unity there and bases her home upon love of the Lord and love of each family member.

Enjoy a Unified Sisterhood (Mosiah 18:21-22)

As part of a sisterhood of righteous women, each woman shares faith, values, experience, ideas, friendship and love with her Relief Society sisters of all ages and circumstances.

In this book, members of the Relief Society General Board share their faith and insights about our wonderful worldwide Relief Society sisterhood and the mission that moves our work forward. We invite you to add your own perceptions to theirs as you share the mission of Relief Society with your sisters everywhere.

Sincerely,

Elaine L. Jack, President

Chieko N. Okazaki, First Counselor

Aileen H. Clyde, Second Counselor
