Cherry B. Silver, Anne C. Pingree, Mary Ellen Edmunds, Carol L. Clark, Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s ( 1991)

Build a Personal Testimony

by Cherry B. Silver

Testimony does not come to us ready-made like a prefabricated house. A personal testimony represents a long-term construction project in which we are the master builders gathering our supplies and managing our tools. We are continually in process of erecting or strengthening testimony. Storms come that knock down sections of our house. We may be flattened by the fall. But with hope in Christ, we rise to rebuild it, perhaps more magnificently than before. "Build ye more stately mansions, O my soul," said the poet. ("The Chambered Nautilus," Oliver Wendell Holmes.)

Our building materials include our own actions and thoughts, our studies, our journal entries recording personal wrestling with life situations, our capacity for faith and hope. Our tools consist of prayer, scripture study, and thoughtful living as disciples of Christ. Experiences in the Church provide mortar. The resulting structure, if we have built on Christ, is stout with a door open through which we invite others to enter as we share our spiritual witness: "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost."

Faith. Faith is much like a muscle of the body. It grows in strength with activity and stretching. Paul taught that we possess a spiritual as well as a temporal nature. With the exercise of faith, gradually we mature spiritually until we learn to live in the light.

One reason to have study classes within the Church is to grow spiritually among sympathetic friends, sharing insights from our experiences and adding grace to grace as the Savior did.

As we mature in spirit, we begin to act on the measure of faith we now have. Faith, which "is not to have a perfect knowledge of things" (Alma 32:21), leads us to live by godly principles. And these nurturing actions help the plant to grow further. Test to see if it is good, counseled Alma, then share your results with others. Let your light shine. Be the salt with savor, be the leaven in the lump, taught Jesus Christ. (See Matthew 6.)

The image of leaven or yeast suggests expansion. People with the light of Christ carry the demeanor and have the words to change the feelings of people around them. Those who are "full of faith" begin to stir up goodness and spiritual forces that influence the circle of people around them and may expand to leaven their whole community.

When problems arise, neighbors turn to the friend who radiates faith for her comfort and insights. "We can solve that," one Relief Society president in a little Hawaiian village used to say. She would open her arms to give a warm hug, offer a bowl of saimin to the visitor, then sit down to listen to troubles and pray together for understanding and relief.

Having faith to keep the commandments allows testimony to grow. A seamstress and mother of two children, as well as wife of a branch president in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire, bore her testimony based on life experiences as she taught Relief Society and made visiting teaching calls. "My husband couldn't get work for over a year. I made a little at my tailoring shop. Because we pay tithing and serve in the Church, other blessings come. Our family doesn't have as much sickness. We are able to shop wisely. And at the end of the month, although our money is gone, for some reason there is enough and we are still able to eat." The family was living with nonmember relatives through this period of unemployment. They could see their faith as the couple gathered their family for prayers in their room, studied gospel principles, took the bus long miles to church meetings, and made many sacrifices to keep their faith active.

There are many among us who, having once been touched by the message of the gospel, now lack faith and hope. What is the chance that these women can build a personal testimony anew?

One convert woman in Washington says, "I have so many questions. I need someone to listen to me, not to moralize, but to help me think these things through. We had wonderful home teachers who would come and talk with my husband and me, even two hours at a time. But we moved and haven't found that bond with anyone yet in our new town and new ward." Could friends from Relief Society provide that support? Can we nurture seeds of faith in one another?

A young adult woman in Utah who lives on her own and runs her own business talks of her emerging testimony: "My mother wants me to be a good church member. She set an example for me at home. But I needed to be independent and discover the truth for myself. Now that I have lived away from home for a while, I can see more clearly. I feel that I believe. Someday I'll come back." She needs models to follow and gentle encouragement from love.

Jesus gave straightforward advice to "try it" when He counseled, "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:16-17.)

To testify that moral living brings positive results, to say with certainty that commitment and sacrifice and paying tithing yield blessings, to witness that prayers are answered—all these testimonies come when we exercise our faith to live these principles and find that they come of God.

Hope. Hope is associated with the future. Particularly is it associated with our eternal future—through the redemption of Christ: "And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise." (Moroni 7:41.)

Hope sweetens life here, because hope opens spiritual windows. In October 1990 a Hungarian woman visited Salt Lake City to receive her endowment in the temple and obtain a patriarchal blessing. The blessing from the patriarch touched Ilona's heart. "He talked as if he knew all about me," she said. "There was a particular question in my life that I had confided only to my parents in Budapest, never to anyone here in the United States. Yet in the patriarchal blessing came an answer to that question. I know the Patriarch was speaking with understanding beyond his own. Another question of mine, he answered too, saying, 'That will come in the due time of the Lord.' What a relief I feel from the burdens I was carrying! I can act in the present. I can hope for the future."

Reading of some of our foremothers' lives reminds us that faith and hope made survival possible in the mud flats of Iowa in the winter of 1846-1847. Not only did women nurse others to ease the plaintive cries of the sick. Not only did families share their sacks of flour. But women living in wagon boxes or log huts gathered to sing and pray and bear spiritual witness together. And from the manifestations that followed, these women took hope. Yes, they worked diligently alongside their menfolk to improve health and housing for their frontier communities; but their goal was not a life of material ease. Many of them could have returned to comfortable conditions if they had renounced their faith and their gathering to Zion. These women lived according to a heavenly vision.

In our time, we too share the belief that we must help improve life conditions by working with other men and women to aid those unfairly treated by adverse social conditions, those burdened by poverty and illiteracy and injustice. We have an even grander hope. The woman of faith sees the panorama that reaches from birth to resurrection. When our mental windows are open to this vision of God's purposes, we cannot mourn that life right now is not fair. Instead, we act with hope that we can make a difference.

Thoughtful Discipleship. The "disciple" is a practitioner of the two great commandments—love of God, love of neighbor.

"If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

"Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." (James 1:26-27.)

"He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:8.)

For thousands of years, prophets in the Judeo-Christian tradition have defined the essence of discipleship as consisting of acts of service and personal discipline.

Do our faces show that we are happy to be alive and doing? Can we radiate goodness and empathy with our eyes and smiles? Can we speak cordially to the store clerk, drive our cars with Christian charity, earnestly listen to the ideas of others and respond with kindly, encouraging words? No one is happy all of the time, but can we make the best of even negative situations, and let the light of Christ radiate through us?

When the government of Ghana padlocked the doors of the LDS chapels in June 1989 and ordered the missionary program shut down and all foreigners connected with the Church expelled, the news struck thousands of Ghanian members like a shock wave. No longer could they meet together in their buildings, or talk with their neighbors about the gospel, or partake of the ordinances together.

What could they do with their religious faith? Emma, the Ghanian Relief Society president in Nsawam, said, "I do miss the Church. I never knew how important church meetings are until the opportunity was taken away. . . . For the first two weeks I felt like someone whose dearly beloved one has been taken away suddenly. . . . Then my head began to ache and I became so tired I couldn't seem to get out of my room. So I took the Book of Mormon and read the book of Alma. I keep reading till I feel better again. . . . I read some Church history. I think we the Ghanian Saints need the pioneer spirit. . . . I keep visiting the active sisters and they are all in good spirit. . . . I have tried to fast and pray more and better than I have ever done in all my life. My faith has increased greatly. . . . I used to be impatient in waiting; but now I know that God's time is the best. This stoppage has helped some of us to grow stronger in the gospel."

Emma is a thoughtful disciple of Christ who knew how to take the blessings of the gospel and Relief Society into the lives of others, even when the closed doors of the meetinghouses were guarded by soldiers and their faith was threatened. In December 1990, Ghanian Latter-day Saints were allowed to resume full church functions in their buildings.

Knowledge of Scriptures. Nephi taught a clear and simple doctrine when he said, "Ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

Scriptures, keys to heavenly power, may unlock spiritual doors for us. In them daily messages from deity await us. We desire to possess, not simply process, the word of Christ.

One mother raised her children by the Psalms. They were her words of praise and of rebuke, her source of philosophy when problems arose. To be a practical student of the scriptures means that a woman loves and uses the writings of the prophets. It may not mean she knows everything "chapter and verse." But she understands and uses the messages of the scriptures. She retells the parables and stories to illustrate her lessons. She makes decisions by the wise words she finds there.

Loving the scriptures and reading in them regularly allows the Lord to send us daily messages. Elder Paul H. Dunn formed this provocative epigram: "When I want to talk to God, I pray. When I want God to talk to me, I read the scriptures."

A single woman, who is a convert to the Church, advises reading scriptures prayerfully with a pencil and notebook nearby. "What do I need to guide my life today?" she asks. In the middle of reading and pondering a chapter in the Bible, for instance, she feels particularly attracted to a verse or two. She writes these down and adds her thoughts or feelings or a way to apply these verses to herself. These personalized devotionals have sustained her through stormy seasons of life.

We are all in process of learning better how to use the scriptures. We can learn to feel the personality of the writers, to apply their teachings to life situations, and to seek the inspiration of the Lord for ourselves in these writings. Imbedded in these chapters are clues to divine principles as well as stories to warn and comfort, to chasten and inspire.

In the hunt for truth—amid arguments that everything is relative—the woman who understands scriptural messages holds an important key. She can choose enduring principles on which to base her behavior and guide others.

When a challenging assignment comes—whether serving a mission for eighteen months or teaching the nursery class for three weeks—we may think of Nephi's resolve: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Nephi 3:7.)

Nonbelievers may scoff at us for paying tithing, honoring the Sabbath day, or attending temple sessions, because the reasons and rewards for these practices relate to eternal rather than earthly logic. However, as we test these principles for ourselves, we find that they bless our lives in accordance with the Savior's advice: "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God." (John 7:17.)

Prayer. Prayer has several purposes. For one thing, it may be a safeguard for us. We can ask for a mantle of protection to rest upon us so that, as we are tempted and tested by life experiences, we are ready with inspired choices. "Ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation" (3 Nephi 18:18), said the resurrected Savior, counseling us that we have an ever-present power available to us to resist negative thoughts and influences.

Another kind of prayer focuses on blessing others. When a friend is sick or in trouble, we will pray for her or him, concentrating on the need.

Elder and Sister Marvin Bowden, as the Church's representatives in Kenya in 1988, were frequently stopped by the police and taken for questioning about our religious practices. Sometimes church meetings were interrupted and members threatened. During one interrogation, Sister Elva Bowden sat in an outer room, praying continually in her heart. Expulsion from the country, even imprisonment, could have been the outcome. As she prayed silently outside, antagonism decreased inside the room. Elder Bowden was able to explain principles from the missionary discussions to the police officers and lead them from threats to quiet listening. Finally, they released him.

Everyday needs are great. The Lord invites us to pray over our flocks and fields and to ask for our daily bread.

The Lord promises answers to our prayers, regardless of where we live or who we are, when we ask what is right. "And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Nephi 18:20.)

One twenty-one-year-old woman described how she learned to pray effectively. "I was a college student wondering if I should finish school or go on a mission. I kept praying for God to make this decision for me. The answer didn't come, and I was confused and even angry. Then a friend made some suggestions on how to pray. When I was living as I best knew how, I invited the Spirit to guide me; then I made a decision and presented it to the Lord, and I was flooded with a sense of rightness." In this manner confirmation came. She accepted a call to serve a mission in Argentina, where she faces more situations that require prayer and answers through the Spirit.

Covenants and Ordinances. A beautiful part of the spiritual world open to women is the making of covenants with God and the participating in ordinances that lead us back to our Heavenly Father. Reminders of these came as Moses organized the camp of Israel in the Sinai desert, as Brigham Young directed latter-day Israel for the crossing of the great plains, and, most supremely, as the Savior passed the cup for the Last Supper:

"Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine." (Exodus 19:5.)

"And this shall be our covenant—that we will walk in all the ordinances of the Lord." (D&C 136:4.)

"Drink ye all of it; For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." (Matthew 26:27-28.)

Ordinances are simple acts that bind and remind us. I was spiritually touched when an African husband baptized his wife in a quiet lagoon near Grand Bassam, Cote d'Ivoire, Africa, on April 25, 1988—the first baptism of a woman in that country. I sat with a congregation in Berlin after the wall was erected in the early 1960s, many of them elderly refugees from East Germany, as they partook of the bread and water of the sacrament and testified with bitter tears of their family losses and their need for Christ's solace. I know of an anxious husband and home teacher laying hands on the bandaged heads of wife and daughter, struck by a car, asking for life and recovery by the power they represented, according to their faith and God's will. And, after an all-night drive across three states, I was excited to enter the Provo temple with Mexican-American ward members where parents and grandparents received their endowments and three generations of a faithful convert family were sealed together in the new and everlasting covenant.

Personal testimonies are strengthened by acts of obedience in making sacred alliances with God. Because of these commitments, we are fortified to do his work.

Spiritual Witness. Alma taught that those desirous of coming into the fold of God would "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death." (Mosiah 18:9.) At baptism we accept a commitment to proclaim God and bear witness of truth. Millions of Latter-day Saints, from Ireland to India, are living today as members of a religious minority among critical or even hostile peoples. It takes courage to bear witness.

The nearly fifty thousand full-time Latter-day Saint missionaries presently in 128 countries and territories of the world form an army of witnesses. Some of these have given their lives as part of their commitment. Others have sacrificed health. Most have experienced hardships and thereby have grown in their capacity to serve their fellowmen empathetically, as Alma counseled his followers to do when they accepted the ordinance of baptism. (See Mosiah 18:8-9.)

Parents of Elder Jeffrey Ball, who was one of two American elders killed by terrorists in LaPaz, Bolivia, in May 1989, have taken up his mission of love and testimony. A year after the shooting, they joined a humanitarian expedition traveling from the United States to Bolivia to bring medical aid and build greenhouses to increase food supplies and reduce poverty among villagers living in the Altiplano. Although Jeffrey had written in his journal, "I am so content to be here," his mother was afraid that she would be appalled by the conditions she would find. She was concerned to know whether his sacrifice had been worthwhile.

At a fireside in LaPaz, as the Balls met the Bolivians their son had served, Sister Joyce Ball's concerns were answered. "It was easy to see how he could feel so comfortable here," she said. "The Bolivian people became examples to me, just the way they live. They lack material things, but they have developed strong character." One small man said he had prepared Jeff's body to come home. Sister Ball could tell he had done so lovingly and that Jeff had been just fine. "I am overwhelmed by how many have been influenced by Jeff's sacrifice. We felt a brotherhood and sisterhood with them. When Christ comes, I know many of them will be there."

Witness through Art. Great poetry and painting, music and sculpture, and the creative use of textiles and stitchery, affirm the divine Creation and the Atonement.

Our Relief Society women are among those testifying of this light through their art. One example is the following poem, written for the Eliza R. Snow poetry contest by Mary Young, a young mother of eight children from Sumner, Washington. Her words dramatize the divine power of Christ, testified to by heavenly manifestations of light, linked to the birth, the mission, and the resurrection of the Son of God.

At the Garden Tomb, John 1:5 As a small sun arising out of turn, Shines that great star in slow-wheeling night, Rousing sheep and shepherds to angel hosannas For cave-born Babe in a slumbering hill-town. By the second hour the morning mists are burning, And glinting off the Galilee dazzle the stony hillsides Where the Words of light are flowing, flowing, And only the sightless are seeing. And here in an hour before the dawning comes The rising of that Son in soul-burst dark-drenching akening, Day-breaking gathering of star and sun and Word, All light coming full in a great and shining circle. (Ensign, March 1986.)

These artists are motivated by a spirit outside themselves, which we can tap also as we desire to strengthen our witness of truth: "If you shall ask the Father in my name, in faith believing, you shall receive the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance, that you may stand as a witness of the things of which you shall both hear and see, and also that you may declare repentance unto this generation." (D&C 14:8.)

Relief Society sisters worldwide are builders through testimony—starting with a desire, nurturing faith, strengthening hope, working with scriptures and prayer, and living as thoughtful disciples, so that all become spiritual witnesses, giving utterance in words and action to the truths we live by through the power of the Holy Ghost.
