Cherry B. Silver, Anne C. Pingree, Mary Ellen Edmunds, Carol L. Clark, Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s ( 1991)

Bless the Individual Woman

by Cherry B. Silver

"Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D&C 18:10.)

We the 5.5 billion people of Planet Earth form an immensely colorful and diverse parade of faces. Our outward appearances differ from the stocky, kerchiefed women shoppers lined up before the meat shops of Warsaw, Poland, to the black-veiled Muslim wives of Cairo gliding to market with baskets in hand and the Bolivian women of the Altiplano hoeing potatoes in bowler hats and petticoats.

Chromosones and genes and DNA cells cluster in infinite variation to make each hand, each body build, each turn of the lips and shape of the eyes, each mind and memory different in every person. All people are endowed with individual personalities, individual ways of thinking, individual agency. This suits God's purposes and adds to His glory.

The Apostle Paul, who sailed the Mediterranean and trekked overland to bring the gospel of Christ to Jews and Gentiles of diverse backgrounds, sought an image to express the beauty and usefulness of all this diversity blended into one.

For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ.

But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.

And if they were all one member, where were the body?

And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. (1 Corinthians 12:12, 18, 19, 21.)

Not only is diversity healthy, it is necessary to make a functioning body. No part is unworthy. So, continued Paul, we are part of an essential unity. We function together. If one part suffers, so do we all. If one part is honored, the others rejoice.

In the history of mankind, caste systems and prejudice against ethnic groups and gender have created misery for many of God's children. Jesus confounded the orthodox leaders of His time because He refused to follow their prescribed formulae. He dined with publicans, He talked with Samaritans, He included instead of excluded all people—women, children, publicans, the lame, the diseased, the sinners.

As members of this worldwide organization called Relief Society, our mission is clear. In all our diversity we combine our strengths to bless each other and to do the work of the Lord.

Relief Society blesses the lives of individual women to live joyfully and righteously.

As Latter-day Saint women, we blend our efforts to help each woman discover and develop her particular gifts, in order that we may all contribute to the "body of Christ."

In her conference open house address in September 1990, President Elaine Jack stated, "The Lord is concerned about every individual. And so are we in Relief Society." We welcome the diversity that exists among the 2.8 million women of Relief Society in the world. In diversity of ages and talents, viewpoints and cultures, lies strength.

Spiritual Witness. Each woman is important to the Lord and has the right to His blessings. Each has the right, first, to pray to God our Father. And each may receive a personal witness of the Christ.

When the resurrected Savior appeared to the people of the American continent, He invited them to feel the prints in His hands and feet, "that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." He had the multitude come forward and one by one test for himself, "and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth." (3 Nephi 11:14-15.)

Jesus did not judge that only the leaders should come forth, nor only the men, nor only the grown-ups. Nor did he separate one race from another. The brown-skinned and lighter-skinned believers listened together. He accepted all as worthy of individual testimony.

Personal Mission. A second right we have as children of God is guidance in fulfilling our individual missions in life.

What purpose does God have for us, each as an individual? That is a question worth asking. What does He want each of us to accomplish with the life He has given us?

"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 3:5-6.)

A path is not a highway. The surface of a path might be irregular, and our feet inclined to trip on the bumpy surface as we find our way (see Jeremiah 18:15), so we need a guide.

The writers of scripture speak frequently of two paths: The wise father counsels his child to avoid the "path of the wicked," which "is as darkness" (Proverbs 4:14, 19), but respond to godly instruction, for the "path of the just is as the shining light" (Proverbs 4:18). Lehi's dream offered a rod of iron alongside the path, something to hold on to when the mists of darkness roll over the way and confuse us and when the taunts of the unbelievers make staying on the path unpopular.

In 1976 our family—which consisted of me, my husband, and our two young children—were touring the bush country of Cote d'Ivoire, West Africa, by private car. The dirt road we were on narrowed in the grasses into not much more than a path. Then it became a raised causeway. We could see no sign of habitation. We speeded up, liking this grand highway taking us into the bush.

Unexpectedly, from out of the distance, a freight truck came lumbering toward us. We slowed after he passed us, surprised because he wasn't on our causeway, but on a lower make-shift road, running parallel to ours.

Why had he avoided our lofty, fast-traveling causeway? We slowed the speed of our car and moved forward cautiously to examine what lay before us. There came in the road a sheer drop-off of ten feet producing a fifteen-foot-wide gash. If we had continued at our original speed, our car would have plunged over the edge, nose first, and smashed. We could have been injured or killed; certainly we would have been stranded in the bush, far from any helping hands.

We were trembling, but felt blessed to have stopped. And we were struck by the sheer miracle of the truck having come when it did to warn us of the need to detour.

After we backed up to find a place to descend to the lower road on which the truck had come, we continued driving, but the marked path dwindled after a few kilometers more and finally ended in the grassy prairie, with no village nearby. We realized a greater miracle was involved than we had thought. There was no earthly reason why a freight truck should have been coming toward us. We believe, however, there was a heavenly reason why it came when we needed to change our path to prevent accident and perhaps even death.

This is a modern parable. Our own understanding is limited, and our resources are feeble. Two years ago I sat trapped in our car in Kinshasa, Zaire, pinned by a soldier sprawled across my lap. He, along with three others, was struggling with my husband in the driver's seat, trying to wrest the car keys from the ignition and push us off the road. Four other military men with rifles surrounded our vehicle. My husband kept possession of the keys. The soldier continued to demand control of our car and searched my purse and papers while the rest glowered at us. All the while I prayed silently, "We are trying to be your missionaries. Guide our words and actions. Soften their hearts." Finally the soldiers' superior officer responded to their radioed message for help, drove up, heard our story, and guided us back on our way. How reassuring it is to trust in Him and feel our paths directed!

I have made decisions in my life that have made me shake my head and wonder why I did what I did—such as the time I bought a bookstore. Looking back on three frustrating years of traveling down that track, I see that I gained experiences Heavenly Father was willing I should have. There were no business profits, but managing a business opened doors to participation in a local service organization alongside outstanding women of many religious faiths. That involvement could not have come any other way. I also started a free weekly class for writing family history in the mornings in the little store. During the day my husband and I often talked about religious beliefs with customers who came. We were able to be witnesses of truth and in a distinctive way bless others.

Strength in Bearing Burdens. In the Savior's atoning mission is the ultimate reason for bearing the burdens we do. Our faith in Him steadies our efforts and keeps our hopes bright. We feel His joy only after difficult decisions, hard labor, even suffering.

Anyone who has lived or traveled in developing areas of the world sees women supporting immense burdens. They know poverty and sickness and hopelessness. Women worry about finding adequate shelter, daily food, paid work for family members, education for their children.

In many areas, diseases such as malaria, polio, leprosy, tuberculosis, dysentery and dehydration, worms, and now AIDS lower life expectancy. High infant mortality rates occur. Malnutrition and poor sanitation affect every age group.

In parts of Africa, Asia, and South America, education is meager and unemployment rates run 30 to 70 percent. As a result, young men stand around on street corners and girls work for very low wages as domestics. The underuse of intelligence and energy represents a tragic loss of human resources.

Despite these huge problems, one also sees smiling faces and surprisingly cheerful women at work, carrying water in buckets on their heads or trudging to market, with a baby strapped to the back.

In branches and wards of the Church worldwide, our women counsel together. They uplift each other by sharing spiritual experiences. They teach each other how to solve practical problems. We are resources to each other to bless our lives.

People working together effect change for good. A village cooperative of women makes bricks to improve their housing in Nigeria. Kenyans lay out an irrigation system for their crops. Bolivians, trying to farm despite a short growing season, learn to lay up adobe walls to make simple greenhouses, topped with heavy clear plastic. Mothers in the Philippines learn to mix rehydration solutions to prevent deaths from dysentery. Together we can make a difference.

Express Individual Creativity. A few years ago a woman college president in Massachusetts initiated a program for creative minds in science and the humanities in which women are supported in their research and writing. "An atmosphere of expectation," Mary Bunting, the college president, called the creating of an environment where women do their best. Here barriers are pushed aside and others wait to receive and profit from their efforts.

Relief Society itself is a kind of institute of higher education, providing a network of expectation and support. Every time we meet to study, create, extend ourselves to others, serve shoulder to shoulder, or visit in each other's homes, we demonstrate an ongoing education program. Our immediate goal is to improve each individual life here; our ultimate goal is to live joyously with loved ones and our eternal parents forever.

As in the parable of the talents, each of us has gifts to share with others. There are artistic talents, there are gifts of courtesy and counsel, there are talents of perseverance and courage. The Lord expects us to search for our personal gifts and let them shine through to bless ourselves and others.

One multi-talented woman, now at retirement age, has shared her talents all her life. Never married herself, she has contributed to her extended family and, when living away from them, has made Church members her family. She has a rich contralto voice and has blessed her community through her gift of song. She is also a skilled social worker, and she still volunteers her time to bishops, counseling with their members. In retirement she is a temple ordinance worker. She has magnified her gifts. And best of all, she lives with a spirit of sensitivity to others, based on her own solid self-esteem. She radiates spiritual health.

This gift of self-esteem grows as each of us recognizes our individuality and accepts our differences from others. A healthy sense of self-worth, says one commentator, requires investing time and effort in ourselves. A woman believing in herself first "takes charge of her own self-development." Second, she decides to make a "growing, life-long investment" in herself. Third, she gives herself "the right to have opinions, beliefs, values and positions that are different from those of others—without penalty." Fourth, she knows she is "intrinsically valuable simply because she is" and that she can make errors without labeling herself as "dumb." Fifth, she develops "multiple sources for love and nurturance and stimulation," rather than relying on just one other person, whether parent or husband or friend. And sixth, she comes to understand herself by looking inward and by reading wisely in books and articles that help her develop "a firm sense of self." (JoAnn Larsen, "Make Developing Self an Objective in Your Life," Deseret News, November 11, 1990.)

Overcoming Obstacles. It sometimes takes courage to discover the best in ourselves and to improve our lot in life. A young woman graduate student in genetics at BYU was praised by her faculty adviser because she "is highly skilled with laboratory equipment, is meticulous in her research, and is a welcome help for the students she counsels."

Yet this young woman is nearly blind; devastated by her failing eyesight, she once dropped out of high school. "She found herself caught in societal attitudes that, she said, dictate a lesser status for those who are blind. 'Society has told blind people they are dependent and not normal, and I believed that for awhile,' she said. 'On my own and through help . . . I've come to realize it doesn't have to be that way.

" 'I've learned that my Heavenly Father loves me and I believe He knows me. I believe that I am physically acceptable to Him; therefore, why shouldn't that be good enough for me? Blind people can function on an equal basis if given the proper training and opportunities. I'm normal; I just sometimes need different tools.' " (Church News, November 3, 1990.)

Multiply her example by hundreds and thousands of other women with disabilities, mental and physical and social, still finding a way to express the divine spirit within them. The mathematics of despair tell us that self-doubt feeds upon itself. When we depend on others to validate us, we are supersensitive to put-downs. Discouragement naturally follows. But this needn't be. As one observer asks, "Is what others think of us more important than what God thinks of us?"

Agency. An eternal gift shared by God with all His children is the power of choice. He expects us to use this power wisely and with courage.

For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things. . . .

Verily I say, [women] should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as [women] do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. (D&C 58:26-28.)

Because we are held responsible, women need to be concerned about their "weight." This does not refer to pounds around the hips. The kind of "weight" we need to focus on is the weight of our judgments, personality, and spirit.

Women have tremendous power to change the world around them for good. Some of that influence can be manifest in school parent-teacher organizations, in political districts and town councils, and in volunteer service projects. Certainly our attitudes and dispositions shape human lives within our immediate spheres of family life, work, and community.

At other times, women need to lean their weight on resolving social problems and moral issues. If crime and drugs, poverty and homelessness, inflict our cities, solutions may come from the common sense and well-chosen words and actions of good women.

Speaking out on political and social issues needs to follow hard thinking and solid research and mature deliberation. Thoughtful women can promote righteous principles with their best energies but without bigotry, all the while allowing others to exercise their own agency to choose.

President Spencer W. Kimball expressed great hope in the power of women to articulate principles of faith and be an influence in the world. "Much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days will come because many of the good women of the world (in whom there is often such an inner sense of spirituality) will be drawn to the Church in large numbers. This will happen to the degree that the women of the Church reflect righteousness and articulateness in their lives and to the degree that they are seen as distinct and different—in happy ways—from the women of the world." (My Beloved Sisters, Deseret Book Company, Salt Lake City, 1980, p. 44.)

He describes the great blessing we women can be to others, as we demonstrate that our choices and distinctive life patterns work well in our multifaceted contemporary world.

One Church member defined "agency" more narrowly when she complained: "I don't want the Church telling me what to do. I have my free agency, don't I?" What this member is forgetting is her role as a child of God in a universe of eternal laws. She can accept or reject wise principles of living from an inspired source, but must take the consequences. We have a stewardship and we are held accountable.

When Lehi talked about freedom of choice, he specified the alternatives and showed the consequences: "Men [and women] . . . are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death." (2 Nephi 2:27.)

Life presents difficult choices. We don't always pick our route. But we can choose our guide. Our basic choice of eternal values helps us manuever through the obstacles on our road.

Transitions. We may believe that we are walking a good path, and then destiny brings us to a fork in the road and we face uncertainties again. We call these "the transitions" of life. And the transitions that confront us are diverse. Shakespeare's Jacques (in As You Like It, Act II, Scene 7) recounts seven ages of man from infant to elder. We could probably add a few.

Who is in transition among us? The Young Adults are, as they move from adolescence to young womanhood. The elderly are, as they lose friends and have physical activity curtailed by declining health and mobility. There are those entering marriages and those leaving them, through widowhood or divorce. Some are adding children to their homes, others are seeing children leave, and still others are receiving back "the boomerang generation"—children who left once and are returning, sometimes with children of their own. Women are in transition when they make career changes or reach retirement for self or spouse.

All the transitions of life require special understanding and help. And Relief Society sisters can be there to bless each other in our individual needs.

Extend, Teach, Exemplify. Extending a hand of help is a natural gesture in every culture. When an African child dies, the mother's women friends gather in the home to wail with her around the corpse. Neighbors help prepare food to feed the circle of mourners. At the graveside, a prayer of dedication is said. Friends may leave gifts to help the family, but after the burial, life must resume its normal course. The wailing stops, the mother says, "So be it," and she takes up again her daily work.

Customs vary from culture to culture, but the desire to help each other is universal. Visualize the extending that goes on around you. Blessed by gospel insights and by the power of the priesthood, women have great powers for ministering to world needs. In Relief Society, the programs called visiting teaching and compassionate service mobilize us to exercise watchcare over each other. We see needs and try to meet them. We are learning to be guided by the Spirit in seeing and responding.

Relief Society women exemplify a wide range of godly life-styles. They act as civic leaders and volunteers at homeless shelters; they head service organizations; they write letters to their congressmen; they help in local schools; they plant gardens and rake their leaves. They search for the truth and teach truth by word and by example. They are contributors to life.

"Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D&C 18:10.) Relief Society women worldwide are themselves blessed. And they bless others.
