Cherry B. Silver, Anne C. Pingree, Mary Ellen Edmunds, Carol L. Clark, Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s ( 1991)

Develop and Exercise Charity

by Mary Ellen Edmunds

One day a friend and I were in the "Avenues" in Salt Lake City going somewhere, and we noticed a young mother looking very frustrated and unhappy standing out by her truck. We were prompted to stop, and did. She had run out of gas on her way to pick up a daughter from a dancing lesson, and she couldn't believe the bad luck. Several other children were with her, watching and waiting.

We said we'd get some gas for her; and while she seemed grateful for the help, there was also the awkwardness of being on the "receiving end." We drove until we found a gas station, got a couple of gallons in a container we borrowed from them, then returned and put the gas in the truck.

The woman was thankful but still seemed uncomfortable. Then an idea came and I said to her, "You'd do the same for us!" That stopped her. She thought about it, then broke into a smile. "You're right! I would!" And all of us would, wouldn't we . . . if we just knew. There are so many more ways that we can know! I can no longer remember where I was going that day, or what else happened. The thing I remember is the sweet experience of stopping and helping in a little way and making a big difference.

There was a new commandment which the Savior shared: "Love one another as I have loved you." Constantly, patiently, unconditionally, almost like: "Do unto others as they want you to do unto them, as they need you to do." As Christ prompts us to do. Many times, in many ways, our Heavenly Father gives us specific opportunities to develop and practice that kind of love, that depth of love. To share with each other, to serve each other, to develop more of the godliness that is within us. The mercy, the patience, the cheerfulness, the genuine kindness.

I suppose you can have service without love, but I don't think you can have genuine charity—pure love—without service. I don't think it's possible to feel compassion without being compelled to do something to help. Charity—the pure love of Christ—is the greatest force on this earth, and one of the only things powerful enough to change all the trouble in this world.

I remember hearing, as a young child, the phrase "charity never faileth." I knew it was somehow associated with Relief Society. And indeed it is—and has been since 1842. This motto was chosen in a different time and place, but is just as powerful now for us as it was for them then. Charity is at the heart of Relief Society. It is at the center of providing relief, and it is critical to building a society. With charity this can happen even though members of the society are miles and continents away from each other, with uniqueness in their daily activities and the demands on their days, hours, and energy. It is a gift we can cultivate and pray for—the ability to love everyone everywhere in a Christlike, tender way.

I think I know a lot more now about what charity means and why it never fails. I am deeply grateful to belong to an organization which has chosen "Charity Never Faileth" as a motto for each of its nearly 3 million members. I'm thankful that the whole program of Relief Society puts us in situations where we develop and exercise charity—opportunities to visit and serve each other, to learn and share in a variety of settings that build sisterhood. To worship and mourn and rejoice and sing and meet together oft. To "be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep [each other] in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith. And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls." (Moroni 6:4-5.) Thank goodness for the gospel of Jesus Christ, His Church, and Relief Society!

We find examples of charity in the scriptures. Mormon teaches what charity means to him. He defines this pure love and points out that "if ye have not charity, ye are nothing, for charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto charity, which is the greatest of all, for all things must fail—But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him." (Moroni 7:46-47.) What a promise! What a declaration about the importance of this quality—this depth of love which helps us to be good and to do good!

I took some time to explore definitions for the words used in Moroni 7 and I Corinthians 13 to come to a better understanding of charity. What an instructive experience! I've gone through the list of qualities and characteristics, and thought carefully about each one.

Charity suffereth long. To suffer is to endure, bear, allow, permit, tolerate. Job suffered long. So did Christ. So have countless others.

Charity is kind—friendly, gentle, tenderhearted, and generous.

Charity envieth not. There is no discontent or ill will because of another's advantages, possessions, etc. No desire to get something that belongs to someone else.

Charity vaunteth not itself. One who has charity does not brag or boast or seek to be above another. Was Christ teaching us of charity when He said that "he that is greatest among you shall be your servant?" (Matthew 23:11.) Was He helping us know how to develop and exercise charity when He reminded us that being in the service of others was as if we had done it unto Him? (See Mosiah 2:17-22; Matthew 25:40.) What about His message that every man should esteem His brother as himself (see D&C 38:24-27), and that we should remember in all things the poor and the needy? (See D&C 52:40.) In deed as well as in word, He pointed out that those who had should share with those who had not (Mosiah 18:26-28), and that those who were strong should help those who were weak (Romans 15:1). He asked that we feed His sheep—that we act towards others as He, the Good Shepherd, does and would.

When we're filled with charity we're not puffed up. We do not want praise unduly. It's exhausting to constantly put ourselves above another. This is sometimes called being a "Topper." Or a "Bottomer." Sometimes moms do that. Did you ever come home and say you'd had a hard day in junior high and have your mom say, "Well, when I was your age I had to rollerskate fifty miles to babysit for five cents an hour." That's a bottomer. What's a "topper"? Someone says to you, "My son got an A on a chemistry paper," and you respond with, "Well my son has been invited to open up a yogurt shop on the moon." That's a topper. Neither a "topper" nor a "bottomer" be. It's too big a drain on your battery. Rejoice in what you can do, as well as in what others can do. One person drags around her family history stuff: "I'm back to Noah!" And you respond with, "I'm back to my mother!"

Charity does not behave itself unseemly. We avoid that which is indecent or unbecoming.

Charity seeketh not her own. There are no "exclusive groups"—one possessed of this pure love reaches out to everyone everywhere. We can visit those who can't come to visit us. We can practice becoming better listeners. We can speak to people we don't know (yet) and be the first to be friendly and to get acquainted. We can work to have a countenance which shows love to everyone. There is much to be learned about charity through our own experiences—with sorrow as well as joy. We can spend time with children who can help us to be more childlike, more charitable. The same is true as we spend time with "senior saints" who many times feel neglected and forgotten.

Those who develop charity are not easily provoked. They are patient, and are not easily angered or irritated. The real Christian is not "touchy," and doesn't have a quick temper and is not impatient. Love is calm—not in a hurry; love takes time. We can't always "do what Jesus would do" for an hour and see dramatic results. Some of the changes you bring in your life and in the world will likely take two hours, or two years, or your whole life. The trees don't bear fruit the morning after you plant seedlings.

Those with charity think no evil. They are always looking for the good in people, situations, experiences. We need to forgive each other. Christ did—and what if one stood near who with great horror realized what he had done, and then heard those tender words from a dying God: "Father, forgive them . . . they don't know what they're doing." Maybe we should forgive each other, because we don't know what we're doing, either. We all make mistakes. We're all trying.

Charity causes us to rejoice not in iniquity, or inequity. We do not desire to put ourselves above or below anyone. We also work to avoid inequity between what we know we want to be doing and what we are actually doing. We want to have harmony and inner peace.

Charity rejoiceth in the truth—in that which is established as fact, as principle. Those with charity strive to be true: sincere, genuine, honest; and in agreement with established standards.

Charity beareth all things. To bear means to undergo successfully; capable of withstanding; to permit; to sustain the burden of, perhaps including the lightening of others' burdens.

Charity believeth all things, having confidence in a statement or promise of another person, especially God. Hopeth all things—a desire accompanied by anticipation; trust; reliance. Endureth all things—to last, continue, remain; to bear.

And then, charity never faileth: it never lacks, falls short; never deceives or disappoints; is never insufficient; never loses strength or power; is never negligent; never weakens; is never useless or unhelpful; never abandons; never leaves, omits, or neglects. No wonder! After going carefully through these words and characteristics, no wonder this pure love never fails!

I've met people who are examples of this pure love of Christ. They include my parents, friends, and loved ones in different lands. They've been my teachers and have shown me why charity doesn't fail. What a marvelous thing—that we have something in our lives that will never fail, to have something which will endure forever! So much in life does fail—our brakes, our teeth, our phone, our furnace, even our hearts and some relationships. Food spoils and treasures break and batteries wear out and something that was a great invention a few years ago has been replaced with something fancier, faster, and finer. But love—charity—never faileth. It is constant and powerful.

Pure love and service with compassion often requires sacrifice. At the very least, inconvenience. People seldom begin a sweet story of an extraordinary experience of helping or serving (exercising charity) with, "It was on a day and at a time when I didn't have anything at all to do and I was just about to call everyone I know to see if they wanted me to do something." Usually it starts, "I was so busy that day. I had so much on my mind, and so much on my list of things to do. I had a headache, the basement had just flooded, my baby had swallowed a roll of film. . . . " The Good Samaritan was on his way to a prayer meeting.

Someone might ask, "Can you help me?" and if it wouldn't be too much trouble I cheerfully respond, "Sure. I don't have anything else to do." But what if I do have something else to do? Something important. Do I trust God enough to know He'll not give me a commandment (a prompting, an opportunity to serve, a feeling to reach out) without helping me to accomplish it? So many times when I've been late for something or have missed something I felt was important, it has turned out to be for a good reason. Maybe someone needed something, and I was in a position to help. I find I need to more often "be still and know."

Have you ever thought that someone somewhere may be pleading with Heavenly Father for help, and you may be the one chosen to help answer that prayer? If we're willing, He'll use us. You likely have no idea how often you rescue someone. "Who is that?" someone will say as you pass by. "Why did I feel so much love?" Maybe it's your countenance, the love that they see in your eyes. They come close to you and feel so safe. You provide a refuge. As you think of your life, of the times that stand out and you have really lived, it's usually when you've done things in the spirit of love. Not necessarily "big" things. Lots of times it's the little things.

Love takes a lot of energy. A lot of work. And remember, sometimes we can help, and sometimes we can't. We do the best we can do, and some days are better than others. Everyone does what he can, according to what he hath—according to the extent of his ability.

How do we develop charity? It doesn't just "happen" after a certain number of years go by. We are commanded to pray for this gift. What are you willing to do? That's where we start—we are willing. Willing to bear one another's burdens, willing to mourn with them, comfort them, take upon us His name—be Christians. Christlike. Covenant people. When we are willing to do loving, kind things, ideas come as to when, and who, and why and how. Where there's a will there's a way. And Christ has said, "I am the way," and we follow His example. He needs our help to show others the way, the way to come unto Him.

There are many ways we can develop and recognize charity in ourselves and others. We can consciously do things which bring more compassion and gentleness into our hearts and our actions. Charity is not only the "act," the "doing," but that which compels us to act and to do—the tender, compassionate feelings in our souls which won't let us ignore someone who needs us. Charity is a condition of the heart, and a conditioning of the heart.

We can develop charity by seeking promptings to contact someone who is in need. We can actually exercise this capacity to be responsive to the Spirit and to become a more effective instrument in God's hands. Think of someone specific whom you need to telephone or write or visit. Make a plan to do so. We can work to cheerfully and willingly respond to opportunities for service even when it's inconvenient. We can respond to those who have a need to give by accepting their help and kindness with gratitude and joy.

How about some "Low Tech Love," for those who don't have a lot of extra time, energy, money, food, ideas, clothing, whatever. Try "low-tech" love. These are things "anyone" can do. Even busy, busy, busy worldlings. Don't wait for the big deal. Just serve here and now. Love is a lot of "little" rescues and burdens lifted and people genuinely served. Be kind to those right around you, close to you—otherwise your help, your compassion and kindness, may be imaginary: "If I were there . . . " Or the "when/then" trap. "When" never comes, so neither does "then."

Have you ever sat in a busy place such as an airport or a shopping mall and watched people—their faces, their nonverbal messages, their interaction with others? It seems to bring compassionate feelings as you try to imagine what their challenges and burdens might be. Charity is cooperation, teamwork, unselfish sharing of responsibilities and the "spotlight." It is love at home and kind words to each other. A woman who is a successful attorney said, "Charity just means that people love each other. And if people did love each other the way they should, it might not be good for my practice, but it would be good for the world."

Give love to those who can't return it right now. Give compliments. Find one. Even if it's hard some days. "Uh, son. I . . . uh . . . like the way you breathe. Yes! It's wonderful the way you breathe in and out, in and out, all the time. Faithfully. You're such a faithful son. So dependable in your breathing!"

Here's a motto to try: "Wait a week." Wait a week, and then give praise for something. It may mean even more to someone to know you still remember a whole week later. "I want to thank you for what you shared in your talk about families (your lesson on faith, your comment in class on commitment). I've been thinking about it this past week and it has meant so much to me. You're in my journal!" What might that mean to someone?

Notice those you haven't been noticing. How about the deacons in your ward. What would it mean to them and do to them if you noticed them. Let's talk to the deacons, the Sunbeams, the Mia Maids, and the senior Saints. Select someone with whom you've been having a hard time, and go to them and "make up." A sister-in-law, a neighbor, whoever. They'll be so surprised. So happy. So thankful. Say something like, "I set a goal not to talk to you for a whole year. I've now reached that goal, and I'm tired of being miserable. Can we talk?" Or, "I've been appointed chairman of the Neighborhood Ash Wednesday celebration, and we wonder if you could please donate a pickle and two paper plates?" Have you noticed that it's hard for someone to close their door or their heart when someone approaches them with pure love?

Charity is developed as we try to more fully live the law of the fast. This important law of God is more than going without food and paying a minimum amount for meals missed. It seems tied to responding to those who are hungry, thirsty, and experiencing other needs. And, oh, the promises! As we reach out to others, we will always find God is there.

Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?

Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward.

Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;

And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday;

And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones; and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in. (Isaiah 58:6-12.)

The deeper our relationship with God, the more we will long to serve and love Him, and to make ourselves ready for anything He needs us to do. As we come unto Christ we can turn and help others do the same, which is the mission and purpose of the Church and gospel. The scriptures are the "handbook" of instructions for those who wish to love and serve the way the Savior did and does, to become filled with charity. "Feast upon the words of Christ, for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do." (2 Nephi 32:3.)

We could love more if we sinned less, because studies have shown that sin runs down our batteries. Many things are a drain on our batteries, things such as hate, contention, envy, anger. Maybe love takes some changing. Some repenting. Turning.

Many of us want to serve, but suffer from "serv-o-phobia"—a fear of serving. We wonder what people will think, or say. Many times it takes courage to respond to promptings from the Spirit. We may find ourselves doing and saying things which surprise others and us. How come we're not kinder? It's so easy to do once we get going, and the world needs it so.

We'll have more time to love and enjoy helping if we're not hooked on things that waste our time or strength or keep our heart and mind unwisely occupied. Television, books, magazines, spending money, or whatever. Let's spend less time, energy, and money on things we don't really need. Our love for God and each other can deepen and sweeten as we expect less and appreciate more. Become more grateful. Simplify.

In our world, our society, our culture, let's not make spontaneous acts of love and charity and kindness and genuine compassion the "unusual thing." As my friend George Durrant says: "When it comes to giving, some people stop at nothing." Don't ever ignore an impulse to serve when there's something you could do. It's important to recognize when you can't as well as when you can. Don't ever withhold love from someone when it's within your power to give it. If we could really figure out how to love, how to exercise charity, we wouldn't need a whole lot of other commandments.

It's destructive if we feel (charity, compassion, empathy) without doing something (when we're able). We diminish our power to act, to respond (like the "disuse phenomena," which teaches: That which we do not utilize diminishes in size and usefulness). When we withhold love we make it less possible for the Savior to reach out. Sometimes I act as if Christ had never come—had not lived, had not suffered, had not died, had not come again, had not loved us and forgiven us and been merciful, as if He had never asked us to love one another as He has loved us, as He does love us. We need to seek to become consistently Christlike. We eventually, finally, turn into that which we most desire to be, and we use our time and our life and all our other resources for that which we really desire to do and become.

As we become more Christlike, we can be called on to help because we'll be there! And it will be a sweet feeling to know that they knew it—they knew you'd stop and help. And we don't need to worry that we'll run out of places for our love and people who need it if we all start loving more. There are and will always be plenty of ways to share love and plenty of people who need it.

In John 13:35 we are taught, "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." It's how we treat each other and feel about each other. Jesus really does want me, and you, for a Sunbeam! The developing and exercising of charity is a way to show the meaning and value and result of the gospel in our lives. Love allowed the Atonement and all that was and is part of it.

Love is a tenderizer. It softens hearts. Love is the most basic of all human needs. To be hungry for love is a terrible kind of hunger. To be without comfort and attention is a terrible kind of nakedness. To yearn for companionship and to be needed is a terrible thirst. It's not only your words, your clothing, your food, your loaf of bread—it's you! God is love, and you are love! Teach me all that I must know . . . do . . . be . . . to live with Him comfortably some day. Who we are is more important than what we do, but who we are causes us to do what we do.

We work to be fit for the kingdom—not just worthy, but comfortable. Fit! To go to heaven—to belong there—we must take it with us. What are the criteria the Savior lists which will qualify us to hear Him say, "Come unto me, ye blessed"? If you still have your CTR ring? If you've used a dozen colors to mark your scriptures? Whether you can quote from Johnny Lingo? If you've memorized your "Tropical" Guide? If your great-great grandparents came across the plains? If you have five hundred pounds of wheat stored somewhere?

No. He will say, "Come unto me, ye blessed. I was hungry, thirsty. You gave me shelter, refuge, time and attention, gentleness, mercy, and forgiveness." A cup of cold water in the name of Jesus Christ. Charity never faileth, and charity is a drink for someone who's thirsty. Some have been hungry and thirsty for such a long, long time. He wants us to live together in love and unity (see Mosiah 18:21). As Leo Tolstoy has said:

I knew before that God gives life to men, and desires them to live; but now I know far more. I know that God does not desire men to live apart from each other, and therefore has not revealed to them what is needful for each of them to live by himself. He wishes them to live together, united, and therefore has revealed to them that they are needful to each other's happiness. I know now that people only seem to live when they care only for themselves, and that it is by love for others that they really live. He who has love has God in him, and is in God—because God is love.

The perfecting of the saints is plural and not just singular. Maybe it's our whole society, so that we may be Zion again. Pure in heart. Pure heart—what does it mean? A change of heart—a new heart. No hard-heartedness. One heart, one mind. Doing our best to live the gospel. No poor among us. Anywhere in the world? Are people in Brazil and Romania and New York and the Philippines and Kenya part of us? Yes. And we are part of them.

In some situations, a loaf of bread is more of a luxury than gold. A glass of water is as valuable as a diamond if you're thirsty enough. What if we concentrated on just one thing and, for example, were more careful with water? Avoiding waste. Low-tech love again. Could we share some with those in the world who are thirsty? There are so many little things, like not leaving the water running when we don't need it. Many of us are probably hungry, lonely, thirsty, tired—or have been. If we knew the heavy burdens of those around us, it would make our hearts ache forever.

Charity will qualify us to be with our Heavenly Family once again. Love is worth it—it's worth giving our time and our life to. Could He have done more? Have I done all I could? Have we? If we fill our heart, our life, our home, our neighborhood, our community, and our whole world with love, then there's no room for hate, contention, anger, impatience, envy, unkindness, and other things which make us sick and sad and are such a drain on our batteries. And if you give love and serve one who does not seem to deserve it, God will not be mad at you. Let Him be the Judge . . . just love everyone!

I have come to know that the gospel of Jesus Christ is full of beautiful words, all related to the word charity. Words such as feed, hug, mourn, serve, forgive, lift, succor, comfort, share, visit. Love is what makes us whole. Love perfects us. If we really have charity, with all that it means, then peace happens, and Zion can be a reality. Let love and service with compassion become your need, your want, and your source of joy.

In this world there is enough loneliness and sorrow. There are enough people who are overwhelmed and discouraged. There are plenty of burdens and tears and unanswered whys. But in this world there is quite enough love for all of us and for all the world. And there is quite enough joy for all the world. Plenty of laughter and optimism and hugs. And there's enough hope and enough power to chase away any gloom. Because Jesus Christ is the Savior and Redeemer of the world, and the Atonement is a reality, and we can be with Him and our Father again.

May we "clap our hands" and exclaim the desires of our hearts to lift others' heavy burdens that they may be light, and bearable—that we are willing to mourn with those that mourn, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort. We will seek and find them. We will stop to help. We will lift hearts, strengthen feeble knees, comfort and bless and smile and give love. He loves us. He will help us. He understands when we can't do what we wish we could. God can heal all our wounds and help us with all our struggling. God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ can say: "I know just how you feel."

May God bless us with His Spirit and with the gift of charity, that it may be well with us when we see Him again. Charity never fails. And the more I learn about it, the more I feel to shout once more, "No wonder!" It never fails to move one soul to reach out to another. And it never fails to come back and comfort and bless the one who has given and given. It never fails to give us the assurance that God lives and Christ is our Savior.
