Cherry B. Silver, Anne C. Pingree, Mary Ellen Edmunds, Carol L. Clark, Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s ( 1991)

Strengthen Families

by Anne C. Pingree

In Singapore there is a gentle custom. When a young woman leaves her parents' home to establish a home of her own, she presents her mother with a basket of gifts which represent all the things her mother has taught her. These gifts, which are well thought out and carefully made, include food delicacies, handwork, paintings, or writings as well as gifts symbolic of qualities such as patience and cheerfulness. They include souvenirs from happy family or personal experiences. In retrospect, a young woman realizes that she is the product of her own home and of the people with whom she shares it. In anticipation, she prepares herself to pass these gifts on to others.

All Families Are Important

Passing our knowledge, skills, and faith on to others is a big part of what families are all about. It is in anticipation of what our families will become that we press forward day after day, teaching and strengthening one another. "The founding of the home is as sacred a work as the founding of a church." (David O. McKay, Church News, October 11, 1958.) It is in the family unit that we learn the most important lessons in life. Families are put together in many different ways. Perhaps our family consists of a mother, father, and children. It may be a family made up of a single mother, a widow, a single woman, or a single father. We may be part of a combined family or a nuclear family. Each family unit is unique but very important. Without question, "the family is a major anchor for us all, whether or not we live close to our immediate family or whether or not our families are all members of the Church." ("The Mission of Relief Society," Ensign, January 1991, p. 74.)

In every family great things are possible. Relationships in the home, interaction one with another, and a feeling of being united and bonded together are all necessary to strengthen families, no matter what the makeup. As stated in one broadcast of "The Spoken Word," "When a family functions well, it can be a neverending source of love, strength and growth for its members." ("Family Relationships," 3 March 1991.) It is within the family that we teach and practice eternal concepts. "It is in the home where . . . values are usually acquired, traditions are fostered, and commitments to others are established." (James E. Faust, Ensign, May 1987, pp. 80-81.)

"Home is a place for all that is good and enlightening and true," said Chieko N. Okazaki, first counselor in the Relief Society General Presidency. (Ensign, January 1991, p. 74.) Strong families are the foundation of all great civilizations. We know that undeviating love and fidelity, internal harmony, honesty, cooperation, and living the Golden Rule are critical to the well-being of the family. A strong family needs a firm religious foundation with an underlying belief in God. In every way the family should be the great "workshop of the Lord" where we work together and where we try day after day to teach each other "to love one another and to serve one another" (Mosiah 4:15), and where we practice what we learn in order to become better disciples of our Savior.

We also teach what we are and what is important to us in our families. Every family unit has conscious or unconscious priorities which are somewhat like a mission statement that motivates us and reinforces our values. Some families place high priorities on excellence in studies while others stress the importance of excelling in music, art, or athletics. One family's focus was on the counsel contained in Mosiah 4:14: "And ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another." This family valued peace and harmony in their home. Each time the mother observed her children quarreling, she would simply say, "Mosiah 4:14!" The children would stop bickering and remember their resolve to have a harmonious family. Eventually, the children reached the point where they themselves reminded one another of their goal in Mosiah 4:14.

Your family matters. That is true whether you live in North Carolina, in Mexico, in Japan, or in South Africa. Families are basically the same worldwide. They may do things a little differently. They may toss the dishwater out the window instead of draining it from the sink. Some mothers may push a stroller while others may carry their babies on their backs. But goals for their families are the same. They all want to defend, protect, and enhance the family. They all desire to enrich the quality of life of their family members, and they all have love and a strong commitment to their families. While it is true that others can support, the family is still the essential team needed to build successful relationships and strong, well-adjusted individuals.

The greatest forces in the world are being used against families and traditional family values. These values are being undermined in subtle and in not-so-subtle ways. Because of this assault on family values, it takes all of your best efforts to fortify your family. It takes hard work and planning. It takes sacrifice. "In the setting of the family . . . may I suggest that we give more of ourselves, that we give more good experiences that are love-producing and family-solidifying. Whether the times we give are measured in minutes or hours is not as important as what we do in them. It may be five minutes at a child's bedside each night or a fifteen-minute walk in the evening. It may be a day in the hills or a three-minute phone call from the office at midday. It may be a clever note to a little girl or a night out with a boy. It can even be the experience of a family home evening. It can even be the experience of a family learning to pray together and reading the scriptures and fasting together." (H. Burke Peterson, Ensign, January 1973, p. 115.) Whatever it takes, we must be willing to work hard and organize ourselves in order to preserve our families.

Organize to Build Strong Families

"Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God." (D&C 88:119.) Organization, commitment, and a dash of creativity all combine to make families work. Some families use creativity in connection with family home evening experiences which teach strong and abiding principles.

One family held a "home teacher appreciation night" to honor one of their home teachers on his recent mission call. The children wanted to be involved in supporting missionary work, so they started saving their earnings in preparation for the special night. One saved money from babysitting jobs; another saved money from a paper route. The younger children earned money doing household tasks. One week before the missionary was to enter the MTC, the families met together. They talked about the exciting preparations that precede a mission and, after a simple skit and song, the two families knelt together in prayer. Then the children presented a small but heavy package to the recently called missionary with instructions not to open it until he got home. To his surprise, he saw that the box contained separate notes and envelopes. It was apparent that there was money in the envelopes—pennies, nickels, and dimes. What an effective way this was to teach younger children about the joys of giving and looking forward to serving missions!

A widow organized a family home evening for her children and grandchildren on their grandfather's birthday. Through special games and activities they learned about their grandfather—his background, his education, his personality. They saw photographs of him at different stages of his life, and they heard how he and grandmother met. Lastly, they read from his journal and heard his strong testimony of Jesus Christ. His favorite foods were served for refreshments.

Comparative shopping was the focus of a busy working mother who needed to teach her children how to help. Leaving the home for the activity, they drove to the local supermarket where they had a "hands-on" experience buying the week's groceries while using the principles of comparison shopping learned the week before.

In addition to hard work, planning, and creative family home evenings, family councils can be an effective way to strengthen families. "The Family Council is one of the most important means of dealing with troublesome problems in a democratic manner. It is just what its name implies—a meeting of all members of the family in which problems are discussed and solutions sought. Each family can work out the details of the Family Council to suit its own needs; but the basic principles remain the same. Each member has the right to bring up a problem. Each one has the right to be heard. Together, all seek for a solution to the problem, and the majority opinion is upheld." (Rudolf Dreikurs and Vicki Soltz, Children: The Challenge, Meredith Press, 1964, pp. 301-5.)

To end the council on a positive note a mother in one family, acting as the heart of the home, reads messages of praise to each family member. These "love notes" have been written during the week, put in the love box, and opened at the conclusion of family council. Praise is given for extra effort and performance given in any endeavor. This note could focus on an admirable personal quality instead of an accomplishment. Other members of the family can also write "love notes" and put them in the "love box" to be read, but mother always does. Thus, family council becomes a reporting, goal-setting, problem-solving, and praising time for families.

Traditions strengthen families. The word remember is used countless times in the Book of Mormon as a means of tying one group of people to another. The same thing holds true in families. Traditions solidify individuals and cause them to "remember" the important principles they have been taught through their lives. Holidays are often times when traditions are established. One family repeats a special tradition each Thanksgiving. In an effort to teach gratitude and appreciation, each member writes an anonymous note of appreciation to a person who has influenced his life in a significant way. One year a child chose to write to a teacher at school; another wrote to a community leader. Other recipients of letters of appreciation from this family included friends, a Church leader, and a grandparent.

On Thanksgiving another extended family holds a devotional just after dinner to express tender feelings of gratitude and appreciation. It takes several hours to hear from all the members, but this tradition bonds the family even though great geographical distances prevent them from being together often.

Familyhood

Traditions, family councils, and family home evenings help develop "familyhood," a process of bringing the family together through planned activities and goals. A divorced mother with three daughters found that her priorities changed when her husband left. Instead of worrying about a clean house, she focused on the importance of bonding the family in meaningful ways. They worked together to maintain their yard in the summer; they learned to fix things around the house. In fact, one of the daughters became very good at repairs and is the one who now really enjoys fixing the sprinkling system.

"When a person you depend on is gone, you pick up and do things; you carry on together," said Kathryn, a divorced mother who teaches school. "You keep up your testimony and stay busy so you don't feel sorry for yourself, and you work hard to build a strong family." Kathryn and her family spend Sundays with her parents where her daughters enjoy discussing gospel principles with their grandparents. They have family prayer together, and they also play games together. Even though Kathryn worries about finances, broken cars, daily lesson plans for school, and preparation of Sunday lessons for Young Women, she takes the time to have family prayers before dinner on many evenings. She and her daughters plan picnics, go to parades, visit the mountains, and sit together each evening doing school work. Even though their challenges are great, this family is strong because they work together and play together. They experience a sense of "familyhood" as they deal with life on a day-to-day basis.

Ruth, a widow in her eighties, was living in Hawaii when her husband died. She taught school for ten years after his death until her five unmarried children were on their own. Now she strengthens her family through letters and frequent phone calls. Her home is a gathering place for five grandchildren who attend college forty miles away. They enjoy coming there on weekends to watch football games and stay with their grandmother. Ruth has a strong conviction that each individual is responsible for her own life regardless of what challenges she may face. She says, "I strengthen my family by being busy. My children are not responsible for my happiness."

She, however, is a strong catalyst in her family for supporting and strengthening her sons, daughters, and grandchildren. Every Monday morning Ruth picks her son up from the airport when he flies into the city for work. She is lovingly known as his "taxi." Besides picking him up, she goes with her son to his seminars. Even though she has heard his presentation many times, she loves to see the audience's reaction to his lectures, and her son enjoys having his mother with him. It makes him feel good. The feeling of "familyhood" is still strong in this large family comprised of more than thirty-four members because of Ruth's strong, ongoing influence and involvement.

Learn then Teach

"Good family life is the ultimate joy of our existence," and building strong, self-reliant family members is critical to the success of a family. (See "Family Relationships," 3 March 1991.) As we learn and then teach each other in our families, we have opportunities to reach out to strengthen those around us. Our influence can have a rippling effect like a pebble tossed into a calm pool of water. We can influence and strengthen others if we have been taught well in our families. We can reach out and exercise the true spirit of charity we have learned in our homes. Then every man is like our brother; every woman is our sister. "Think of your brethren [and sisters] like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you," we are counseled by the prophet, Jacob, in the Book of Mormon. (Jacob 2:17.)

Jacob's counsel was taken to heart by Dalene, a thirty-four-year-old single woman from Indiana who was taught "by precept, example, and direct participation" the Relief Society motto, "Charity Never Faileth." "I watched my mother and father do visiting teaching and home teaching, bake and take food to those in need, visit the sick, give blessings, and take time out of busy schedules to listen, talk, or be there for someone in need." After graduation from nursing school and working for a year, Dalene felt a strong desire to serve a mission. She was called as a welfare services missionary to Chile where the principles she had been taught in her home blessed and strengthened the lives of many.

Among those whose lives were touched by the principles of love and charity Dalene learned in her family was Sister Sepulveda, a sixty-year-old convert to the Church of less than three years. "She was illiterate yet she loved the gospel. The Book of Mormon was one of her greatest treasures, and her greatest desire in life was to be able to read it. Sister Sepulveda traveled six miles by bus each week to Church when she had the money. Otherwise, she walked the distance with her granddaughter in spite of heat, rain, or snow," Dalene said.

For eight months, Dalene spent forty-five minutes three times a week teaching Sister Sepulveda how to recognize the alphabet, how to pronounce vowels and consonants, and how to recognize simple words. "It seemed to me as time was passing, that she would never learn, and that this was a futile effort.

"On one of the rainiest days of the year, Sister Sepulveda arrived one hour late for the lesson at the chapel. My companion and I were just preparing to leave when she came in the chapel doors. She was soaked from head to toe, and she had on an old wool coat that had no buttons. She held it tightly closed in front of her as she hobbled along. Her hair was long and grey, and it was matted to her head. She looked like a drowned rat. Her feet and ankles were swollen. I told her she shouldn't have come, and her response was, 'Oh, Hermana, I promised the Lord if he'd just send me someone to teach me to read, I would never miss a lesson or Church meeting!'

"I worked with Sister Sepulveda to the end of my mission. As I was preparing to leave and saying good-byes to all who had so richly blessed my life, Sister Sepulveda gave me a letter she had written in her own hand. She told me that as we had learned letters, she began practicing to trace them and copy them at night. She worked by a kerosene lamp with her bad eyes. Her fingers and hands were swollen with arthritic joints, yet she practiced the letters with her granddaughter's help. This was her gift to me."

A young black single mother and her family struggling to make ends meet in the ghettos of Chicago, Illinois, is strengthened through homemaking meetings carefully planned to meet the needs of the 202 sisters in the Hyde Park Ward. Sister Hattie Soil, a wise and farsighted Relief Society president, has a desire to use the Relief Society program to teach eighty black sisters. Many are single and divorced parents needing to break the cycle of four generations of welfare and to learn to survive on incomes far below poverty level. Homemaking meetings are organized to help these women learn principles of budgeting, effective childcare, basic sewing, home organization, and canning fruits and vegetables.

When a twenty-two-year-old single mother of three children ages five, three, and one joined the Church, she knew very little about caring for her children and was living in a very dangerous situation. Her rat-infested apartment had a hole in the floor which dropped clear to the basement and was hazardous for her crawling baby. She came to feel the great influence of Sister Soil's vision of how Relief Society could be used to strengthen her home and young family. Sister Soil and the ward bishop visited the young mother and subsequently helped her move out of the bad housing and into a cleaner apartment located in a rehabilitated building nearby which rented for the same price.

In homemaking meeting this same single mother is learning to break the cycle of welfare which has been a part of her background for four generations. Her children are now safe, clean, and well cared for, and she is learning how to budget her $400 monthly income check as well as how to can fruits and vegetables. She is putting aside a portion of her canned goods for food storage and has learned creative ways to store them, including under her bed. In addition to learning these important skills, this young mother is enrolled in a Church literacy program where she is learning to read. Her goal is to acquire a high school diploma, learn typing skills, and reach a point where she can get a job and grow in independence and self-confidence.

Individual women can richly bless the lives of others when they put into practice the principles they have learned in Relief Society. A strong gospel foundation gleaned from years of spiritual living as well as home and family education lessons may have helped two sisters touch the life of a nonmember woman living in their neighborhood. They acted on the counsel of President Spencer W. Kimball who declared in a Churchwide women's conference in September 1979: "I stress again the deep need each woman has to study the scriptures. Become scholars of the scriptures," he said, "not to put others down but to lift them up." ("The Role of Righteous Women," Ensign, November 1979, pp. 102-4.) He told women that as they become more and more familiar with the truths of the scriptures, they will not only bless their own families, but will become more effective in keeping the second great commandment of loving their neighbors as themselves.

That opportunity to lift and love a neighbor came to a pair of sisters. Their bishop, through the Relief Society president, asked them to visit and become a friend to Linda, a Catholic neighbor living in their area. Linda was experiencing challenges in her marriage as well as with her children. She opened her door to these new friends who began to visit her on a regular basis. For only a few short months they took kind and understanding hearts and their love of the gospel into Linda's home. Hearing her problems, they shared their insight and experience. Linda listened and asked questions. She spoke openly of her beliefs and concerns. And then one wintry day in December she announced to her friends that she and her family would be moving across the country in one week to Florida where her husband had a job opportunity.

Linda's new friends wanted to give her a Christmas gift before she left, but they weren't sure what it should be. Finally, after much thought and prayer, they bought a copy of the Book of Mormon and had Linda's name imprinted on the front of it. Inside the cover they slipped letters in which they shared their testimonies of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon and the joy and peace the gospel of Jesus Christ had brought to them and their families. Then they wrapped their special Christmas gift and presented it to Linda a few days before she moved.

The weeks and months passed with no word from Linda. Her Relief Society friends wondered if they had offended her with their testimonies of Jesus Christ and their gift. Then one day—two years later—a letter came from Florida. In it Linda told how she had read the Book of Mormon while making that long, cross-country trip. She wrote how she had eventually asked for the missionaries to come and teach her, and she described how she had joined the Church and been sealed to her family in the Atlanta Temple.

Because two women shared what they had been taught, the Book of Mormon became a moving force in Linda's life, and she said in a letter to them: "You will never know how I hold this gift of the Book of Mormon so dear to me. Your Christmas gift changed my life so much. I carry your gift with me to all my Church meetings. I read my scriptures daily, and your gift to me is more than a part of life—it is my life."

What an influence committed women of these latter days can have in their homes and in their neighborhoods! In spite of challenges, difficulties, and less-than-perfect families, all of us can work toward building righteous families. We can also reach outside our families to strengthen those around us. The gift of knowledge, understanding, and testimony remains an empty gift unless we use it to bless the lives of our families and those around us.

"To teach, you must first learn. To give, you must have something to offer. A woman who nurtures her spirit and mind, who expands her understanding and capacities, will have a rich harvest with which to feed others." (Learn Then Teach, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.) As the gentle custom in Singapore suggests, a woman's basket of gifts gleaned from experiences and gospel concepts learned in her home and in Relief Society will be full and ready to share with others. "One woman's spirit and mind can bless thousands of lives." Her influence can be felt not only in her immediate family and in her neighborhood, but also through generations to come.
