Cherry B. Silver, Anne C. Pingree, Mary Ellen Edmunds, Carol L. Clark, Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s ( 1991)

Enjoy a Unified Sisterhood

by Carol L. Clark

I felt awful. It was the week after Thanksgiving, I had just broken up with my boyfriend, I was thirty-five and childless, and I was living alone and feeling very sorry for myself. I ran into a wonderful friend, a woman older than I—also single—who I felt sure could comfort and counsel me. Over dinner at her house, I poured out my frustrations, my anger, my loneliness.

Without sympathy or hesitation she responded, "Carol, if you don't have a family, make one."

"Make one!" In a big dose of spiritual reality therapy, Elizabeth wisely reminded me that I can create—and enjoy—something quite wonderful myself, a bounteous series of relationships with the Lord and with his children, who are my brothers and sisters.

The fifth part of the Relief Society mission statement encourages us to "enjoy a unified sisterhood." This suggestion that we make a family of each other seems fitting to me as the conclusion of our mission. We LDS women, like the people instructed by King Benjamin, "believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things." (Mosiah 4:2.) I believe that like these people we can be "filled with joy, having received a remission of [our] sins, and having peace of conscience, because of the exceeding faith which [we have] in Jesus Christ." (Mosiah 4:3.)

I also believe we can be "filled with joy" as we make of one another a family of daughters of God and sisters in Zion who share faith in Jesus Christ.

Make a Family

The scriptures live for me—in technicolor with dolby sound. When I encounter these people of other times and places, I am counseled by their lives and teachings.

One story I particularly enjoy is that of Alma the Elder. Here was a man of high political and religious standing who was converted by hearing instructions from a prophet of God to an evil king. Alma taught others and they joined him at "a place which was called Mormon." (Mosiah 18:4) From him they learned about making a family in the truest sense: "And he commanded them that there should be no contention one with another but that they should look forward with one eye, having one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another." (Mosiah 18:21.)

With "one eye, one faith, one baptism," they dealt with one another in unity and love. What a remarkable thing to be "knit together in unity and love" with the family of Saints.

I presume that Alma and his people succeeded in their "knitting," for their story continued, "and thus they became the children of God." (Mosiah 18:22.) How did they do it? How can we do it?

Clearly, we must want to do it. We start by recognizing that being a literal daughter of God is not enough. We must also become the spiritual children of God, something that does not occur, as Alma's people experienced, until we bond together. This bonding is more than sitting or talking or listening or singing together. To become the children of God, we must be knit together. This bonding means believing, covenanting, and working together in loving unity. The bonding that makes us the children of God also truly makes a family of us.

Learning that King Noah "sent his army to destroy them" (Mosiah 18:33), Alma and his people "departed into the wilderness" (Mosiah 18:34). This band of people left behind their indoor plumbing and refrigerators, their social groups and their professions. Maybe some of them came with their entire family units, maybe some of them came alone, maybe some of them came without daughters or fathers. We cannot say. All we know is that something wonderful happened among these people who learned what it is to make family of one another.

In Relief Society we talk about sisterhood a lot. We designate each other as sisters, we call Relief Society our ward sisterhood, we comment about our worldwide sisterhood. What we're really talking about is making a family.

I take this business of family relationships very seriously. Perhaps this is because, as a single woman without children, I know what it is like not to have a family. Hence, when we Relief Society women call each other "sister," I think quite literally of this as a title that means we are family—we are connected in a unique, lasting, personal way. And when these connections are not just taped or spliced or lashed together but rather knit together, wonderful things happen.

Affection

My friend Blythe (aptly named) is an orphan. Her parents died when she was a teenager, and her brother, not a member of the Church, has always lived far away. Some people might wither in such a circumstance.

Not Blythe. She is a thriving survivor, who also turns a fine phrase.

It is from her I learned the great line, "family by affection." She acknowledges that none of us can alter our blood family relationships. We are born into our families by blood. But because of the agency Heavenly Father has given us, we can choose our family by affection.

Just think of it—we can feel related to the people we love. And this means we can choose to make our family by blood also our family by affection. We can "adopt" and enfold them through the love we feel for them. Maybe this is what Paul was talking about when he said, "For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: And if children, then heirs." (Romans 8:15-17.)

So we, children and heirs of God, can create large, warm families by affection. I think of this idea each time I sing "I Am a Child of God." If I am a child of God and you are a child of God, then we're sisters, right? And if we're sisters, let's love each other, adopt each other into a family by affection. In our family by affection we can enjoy close, warm, personal, meaningful relationships, whether or not we have them in our family by blood.

Allison, my niece by blood and affection, taught me what they say to each other in her family as they go off for the day. She never leaves home that she doesn't say to her mother, "Love you" instead of "Good-bye." Wouldn't it be nice if as we left Relief Society, we all said, "Love you" instead of "Have a good week"? Time, circumstances, and many pressures can steal our opportunities to feel bonded and one with our Relief Society sisters. Still, despite all the pulls of life, whenever we join together, I seek opportunities to enfold my Relief Society family in my arms as I enfold them in my heart.

Parents, children, siblings, even spouses may leave us. We may never have loving family by blood. Yet through the gospel, we can be family. Neither you nor I need ever feel orphaned anymore than my blithe-spirited friend does.

Humor

When I've shared a good laugh with a woman, I consider her my sister and buddy. Buddy is a word with warmth for me because of a ward Relief Society president who singlehandedly made me feel welcome in a ward of seven hundred.

I had just bought my first home and was finding the transition to homeowner to be a bit taxing. I was trying to paint, unbox my life, carry the demanding load at work, and feel at home with it all. During those first weeks as I sat alone in a huge congregation at sacrament meeting, I felt very disaffiliated. It seemed that the new couples had each other, the established couples had each other and I had little way of introducing myself into this massive group of groups.

Then MarJean found me. MarJean was the ward Relief Society president. Most of all she was a buddy. From the moment she introduced herself to me and me to others, MarJean watched out for me. Each week she would find me in the crowd and tell me some wonderful little story. Invariably at the end of it she would say, "Isn't that funny?" And it was. She talked about bouncing on the new mattress, about going to her son's rugby game, about hugging a wet baby, about exploring the thrift stores. It was all engaging and funny.

Soon I looked forward to those weekly visits and was delighted to discover that MarJean hung around the local grocery at 10:30 p.m. too. We'd run into each other in the frozen foods and talk and chuckle our way from the petite peas to the ice cream bars.

As I met her family and came to love them, I was drawn into their world. Over her husband, Blaine's, celestial waffles, her children and various family by affection, like me, would talk about the world and the weirdness and wonders of life. And often we had cause for a good laugh.

MarJean helped me enjoy my transition into the ward. With her at the helm, Relief Society was like a party to which all were cordially invited. I always sensed that MarJean had laughed with each of them as she laughed with me. The result: we felt at ease with each other. We felt close to each other. We were buddies.

I learned from MarJean that if I don't spend some time enjoying a good laugh with a buddy everyday, I am missing some of the great pleasures of life. Nothing is more bonding than a good laugh or a good cry, and humor gives us an excuse for both.

I weathered another broken romance, increasing job demands, my first winter of snow shoveling, a torn up basement, and much more during my sojourn in that ward. And I weathered it much better because MarJean had taught me to say, "Isn't that funny?" even when it was awful.

Diversity

My friend Suzanne and I don't have a thing in common. We do not belong to the same church. We do not have many of the same values. We do not look at the world in the same way. Yet, she's the one I get my opera tickets with because Suzanne is a trusted, tried friend. What bonds us?

I think it's primarily our diversity. Each of us enjoys learning how the other thinks and why. We have a great time laughing, talking, sharing together. I always like the opera, but I always love talking to Suzanne.

I thank the Lord daily that I am alive in a time of great diversity. I love the changes in the world, in the Church. Perhaps this is because I don't find changing particularly easy to do in my own life, so I love the constant challenge of having to do it and of learning from others how to do it. I love the personal challenge and reward of being part of a worldwide Church, a worldwide sisterhood.

I am blessed to serve in Relief Society now. I serve with fine, committed women, many of whom are not like me. We have not had the same life experiences, we do not view the world the same, we do not think alike. All of this is wonderful to me. It means that whenever we gather, I enjoy fresh ideas, new thoughts, great scriptural insights, and broadened vistas about everything in the world.

In my Relief Society sisterhood, we are not alike. Yet we are one as we are unified in purpose and direction. This unity is something we have discussed and about which we often pray, for we know that through unified diversity we are all bettered. We are not all alike. What a blessing!

In my salad days in Relief Society, years ago, I was intimidated by the knowledge others had that I didn't possess. A memorable case in point was my first committee assignment when I began my serious involvement in Relief Society at age twenty-five. I didn't know anyone. I thought I had little to offer. I felt terribly insecure.

This first assignment was to serve on the Christmas party committee. We held our first meeting in the elegant home of an elegant hostess, our committee chair. We sat around her kitchen table, and I immediately noticed she had a built-in marble slab in her counter. I was terribly impressed, as a built-in marble slab for making candy symbolized to me the ultimate in kitchens, the ultimate in homemaking.

I gasped when the committee chair asked me to bring caramels to the party—by-me-made caramels. I glanced at the marble slab in horror. I had never made candy in my life. I didn't have a clue how a body even made caramels.

After the meeting ended, I headed for the home of a good friend. I told Meredith and her mother about my caramel assignment. I said that maybe I should just ask to be released because not only was I a candy illiterate, I was also a sewing illiterate. The Relief Society was sure to discover these voids soon enough, so it might be better if I confessed all so they could just release me and get it over with.

Pat, Meredith's mother, advised prudence. My own mother and sister, she reminded me, made wonderful candy. They would certainly help me. I shouldn't panic. My reputation was not on the line. My life was not ending. These were only caramels, after all. Meredith added that the candy everyone made would be put together on platters. No one would know which I'd made anyway, so what was I worried about.

But I was worried. I made the caramels—all alone—with my mother standing on my left hand and my sister standing on my right. At my request, they monitored every beat of the spoon.

What I learned later was that few of those Relief Society women had marble slabs in their kitchens. Some of them didn't even like candy. My own green expectations created the stress I felt.

The truth was that they were diverse in many ways. In time, I quit worrying about caramels and started learning from this treasure of women, many of whom shaped the opinions and working styles I have leaned on heavily in subsequent years. Our differences blessed me by giving me various righteous role models from which I mined many skills. I formed friendships that have lasted nearly twenty years and have enriched my life beyond expression. Those caramels I painstakingly made were sweet; learning from my sisters has been far sweeter.

Fine Ideas

I have savored many a moment spent with a fine idea and a friend.

Recently I received a four-page, single-spaced letter of fine ideas from a brand new friend. I consider it a treasure. I consider it such because ideas shared from the heart are so rich, and Mary Ellen shared from her heart.

One idea Mary Ellen shared was about communication. She suggested that "maybe the pure in thought and heart had practiced the skill so much that they were able to perceive the thoughts and intents of others' hearts. Perhaps here lies a key to there being 'no poor among them.' The pure in heart and thought might know each other's strugglings and sorrow, each other's poverty, each other's spiritual, social, physical and other needs."

What a powerful idea, this concept of spiritual communication. I've thought about it, made it a consideration in my scripture study, in my prayers. It's something Mary Ellen and I can talk about for a long time to come. I am grateful for Mary Ellen, I am grateful for the idea.

Years ago I became conscious of D&C 43:8: "And now, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that when ye are assembled together ye shall instruct and edify each other, that ye may know how to act and direct my church, how to act upon the points of my law and commandments, which I have given."

This counsel to instruct and edify appeals greatly to me. At best our interaction with each other should do both—teach and lift. What's even better is to know that we can teach and lift each other.

I have some good friends I see about once a month. We gather for what we call "Friday Breakfast." On the first Friday of the month we congregate at a local restaurant early in the morning, head for a back table, and enjoy an hour's worth of chat. Sometimes it's rather mundane, sometimes it's heated, sometimes it's personal, sometimes it's professional. Always it's fun.

As part of our group's activity, we gather on an erstwhile basis for birthday parties. If your birthday is within two months either way, the party counts for you. Our parties are happy celebrations, full of cake, ice cream, and song. Last year at the party honoring me, among others, Jeanie, our hostess, asked each person to bring a favorite thought to share with the honorees.

After we sang every birthday song we knew—it turns out to be quite a few—Jeanie asked each woman to read her thought. Suddenly the party became a spiritual experience. As each of my sisters read her thought, I was edified and instructed. I learned something about each one. I was instructed by her comments on the thought she shared. I was edified by the spirit of the Lord each woman invited into our party. It was a celebration of the fine ideas the Lord had blessed each of us to understand and love.

Lots of times I sit in Relief Society and think about what each sister brings to the party. We sing songs together—we know quite a few—and we share ideas. Whenever a sister of mine shares from her heart something she has learned, I am edified. I am grateful I'm in the company of women who hold fine ideas dear.

Spiritual Friendship

Two years ago, I took a business trip to Canada. My dad drove me to the airport, and as he closed the trunk of the car and turned to send me off, I gave him a hug and said, "Dad, I love you."

Those were the last words I ever spoke to my father. He died of a massive heart attack the next day.

As I struggled to get home through that endless night, I sat for six hours in the Calgary airport alone. What happened to me beginning there has changed me permanently.

I read Moses' words: "I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live; That thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him; for he is thy life, and the length of thy days." (Deuteronomy 30:19-20.)

My beloved father had chosen life; he had chosen the Lord. As people spoke to members of my family during subsequent days, most spoke of a personal moment shared with dad as he had been a friend, a bishop, a business partner. No one ever mentioned business success or cars or nice homes.

What my father left them was also what he left us—something permanent—for he left spiritually based friendships. I can say, "Dad, I love you," not just because he's my father, but also because with Norman Clark I share a spiritual friendship and a great deal of affection.

Sometimes I think about what makes Relief Society different from other women's groups. What can I get/give in Relief Society that I can't experience somewhere else? For me the answer always hinges on spiritual friendships. In Relief Society I join with a group of women who share my love of the Lord. Our friendships, our familial relationships are based upon that which endures, i.e., the gospel of Jesus Christ. Solid friendships I can find many places, but spiritually solid friendships I can have through the sisterhood of Relief Society. Like my father, I would "choose life" that I may grow in my capacity to create friendships that bind me spirit to spirit with other individuals. What other type of friendship can ever be as satisfying, comforting, or enduring?

Charity Never Faileth

There they were, the people of Alma the Elder. We do not know all they sacrificed, we do know it was at least their homes and most of their possessions.

What happened to them? Amulon, in cahoots with some Lamanites, captured them. Having also been a priest of King Noah, Amulon knew Alma and took perverse pleasure in tormenting these new converts to the Lord's church. "And it came to pass that so great were their afflictions that they began to cry mightily to God. And Amulon commanded them that they should stop their cries; and he put guards over them to watch them, that whosoever should be found calling upon God should be put to death." (Mosiah 24:10-11.)

I have often wondered how I might have responded to this loss of connection with my fellow believers. Unable to worship or even pray with others, would I have been able to maintain faith?

Alma and his people seemed to grow their faith in such tough times. "And Alma and his people did not raise their voices to the Lord their God, but did pour out their hearts to him; and he did know the thoughts of their hearts. It came to pass that the voice of the Lord came to them in their afflictions, saying: Lift up your heads and be of good comfort, for I know the covenant which ye have made with me, and I will covenant with my people and deliver them out of bondage." (Mosiah 24:12-13.)

Two things strike me about these verses: first, the Lord spoke to each person individually; second, the Lord said the same thing to each person individually.

These people were together—literally and figuratively. Each was righteous enough to be prayerfully capable of receiving instruction from the Lord. Each was united enough with her brothers and sisters, and received the same message.

The Lord rescued the people of Alma the Elder from bondage. I am convinced this miraculous rescue was possible because these people loved and lived charity. "Charity never faileth" is the Relief Society motto; it is also a statement about how we can choose to treat each other. Alma's people "did walk uprightly before God, imparting to one another both temporally and spiritually according to their needs and their wants." (Mosiah 18:29.) I believe that once these people understood what it meant to "impart" to each other, they made a family by affection of each other. They created spiritual friendships that endured the most arduous trial. They were bonded through their living of the law of charity.

In Relief Society I see myself bonded—how different from being in bondage—with 2.8 million women worldwide. Often when I do my visiting teaching I think of the women who do their visiting teaching in Kansas or France or Guam. Sometimes I think of myself as ringing a doorbell at the very moment my sister in Canada is doing the same thing. In Relief Society I am part of something bigger than myself.

As a visiting teacher what I do is important because I exercise watchcare of another woman. What I do is also important in a global sense. I am one of thousands of women who are together—literally and figuratively. We do this work because we love the Lord and we feel a kinship with our sisters. Through our "imparting" one to another we learn of the Lord, we discover how to be like Him, we rejoice in each other. I am part of a righteous sisterhood building the kingdom of God throughout the earth. What my sisters and I do together and individually matters.

Together now and forever we enjoy our unified sisterhood.
