Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

PREFACE

Deseret Book Co., Copyright 1952

Books on the Old Testament prophets are numerous, but no systematic treatment of them has hitherto been attempted by one who has the point of view of the restored Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This work must be considered as a pioneer venture, and I humbly offer it to the Church as such. It is sent forth with the hope that it may stimulate our people to read the prophets with a greater measure of understanding and enjoyment. The prophets were great men, and we believe that many of them foresaw our day and the great events of the Restoration. Their writings, unfortunately, are for most people difficult to understand. This is true even for those who have a good knowledge of the gospel, not to mention a fair understanding of ancient Oriental history and languages. In these pages I try to take the reader on a personally conducted tour through the mazes of some of the more important prophetic writings. I trust that my work as a guide will not result in too many bumps and false leads. Whenever it has seemed worth-while, an attempt has been made to collate the writings of the prophets with our modern scriptures and the writings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

My former work, The Message of the Twelve Prophets, now out of print, has been combined, in a slightly revamped form, with my writings on the Major Prophets to form this volume. Certain inconsistencies in form and presentation which may be found to exist between my discussion of the Major Prophets and that of the Minor Prophets is due to the time element—;I wrote on the Minor Prophets over thirteen years ago.

I am much indebted to the work of scholars of all latitudes. Even those with whom I have disagreed most have often given me leads which have proved most useful. I have been independent in my judgments of the meaning of texts, assisted the while by that measure of the Spirit which I could summon to my aid.

Through the volume, scriptural passages have been quoted liberally, often in poetic form. Much of what the prophets said is poetry. Indeed, the Book of Isaiah without poetry would be like a symphony without music. Most people will not take the trouble to look up references, and it has been deemed of value to lay the Scripture itself in an attractive form before the eyes of the reader. The text most often used is that due to the Jewish Publication Society of America. Occasionally the text of the King James Version is used for some special reason. Only rarely have I made an independent translation of a passage.

My thanks are again due to my good friend and colleague, Professor Ralph Britsch, whose sharp eye and good judgment have saved me from many errors. Any which remain must be charged to me, and the indulgence of the reader is asked in a difficult, if delightful task.

S. B. S.

Brigham Young University

June 10, 1950
