Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter One

PROPHECY AND THE PROPHETS

Some Facts About the Old Testament Prophetic Books.—; In the Hebrew Old Testament, the prophetic books are classified as: (1) The Former Prophets, comprising Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings; and (2) The Latter Prophets, which include Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and The Twelve. The Former Prophets do not come within the purview of this book. The Twelve or Minor Prophets as a group are dealt with in Chapter Nineteen and will not be discussed here. The remaining books among The Latter Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, give accounts of the great prophets commonly known as the Major Prophets. They are spoken of as being "Major" because the books under their names are so much larger in size and scope than those of the "Minor" prophets. The reader may wonder why the Book of Daniel is omitted from the list of prophetic books in the Hebrew Bible. It is found, instead, in the last part of that Scripture, among the so-called "Writings." The reason or reasons for its position in this place have been widely sought for, but I fear without much success. The reason commonly given, however, is that Daniel did not occupy the office of a prophet, although he did possess the prophetic gift. As Latter-day Saints we would disagree with this view. In the Greek and Latin versions of the Bible, the Book of Daniel was placed immediately after Ezekiel as the fourth of the Major Prophets; it is so found in our common English versions. Inasmuch as our people consider Daniel a great prophet, it is fitting that he should be discussed in this volume, and immediately following Ezekiel.

The Line of the Prophets.—;The Latter-day Saints believe that the line of the writing prophets considered in this volume harks back to the days of Adam, our great progenitor. That noble Patriarch of the human race was also its first prophet. He was an inspired man, and received revelations from God for the benefit of his children. As an example, we may call attention to a modern revelation on the subject through the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel. And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever. And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation. These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of in due time. (D. & C. 107:53-57)

When the Book of Enoch comes forth in its original purity, the world may be startled by the nature and extent of Adam's written prophecies. Adam taught the same gospel as taught by the Savior when He walked and taught among men. All of the prophets from the beginning understood and taught the same doctrines, being instructed by or under the direction of our pre-existent Lord. These included Adam's patriarchal descendants such as Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech and Noah. The Pearl of Great Price speaks of most of these men in these words:

And this is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God, himself, conversed. And they were preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied, and called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men. (Moses 6:22, 23; see also 7:65, 66; 8:3, 13)

Many of Noah's direct descendants, including Abraham, were also prophets. Our Lord paid special tribute to Abraham when He said, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad." (John 8:56) That is to say, Abraham as a true prophet understood the mission and work which the Christ was ordained to undertake among men; he was probably permitted in vision to see the Savior's ministry and rejoiced over it. The Hebrew prophets, lineal descendants of Abraham, were spiritual heirs, therefore, of the great prophets of the past. Herein lies the reason for the unity that underlies the books of the Bible. Although the Hebrew prophets ministered among a people who were obliged to keep the Law of Moses, it was their understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ that kept their ideals so high. Jacob, a Book of Mormon prophet, (c. 540 B. C.) understood this fact, as his writings show:

... we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us. Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name. And for this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to him; and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for righteousness, even as it was accounted unto Abraham in the wilderness to be obedient unto the commands of God in offering up his son Isaac, which is a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son. Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. (Jacob 4:4-6)

Unfortunately for the present generation, so many books or passages of sacred scripture were omitted or deliberately deleted in ancient times from the Bible by wicked men that many persons are led astray from the truth concerning the ancient prophets:

Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God . . .—cause of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God—cause of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceeding great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them. (1 Nephi 13:28, 29)

We see, then, that the Hebrew prophets discussed in this volume were lineal and spiritual descendants of great prophets who understood the gospel of Jesus Christ. Through the revelations of God to the modern prophet, Joseph Smith, we are able better to assess their mission and true worth than ever before.

The Hebrew Prophets Contrasted With the Religious Figures of Other Nations.—;In ancient times, as now, "holy men" appeared in various religions and exerted much influence upon their people, but few or none have had so profound an effect upon the course of civilization as did the Hebrew prophets. The Greeks had their "oracles"; the Babylonians had their "astrologers" and "diviners"; others had "wise men"

or "crystal gazers"; but none had a "prophet" in the Hebrew connotation of the word. The eminent Hebraist, C. von Orelli, says: "We come to the conclusion that no phenomenon analogous to Biblical prophecy, even in form, is anywhere to be found in the world of nations." [^1] Wherein lay the difference between the Hebrew prophets and the others? Perhaps the answer—;in part, at least—;may come out as we inquire into the mission of a prophet and the nature of prophecy.

What Constituted a Prophet Among the Hebrews?—;It should be pointed out that our word "prophet" is derived from the Greek word "prophetes." The term usually denoted one who spoke for a god and interpreted his will to man. It had reference to a man who acted as an interpreter or expounder of the will of the god and who was believed to speak not his own thoughts but a revelation from without. The Hebrew word for prophet was "nabhi," and had reference to one who acted as a giver or recipient of information with respect to the Unseen World. The prophet spoke in the name of God or acted as His interpreter. (Cf. Exo. 4:15 f.; 7:1f.) One outstanding fact about the true Hebrew prophet should be noticed here: He never arrogated to himself the spiritual prerogative of preaching or ministering to his own people or to any other, but waited until he was directly commissioned and sent of God. The sectarian world of today might well take that fact to heart. Keep in mind as examples the cases of Amos, Jeremiah, Isaiah and Ezekiel. Amos said in effect: "I'm no professional prophet. I'm a simple herdsman, and a dresser of sycamore-trees, whom God has called and commissioned to prophesy unto His people Israel. Now hear the word of the Lord." (Cf. Amos 7:14-16) Jeremiah even protested God's call, because he was so young, but the Lord said, "Say not: I am a child; for to whomsoever I shall send thee thou shalt go, and whatsoever I shall command thee thou shalt speak." (Jer. 1:7) Isaiah volunteered for the ministry when he realized that the Lord needed a messenger, but the divine command was expressly heard: "Go, and tell this people." (Isa. 6:9) Ezekiel was told, "Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to rebellious nations, . . ." (Ezek. 2:3) The Latter-day Saints understand these calls from God in their literal sense just as the ancient Hebrews did. We do not explain them away by psychological analysis or comparative study. When once the Hebrew was found worthy and was commissioned a prophet, he acted as an intermediary between God and His people, and not before. And though the prophet was the mouthpiece of Jehovah to His people, that did not alter the fact that each one of the people in turn, if worthy, might receive individual inspiration or revelation. Notice the cases of Hagar (Gen. 16:7-12) and Solomon (1 Kings 3:5-14). The Hebrew prophet was often given names such as the messenger of God or Jehovah, the servant of God or Jehovah, the man of God, or the watchman. Although the prophet spoke the word of God, it does not follow that he acted simply as a mere recording instrument. To be sure, the Lord moved him to say the thoughts desired, but the voice and words were usually those of the prophet. Under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit he learned the desires of God, and these he often repeated in the vocabulary and language at his command. Were that not so, we would not have all the diversities of vocabulary, syntax, figures of speech, and style that are found in the Old Testament. A prophet might impart to his people wisdom learned out of his own worldly experience and be accepted of God in so doing.

Another fact of great importance concerning the Hebrew prophet was that he acted as the spiritual leader of a great people whose peculiar function, among all other peoples of the globe, was to bring salvation to the world. Israel was God's special agent, whose leavening influence was meant to hasten the hour when God's will would be done in the nations. "You only," said the Lord, "have I known of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2) Moreover,

How would I put thee among the sons,

And give thee a pleasant land,

The goodliest heritage of the nations!

And I said: Thou shalt call Me, My father;

And shall not turn away from following Me. (Jer. 3:19)

God's missionary work was to be done by Israel; not only were the dispersed of Israel itself to be gathered from the nations, but the honest in heart from among all peoples:

Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and afterward I will send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the clefts of the rocks. (Jer. 16:16)

So we interpret the spirit of the Scriptures.

The Lord declared to Amos that He would do nothing, except He revealed His counsel unto His servants the prophets. (Amos 3:7) The prophet was perfectly aware that he was the agent of a covenant people, the only people upon earth that had made a special compact with God. This covenant is best explained in the Book of Abraham:

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations; and I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father; and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood) for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. (Abr. 2:9-11; cf. Gen. 12:2, 3; 13:14, 15; 17:6, 7, 10-14)

As the Lord explained it to Abraham, all of the families of the earth were to be blessed with the gospel through his seed. Hence the responsibility which the Hebrew prophet felt. The close tie between God and His people through a prophet, not to mention the importance of prayer and personal revelation among the faithful of the Hebrews generally, explains the great spiritual value and influence of the Old Testament record.

The Prophet Versus the Seer.—;As we have already seen, the prophet was known among the Hebrews as a "nabhi." The Hebrew Old Testament also refers to seers under two names, "ro'eh" and "chozeh." "Ro'eh" means literally "one who looks intently at an object." The three words, "nabhi," "ro'eh" and "chozeh," seem to have had different applications and suggested different ideas to the ancient Hebrews. In 1 Samuel 9:9 it is recorded, "he that is now called a prophet was beforetime a seer." Although this statement is probably a gloss added by a commentator who did not himself understand the difference between a prophet and a seer, it does suggest that there were possible differences in meaning between the two. A very interesting passage of scripture is found in 1 Chronicles, where the nabhi, ro'eh and chozeh are all referred to in a very distinct manner:

Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the words of Samuel the ro'eh, and in the words of Nathan the nabhi, and in the words of Gad the chozeh. (29:29; italics ours.)

It seems tolerably plain from this reference that the three terms were not exactly synonymous. Why was Nathan a prophet, Samuel a seer, and Gad a gazer? Again, in 2 Kings we find:

. . . the Lord forewarned Israel, and Judah, by the hand of every prophet, [nabhi] and of every seer, [chozeh] . . . (17:13)

Shemaiah is spoken of as the "prophet" (nabhi; 2 Chron. 12:15), Heman as the king's seer (chozeh; 1 Chron. 25:5), and Iddo as the seer (chozeh; 2 Chron. 12:15), by way of further illustration. We see, therefore, that the sacred writers did not use "prophet" and "seer" synonymously.

In the Book of Mormon, seers are spoken of in the books of 2 Nephi and Mosiah. It is made clear that whoever was commanded to look in the Urim and Thummim, or Interpreters, as they were known to the Nephites, was called a seer. (Mos. 8:13) A seer was considered to be greater than a prophet:

And the king said that a seer is greater than a prophet. And Ammon said that a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God. But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known. (Mos. 8:15-17)

It would appear that a seer was one who could behold and understand mysteries of the past, present and future, and, if so instructed, make them known to men. His was not a mere dream but a "waking" experience in which his physical senses were usually under control, though his "seeing" or "gazing" was spiritual. The "nabhi" or "prophet" differed from him in that he could speak of such things only by inspiration or verbal instruction from some authorized source. When a prophet began to see the events of which he spoke, he was to that extent a seer also. A seer could be a prophet, but a prophet was not necessarily a seer. A prophet was in a sense a practical religionist who advised and counseled his people through the inspiration of the Spirit, but who did not necessarily enjoy a knowledge of the higher mysteries of the Lord's kingdom. The seer could have both privileges.

Even after the disappearance of the Urim and Thummim from Israel, it is quite obvious from the Old Testament accounts that seers were still raised up by God among His people. Daniel and Ezekiel are good examples. They foresaw and understood many future events pertaining to the kingdom of God. Though only a seer was commanded to use the Urim and Thummim or "Holy Interpreters," it does not follow that holy men could not be seers without these sacred instruments.

The Prophet As a Practical Religionist.—;Although the prophets doubtless thought much about the future, it is more than probable that most of their work among their contemporaries was of a practical nature. They were teachers, statesmen, and counselors of the people. Moses gave to man his great law code, including the "Ten Commandments" which he received on Mount Sinai. His influence on law and morals has been tremendous, and his work represents that type of prophetic function which is to lay down laws and principles for the guidance and progress of man. The prophets were concerned with the mundane activities of their people, because they considered them part of their general spiritual life. They seemed to have labored with the idea that what we are to be, we are now becoming; and, if the conditions of society are not favorable, men cannot achieve the spiritual status God desires, for His children cannot live the "abundant life" in the face of war, ignorance, poverty, illness, or sin. The prophets were the great champions of human rights, for they evidently realized that no society can rise higher than the level of the vast majority of its component members.

The worth of human personality and the brotherhood of man are principles that were emphasized again and again.

The social teachings of the prophets are one of the most prominent features of our Old Testament. Jonah was shown the responsibility of a Hebrew prophet and God's love for all mankind; Amos emphasized honesty and social justice; Micah, a prophet of the poor, showed the value of justice, kindness, mercy and humility. We must never forget his classic:

It hath been told thee, O man, what is good,

And what the Lord doth require of thee:

Only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. (Micah 6:8)

Others of the prophets condemned hypocrisy, pride, undependability, worldliness, backsliding, idolatry, oppression, and dishonesty. (See Jer. 2:11; Hos. 4:6-19; 5:5; 6:4; 7:8; 9:9; 11:7; 13:2; Amos 4:1; 8:4-6; Micah 3:5-7; Isa. 3:13-15; etc.) Brotherhood is one of the greatest elements in the teachings of the prophets. "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," is at the heart of their teachings. (Lev. 19:18; cf. Matt. 22:39)

Besides teaching the gospel to their contemporaries, the prophets made their presence felt in diverse ways. Many moved in court circles; this fact was doubtless in part due to the precedent set when the first king of Israel, Saul, was chosen and anointed by Samuel, the seer and prophet. (1 Sam. 10:1, 24, 25) Notable examples of prophets who acted as counselors to kings may be found in the cases of Nathan and David (2 Sam. 12), Isaiah and Hezekiah (2 Kings 19:20), Jeremiah and Zedekiah (Jer. 37), and Daniel and Nebuchadnezzar, not to mention other kings. (Dan. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7) The prophets did not remain aloof from politics if participation would advance the spiritual interests of their people.

The prophets portrayed God in such a way as to make Him more comprehensible to the finite minds of His people. The Lord is shown as possessing attributes much in common with man; therefore He spoke to the people according to their understanding and their weakness. He was described as being a jealous God and as being much concerned about the reverence due him. (Exo. 20:5; Deut. 4:24; Nahum 1:2; Mal. 1:6) As a result of sin and rebellion against Jehovah, He was angry with men because that which they rejected was designed for their welfare. (Isa. 30:27, 28; Jer. 7:19, 20) He punished men for wrong doing; nevertheless, He was merciful in judgment. (Exo. 20:5, 6; Deut. 4:31; Nahum 1:2, 3; Jer. 3:12; Joel 2:13; Jonah 4:2) Jehovah was indeed viewed as a God of love. (Isa. 63:9; Jer. 31:3; Hos. 3:1; 11:4; Mal. 1:2)

As is evident, the prophets entered into every part of Hebrew social life; therefore, we may conclude that their work was as broad as the needs of the people.

The Predictive Element in Prophecy.—;Many Biblical scholars are in disagreement concerning the element of prediction in prophecy. There is one school which holds that a prophet must speak out of a definite concrete situation and cannot see beyond the historical horizon of his own times. Anything that was predicted and also fulfilled was held either to be the result of keen insight or to have been written after the prophet's time and attributed to him. This position is opposed by some competent scholars, and would most certainly be denied by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Professor Orelli wrote:

Undoubtedly the prophets, whose writings we still have, owed their high reputation in great part to the fulfilment of their oracles in reference to the future. [^2]

In his Bampton Lectures of 1938, Professor Alfred Guillaume, eminent Orientalist, said:

An epigram which has become widely current asserts that the prophets were 'forthtellers rather than fore-tellers'. Whether this dictum can be sustained is very doubtful. There is no prophet in the Old Testament who was not a foreteller of the future, . . . When a prophet ceases to prophesy in this sense he ceases to be a prophet and becomes a preacher. [^3]

There are, therefore, a few voices in the wilderness crying out against common misconceptions of the element of prediction in prophecy. The truth is, probably, that the prophets were mostly concerned with the current problems of their own people, but in their writings that have come down to us they say a great deal about the future. Thus, Isaiah makes much of his knowledge of the future as a basis for sustaining his right to speak in the name of the Lord. (Isa. 41:22, 23; 42:9)

Prophecy cannot be rightly understood without a knowledge of the restored gospel. We believe that many of the prophets looked forward to our own day and beyond, because they knew that in His own good time God would establish His church upon the earth, never again to be overthrown, and would redeem His people and bring peace to the nations.

False Prophets.—;All prophets were not of God. The wicked prophets of Baal held a very prominent position in Israel in the reign of Ahab. They officiated in the orgiastic Canaanite religion, with all its lewd and repelling practices. There was also the school of the prophets, which may have been just and reputable at its inception but which finally degenerated into an unscrupulous guild that divined for money and power. With these the true prophets had to compete for the people's attention, and in the case of Elijah, it needed a supernatural demonstration to convince men that the prophets of Baal were unreliable. Probably all of the true prophets had constantly to contend with false prophets. (See, e.g., Jer. 23:13-17)

Repentance in the Prophetic Message.—;We must take cognizance of the fact that the prophets did not carry a message to their people for the mere pleasure of doing so. There is a real need behind every prophetic injunction to mankind. In most instances men are upbraided for their low standards of conduct and are called to repentance. Unless they turn to the Lord, the penalties resulting from broken laws are generally visited upon them. If the people repent they may escape, as did Nineveh; otherwise, the penalties must come. We may affirm that repentance is one of the most prominent elements in Old Testament prophecy. The Book of Jonah is a good illustration of this point, not to mention Jeremiah.

The Prophets Were Messengers of Hope.—;We must not conclude that the prophets could see only the dark and unpleasant side of affairs. Beyond every rebuke was a ray of hope for the repentant. Israel would be punished but would also be redeemed; and with the prediction of the dispersion came also the prediction of the gathering. Psychologically this method is powerful: to rebuke, but to show that the offender is chastised only for his own good and that he is still loved by the Lord.

The Test of Prophecy.—;Now that we have defined prophecy, within certain limits, and have noticed some of the more outstanding features of this great spiritual medium, let us consider the way in which the prophets determined what was true prophecy and what was false. Moses gave the key by which the veracity of the prophetic oracles was determined:

When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him. (Deut. 18:22; see also Deut. 13:1-3; Jer. 28:9)

Professor Orelli states:

The contents of prophecy are, consequently, not something thought out, inferred, hoped, or feared by the [true] prophets, but something directly perceived. This explains the categorical certainty with which they announce their oracles. They know these oracles to be independent of their own subjectivity. The revelation comes before their gaze as something independent, nay, belonging to another.

It is God who discloses these things to them—ings withdrawn from human gaze... The fundamental assumption always is, that the attitude of the genuine prophet to the contents of his discourse, if not passive, is primarily receptive. Only false prophets announce what they themselves have thought out or inferred on grounds of probability. [^4]

Truly Moses gives the key to the predictive element of a divine message, but one would probably want to know whether a man were a prophet before his prediction was fulfilled. This desire might not in every instance be easy of fulfillment. And generally speaking, prophets are not acknowledged as such by those whose outlook and actions are not on the same high spiritual plane as their own, as the history of prophecy clearly shows. Probably only through revelation or inspiration can one determine whether or not a man is a prophet. In other words, the observer must himself have in some degree the spirit of prophecy.

The Conditional Element in Prophecy.—;Perhaps some of us are like Jonah in that we are disappointed if a prediction is not fulfilled as we desire. Prophecy is conditional in a degree, as is well illustrated in respect to Nineveh. (Jonah 3) The people repented; as a result, the city was spared. Had they not repented, the destruction decreed upon it must surely have come to pass. The Lord sent Jonah to warn the people, not because He wished to destroy them but because He wished to save them from the error of their ways. In another instance the Lord sent Jeremiah to warn Zedekiah, but Zedekiah rejected the message and met his doom at the hands of the Babylonians. (Jer. 32:1-5; cf. 2 Chron. 36:11-21) Had Zedekiah repented, he might have avoided the great disaster which befell him.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] During the reigns of Jeroboam II and Uzziah the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were wealthy and relatively powerful. This was possible because of the weaknesses displayed by their neighbors, Egypt and Assyria. Isaiah's call to the ministry marks the approaching end to Judah's and Israel's power and prosperity. Chapters 1-12, prophecies dealing chiefly with "Judah and Jerusalem," the nations coming in the last days to the "mountain of the Lord's house," and closing with promises of Israel's restoration and a psalm of thanksgiving. As quoted by G. L. Robinson, The Book of Isaiah (First Edition), p. 22.
[^2] During the reign of Ahaz, Jotham's successor, there occurred the Syro-Ephraimite war, one of the great events in Isaiah's career, during which Judah was brought low because of the king's decidedly baneful religious and political policies. (2 Chron. 28:19; 2 Kings 16:10-16) When Syria and Israel united their forces in 734 B. C. in order to capture Jerusalem, and put a king of their own choosing upon the throne, Isaiah declared the Lord's purpose that the attempt would fail, and he tried in vain to persuade Ahaz to put his faith in Jehovah and not in heathen princes. (Ch. 7) Ahaz instead called in Tiglath-pileser, the king of Assyria, and became his vassal. Chapters 13-23, prophecies of judgment and salvation, for the most part consisting of "burdens" on the nations of concern to Judah and Jerusalem. See Isa. 7:3. Notice Isaiah's ready access to the king. See also 8:2, where he seems to have easy access to the religious leaders
[^3] During Hezekiah's reign (728 B. C.—;699) Isaiah saw the end of the Kingdom of Israel with the capture of Samaria by the Assyrians in 721 B. C. About the year 714 B. C. the Assyrians invaded Judah. (2 Kings 18:13; Isa. 36:1) Not long after, in the same year, Hezekiah fell exceedingly ill, and Isaiah told him to set his house in order, for he was to die. The king prayed earnestly to God, and Isaiah was instructed by the Lord to return and promise him fifteen more years of life. (2 Kings 20:1-11) The constantly increasing pressure and power of Assyria finally culminated in Judah's being overrun by Sennacherib in 701 B. C. [^4] (See in order Isa. 39; 2 Kings 20:12, 13; Isa. 20; 2 Kings 18:13-19:36.) Jerusalem was saved because of Isaiah's good judgment, as we have already pointed out. The Assyrian crisis was the greatest political event in the long ministry of Isaiah. Chapters 24-27, prophecies concerning a great world judgment, which will issue in Israel's redemption. Robinson, op. cit., p. 23.
[^4] During Isaiah's time, great wealth and extremes of poverty existed side by side. The poor were oppressed by the wealthy classes, land grabbing was rife (5:8), religion was a hollow sham, [^5] idolatry increased in the land because of the influence of Assyrian colonists in the Northern Kingdom, drunkenness and carousing prevailed, women were guilty of low standards of conduct, great moral laxity prevailed, and judges and civic leaders failed to keep faith with the people. Chapters 28-33, a series of prophecies concerning Israel's future (including the coming forth of the Book of Mormon) and the relations of Judah with Assyria and Egypt. For Sennacherib's own account see D. D. Luckenbill, Annals of Sennacherib, pp. 31-34; consult Jack Finegan, Light From the Ancient Past, pp. 176-179.
