Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Two

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF ISRAEL

The Greatness of the Man.—;Isaiah was one of the greatest men of all time. Certainly none of the prophets of the Old Testament, so far as we can tell from their writings, was greater than he. In the first place, Isaiah had great natural gifts, which were disciplined and sharpened by the best education that his time afforded. He was blessed with fine judgment and insight, together with the courage to defend to the uttermost a cause he knew to be right. Secondly, he possessed great spiritual intuition and insight, which made him a marvelous and ready instrument in the hands of Jehovah, whom he loved and served with all his heart. Isaiah thus combined earthly and heavenly wisdom to a most unusual degree. All this he of course used for the benefit of his fellow men. Valeton pays this tribute to him:

Never perhaps has there been another prophet like Isaiah, who stood with his head in the clouds and his feet on the solid earth, with his heart in the things of eternity and with mouth and hand in the things of time, with his spirit in the eternal counsel of God and his body in a very definite moment of history. [^1]

Some Facts About Isaiah's Personal History.—;As the superscription (1:1) of the book makes plain, Isaiah was the son of Amoz (do not confuse with Amos), and his ministry took place during the last half of the eighth century B. C. His name means "Jehovah has saved," and is practically identical in meaning with the names Joshua and Hoshea. Isaiah seemed to be keenly aware of the meaning of his name, for he continually used the words that comprise it. So far as can be ascertained, Isaiah was a native of Jerusalem and therefore a city prophet. Of his father Amoz nothing is known. The statement of the Rabbins, that he was a prophet (Megilla 15a), and the intimation of the Talmud (Megilla 10b) that Amoz was a member of the royal family, and was a brother of King Amaziah, seem not to be supported by trustworthy evidence. Throughout his book Isaiah mentions Jerusalem, and since he was a close confidant of the king, he is sometimes referred to as a court prophet. According to tradition, Isaiah was a cousin of King Uzziah, and from the prophet's own statements it may be deduced that he came apparently from a family of high rank. [^2] Isaiah was married, though we do not know the name of his wife. She is simply spoken of as the "prophetess." (8:3) Two sons are mentioned, Shear-jashub (7:3) and Maher-shalal-hash-baz. (8:3) The meaning of these names are, respectively, "a remnant shall return" and "the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth," and symbolize, at least in part, Isaiah's message to his people:

Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me shall be for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, who dwelleth in mount Zion. (8:18)

Shear-jashub seems to have symbolized a message of comfort to Israel's future exiles. On the other hand, the name of Maher-shalal-hash-baz was a symbol and warning concerning the fate of Damascus and Samaria, representing Syria and the Northern Kingdom, whose wealth was destined to be carried away by Assyria.

Isaiah as a Poet and Statesman.—;Isaiah has no rival in the Old Testament for his versatility of expression and brilliancy of imagery. Dr. G. L. Robinson pays this tribute to his literary ability:

His style marks the climax of Hebrew literary art. Both his periods and descriptions are most finished and sublime. "Every word from him stirs and strikes its mark," says Dillman. Beauty and strength are characteristic of his entire book. He is a perfect artist in his words. No other Old Testament writer uses so many beautifully picturesque illustrations (5:1-7; 12:3; 28:23-29; 32:2).

Epigrams and metaphors, particularly of flood, storm and sound (1:13; 15:18, 22; 8:8; 10:22; 28:17, 20; 30:28, 30), interrogation and dialogue (10:8; 6:8), antithesis and alliteration (1:18; 3:24; 17:10, 12), hyperbole and parable (2:7; 5:1-7; 28:23-29), even paranomasia, or play on words (5:7; 7:9), characterize Isaiah's book as the masterpiece of Hebrew literature. He is also famous for his vocabulary and richness of synonyms. Ezekiel uses 1535 words; Jeremiah, 1653; the Psalmists, 2170; Isaiah, 2186.

Isaiah was also an orator. Jerome likened him to Demosthenes. He was likewise a poet. He frequently elaborates his messages in rhythmic or poetic style (12:1-6; 25:1-5; 26:1-12; 38:10-20; 42:1-4; 49:1-9; 50:4-9; 52:13-53:12; 60-62; 66:5-24); and in several instances slips into elegiac rhythm: for example, in 37:22-29 there is a fine taunting poem on Sennacherib, and in 14:4-21 another on the king of Babylon. As Driver remarks, "Isaiah's poetical genius is superb." [^3]

Isaiah not only had great literary gifts, but his fine mind, education, and broad acquaintance with men in all walks of life qualified him to be a statesman of the first rank. Judging from his book, the political horizon of the prophet, both foreign and domestic, was very extended and included Assyria, Babylonia, Syria, Egypt, Moab, Edom, Ethiopia, Arabia, Ammon, the isles of the sea, and all parts of Palestine. Isaiah's counsel to his people was to trust in God and not to make entangling alliances with other powers that would only lead them into trouble. When his counsel was kept, the kingdom profited; otherwise it did not. It was due to the prophet's wise counsel and advice that Jerusalem was saved from Sennacherib in 701 B. C.

The Period of Isaiah's Ministry.—;Isaiah lived and prophesied during the reigns of four kings of Judah: Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah. (1:1) The chronology of the regal period of Israel and Judah is somewhat uncertain, but it is reasonable to believe that Isaiah's ministry occupied about forty-five years. It began in the year that King Uzziah died (c. 740 B. C.) and lasted until near the end of Hezekiah's reign (c. 699 B. C.). There is a tradition, variously reported in the Talmud and current in the Christian Church, that Isaiah suffered martyrdom by being sawed asunder with a wooden saw by Manasseh, Hezekiah's cruel and godless successor.

The main political and social facts of Isaiah's time may be summarized thus:

The terrible effects of war upon Judah were especially apparent toward the end of Isaiah's ministry.

Isaiah's Vision and Call to the Ministry.—;God had said to Amos, years before this time:

For the Lord God will do nothing

But He revealeth His counsel unto His servants the prophets. (Amos 3:7)

Near the end of King Uzziah's reign the sin and pride of the people of Israel was such that they needed stern warning. Isaiah was the man chosen by God to receive "His counsel" and to deliver the message desired. One day—esumably in the temple—;Isaiah was suddenly vouchsafed a vision:

In the year that king Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, and His train filled the temple. (6:1; cf. 2 Nephi 11:2 where Isaiah is said to have seen the Redeemer.)

Round about, seraphim cried one to another:

Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts;

The whole earth is full of His glory. (6:3)

Isaiah, in his humility, thought of the unworthy state of himself and his people. He exclaimed:

Woe is me! for I am undone;

Because I am a man of unclean lips,

And I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips;

For mine eyes have seen the King,

The Lord of hosts. (6:5)

His sin was forgiven, in symbol of which one of the seraphim touched his lips with a hot stone from the altar. Then he heard Jehovah say:

Whom shall I send,

And who will go for us?

Then I said: 'Here am I; send me.'

And He said: 'Go, and tell this people:

Hear ye indeed, but understand not;

And see ye indeed, but perceive not.

Make the heart of this people fat,

And make their ears heavy,

And shut their eyes;

Lest they, seeing with their eyes,

And hearing with their ears,

And understanding with their heart,

Return, and be healed.' (6:8-10)

Isaiah was commissioned and sent forth, but as the last passage implies, his message was to fall on deaf ears and unrepentant hearts. As the rest of the chapter points out, only disaster and exile could be the end of such a people, though, to be sure, there would remain a little stock from which life would spring.

An Overview of Isaiah's Prophecies.—;The text of the Book of Isaiah consists of two large collections of prophecies, chapters 1-35 and 40-66, which are separated by a short section (Chs. 36-39) consisting of history, prophecy, and song. We may conveniently divide the entire book into seven unequal portions as follows:

The reader who wishes better to appreciate Isaiah should regard the above overview as a simple analysis which needs much filling in of details. Now we may examine each of these divisions in greater detail.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Verses 1-9, the first section, contain the charge and appeal to the witnesses. Notice the vigor of the opening lines, in which Israel is accused of rebellion: T. K. Cheyne, The Prophecies of Isaiah, I, 1
[^2] The next section, verses 10-17, anticipates Israel's preliminary objection to a charge. Notice the allusion to Canaanite religious practices in the opening lines. This must have been bitterly received by Isaiah's audience: In support of this view, notice Isa. 1:15. It might be argued from this verse that God is opposed to prayer. But no one would believe that. The point is that those offering prayer are unworthy. "I will not hear; your hands are full of blood."
[^3] The third section, verses 18-23, offers reconciliation to Israel on condition of repentance. Three verses follow: C. von Orelli, The Prophecies of Isaiah, p. 16.
