Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Three

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF ISRAEL (Cont'd)

Division 1, Chapters 1-12.

The Great Arraignment.— [^1]ch is the title suggested by the famous German scholar Ewald for the first chapter of Isaiah. This chapter forms an excellent preface to the book because it contains a summary of certain characteristic and essential teachings of Isaiah. It is one of the finest specimens of prophetic oratory in the Old Testament. [^2] The student is strongly urged to read it through with care.

The preface takes the form of a court scene in which Jehovah appears to be plaintiff and judge, Israel the defendant, and Isaiah a bystander and interlocutor. The prophecy falls naturally into four sections:

Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth,

For the Lord hath spoken:

Children I have reared, and brought up,

And they have rebelled against Me. (1:2)

Israel's rebellion is evidence of the highest degree of sin. The Lord then accuses the people of a lack of knowledge and understanding. They do not even know how to do right:

The ox knoweth his owner,

And the ass his master's crib;

But Israel doth not know,

My people doth not consider. (1:3; cf. Amos 3:10)

Lack of knowledge might be forgiven under some circumstances, but Israel had no excuse. She had had teachers aplenty but had rejected them; therefore her sin was the greater. Here we have a fine teaching of Isaiah's: Good religion demands knowledge in its scheme of things, and men will be held accountable if they do not obtain it insofar as they are able.

The Lord continues His accusation:

Ah sinful nation,

A people laden with iniquity,

A seed of evil-doers,

Children that deal corruptly;

They have forsaken the Lord. (1:4)

The section ends by Isaiah saying:

Except the Lord of hosts

Had left unto us a very small remnant,

We should have been as Sodom,

We should have been like unto Gomorrah. (1:9)

The doctrine that a remnant of Israel should be saved is similar to what is met with in Amos 3:12; 5:3; 9:8b-15.

Hear the word of the Lord,

Ye rulers of Sodom;

Give ear unto the law of our God,

Ye people of Gomorrah. (1:10)

Isaiah was a brave man to confront his people with such a statement. Then, in anticipation of Israel's defense of herself, based on precise observance of ritualistic practices, the Lord says:

To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto Me?

Saith the Lord;

I am full of the burnt-offerings of rams,

And the fat of fed beasts;

And I delight not in the blood

Of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats.

* * * * *

Bring no more vain oblations;

It is an offering of abomination unto Me;

New moon and sabbath, the holding of convocations—;

I cannot endure iniquity along with the solemn assembly.

Your new moons and your appointed seasons

My soul hateth;

They are a burden unto Me;

I am weary to bear them. (1:11, 13, 14)

Many writers have supposed these verses to mean that Jehovah had no use for sacrifices and that the ritual of Israel was distasteful to Him. Far more probable is the view that He was not denouncing sacrifices and worship as such, but only refuting their efficacy and value when performed by a wicked and hypocritical people. [^3]

If the nation, as Isaiah says, has revolted from God, and become like Sodom, then ... the basis of the sacrificial system ordained by God has fallen away; the means of grace have lost their force, and the conduct of the multitude in matters of worship is a self-willed course of no value before God, and bringing no blessing to the people. Outward worship without the accompaniment of true fear of God, and a corresponding walk, the Lord rejects as utterly foreign and repugnant to Him. [^4]

Come now, and let us reason together,

Saith the Lord;

Though your sins be as scarlet,

They shall be as white as snow;

Though they be red like crimson,

They shall be as wool.

If ye be willing and obedient,

Ye shall eat the good of the land;

But if ye refuse and rebel,

Ye shall be devoured with the sword;

For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken. (1:18-20)

In this passage the Lord points out to Israel that it is not too late to repent. Bad as conditions are, she can stave off destruction and ruin by undergoing a change of heart, if such be coupled with righteous actions. The Lord again (as if his mind could not be kept off the subject) speaks of the sinners of his people as harlots, murderers, companions of thieves, lovers of bribes, and forsakers of the cause of the orphan and the widow. (1:21-23)

Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts,

The Mighty One of Israel:

Ah, I will ease Me of Mine adversaries,

And avenge Me of Mine enemies. (1:24)

This statement seems to be directed to the people as a whole. But Jehovah also seems to stress His remarks to a special class of sinners, probably among the higher classes, [^5] and speaks of their destruction. He makes clear, however, that Israel will be purged of her baser elements and will someday—esumably far in the future— redeemed and restored.

And I will turn My hand upon thee,

And purge away thy dross as with lye,

And will take away all thine alloy;

And I will restore thy judges as at the first,

And they counsellors as at the beginning;

Afterward thou shalt be called the city of righteousness,

The faithful city.

Zion shall be redeemed with justice,

And they that return of her with righteousness. (1:25-27)

The doctrine of Israel's redemption is emphasized throughout Isaiah and is one of the keys to the understanding of the book.

Professor G. L. Robinson has summed up the practical lessons of the chapter in these words:

The paramount lessons of the discourse are the too oft-forgotten facts that true religion is the prime condition of a healthy social order; that irreligion or formal ritual is a social vice; that no man liveth to himself; and that what a peasant or a prince believes is of public concern to all. All social evils are traceable ultimately to rebellion against God. [^6]

The Mountain of the Lord's House.—;Isaiah saw clearly the wickedness and moral degeneration of his people, but as a seer he gazed into the future and saw that in the latter days his people, a remnant of the house of Israel, would be gathered and would be playing a glorious role in the world:

And it shall come to pass in the last days,

That the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains,

And shall be exalted above the hills;

And all nations shall flow unto it.

And many peoples shall go and say:

'Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,

To the house of the God of Jacob;

And He will teach us of His ways,

And we will walk in His paths.'

For out of Zion shall go forth the law,

And the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. (2:2-3)

These verses give an exalted and idealized vision of Israel's future. Latter-day Saints believe that the law and word of the Lord will issue from two great spiritual capitals of the world, Zion and Jerusalem. Those remnants of Israel that are of the house of Joseph will inherit this continent; the present members of our Church are mostly of that lineage. The other tribes of Israel will eventually receive the gospel and return to Palestine to receive their inheritance, as the Lord decreed to Abraham. (Genesis 17:8) To this blessed land of America many peoples shall come to be taught the gospel principles in their fulness. This, we believe, has in part already taken place. The great empire in the West already established by the Mormon people attests to that fact. These people have come out of many nations, and their influence is spreading throughout America. Jerusalem, the capital of Palestine, will in time also have great power and influence under the gospel plan.

What is meant by the phrase, "mountain of the Lord's house"? It would seem to mean the dwelling place or abode of God, a place where He may feel at home with His people. (See Ps. 68:16, 17; Isa. 8:18) Latter-day Saints may be too prone to restrict the application of the phrase to one locality. Jerusalem is also spoken of in our scriptures in connection with it. Notice this passage:

And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house. (D. & C. 133:13. Italics ours.)

Nor is that all. Isaiah speaks of the whole earth as the Lord's "mountain." But it will be that only when men are at peace with each other and the earth is at rest:

They shall not hurt nor destroy

In all My holy mountain;

For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord,

As the waters cover the sea. (11:9)

Not only did Isaiah see great religious commonwealths composed of gathered Israel teaching the peoples of all nations, but he saw also in glorious vision that there will be a time when there is no more war.

Isaiah and the Crime of War.—;In our war-shattered era, it seems strange to read Isaiah's intensely idealistic and beautiful word picture of a world in which there is no war. It has been about 2684 years at the time of this writing since the Hebrew prophet wrote the vision, and we sometimes marvel at how little social progress man has made in that time. Let us examine Isaiah's words as he continues the vision:

And He shall judge between the nations,

And shall decide for many peoples;

And they shall beat their swords into plowshares,

And their spears into pruning-hooks;

Nation shall not lift up sword against nation,

Neither shall they learn war any more. (2:4)

Wars are bred because men and nations seem never to learn how to get along with each other. Selfishness and greed for power are still rampant in the world. In the midst of it all, we are apt to conclude that Isaiah was an impractical dreamer. But was he? In the physical world we do not progress without much planning and toil. But in physical matters we are making progress. In the realm of the moral and spiritual, can we likewise expect to progress without effort and without setting up goals and ideals? Isaiah knew, as all men should know, that war is a crime against humanity. He knew, as few men have known before or since, the weaknesses and failings of mankind. But in spite of that knowledge he boldly writes that some day war shall cease. He doesn't argue the point. He writes as if it were certain of accomplishment. His faith is magnificent.

Speaking of the vision, Alexander R. Gordon has said:

The insight of this prophecy is as deep as its outlook is broad. War may have its place in the Divine drama of history; but the end towards which all move is peace. God is a God of peace, who desires that His children should live and work together in peace. And the way of peace is no base surrender of justice, but the carrying of its claims to the highest court of appeal—e mind and purpose of God—;which is identical with the arbitrament of sound reason, trust and goodwill. "Peace on earth to men of goodwill." Won by this motive, peace transforms the very instruments of war. [^7]

Israel's Idolatry, Destruction, And Future Glory.—;Chapters 2:5-5:30 contain prophecies of considerable diversity which we shall discuss somewhat briefly. After his famous declaration that there shall come a time when war is no more, Isaiah denounces the idolatry and wickedness of his people.

He declares that their land is "replenished with soothsayers like the Philistines," as well as being full of gold, silver, horses, chariots, and idols; every one worships the work of his own hands, that which has been made by his own fingers. (2:5-9) Because of their wickedness, the Lord will take away their rulers and give children to be their princes, and babes to be their rulers; their tongues and their works provoke the Lord, the spoil of the poor is in their houses, and they "grind" their faces. (3:1-15) In the famous "Parable of the Vineyard" (5:1-7) Isaiah compares the house of Israel to a vineyard which the Lord caused to be well cultivated in the hope that it would bring forth grapes, but, alas, it brought forth wild grapes.

And He looked for justice, but behold violence;

For righteousness, but behold a cry. (5:7)

In a series of six woes (5:8-23), Isaiah indicts the rulers of his people for land-grabbing, for drunkenness, for challenging God to hasten His work, for calling evil good and good evil, for their arrogance, and for taking away the righteousness of the righteous.

The prophet predicts the destruction of Israel for her backsliding. The daughters of Zion shall be punished for haughtiness and false pride. (3:16-26) Notice:

Thy men shall fall by the sword,

And thy mighty in the war.

And her gates shall lament and mourn;

And utterly bereft she shall sit upon the ground. (3:25, 26)

Those upon whom the six woes were pronounced shall be punished; nevertheless, the Lord's hand is still stretched out to His people in the hope that they will return to Him:

Therefore as the tongue of fire devoureth the stubble,

And as the chaff is consumed in the flame,

So their root shall be as rottenness,

And their blossom shall go up as dust;

Because they have rejected the law of the Lord of hosts,

And contemned the word of the Holy One of Israel.

Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against His people,

And He hath stretched forth His hand against them, and hath smitten them,

And the hills did tremble,

And their carcasses were as refuse in the midst of the streets.

For all this His anger is not turned away,

But His hand is stretched out still. (5:24, 25)

Gazing far into the future, Isaiah sees a day when the escaped of Israel, the remnant that have survived the destruction of the wicked, shall experience glorious times. So great will be the destruction of men that the prophet predicts that many women will request one man to be their husband:

And seven women shall take hold of one man in that day, saying: 'We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us be called by thy name; take thou away our reproach.' (4:1)

Concerning that day, which is even yet mostly future, Isaiah exclaims:

In that day shall the growth of the Lord be beautiful and glorious,

And the fruit of the land excellent and comely

For them that are escaped of Israel.

And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written unto life in Jerusalem; . . . And the Lord will create over the whole habitation of Mount Zion, and over her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for over all the glory shall be a canopy. And there shall be a pavilion for a shadow in the day-time from the heat, and for a refuge and for a covert from storm and from rain. (4:2, 3, 5, 6)

In Chapter 5:26-30, the prophet continues his description of the future glorious age of Israel's final restoration. The gospel ensign will be lifted up to the world, and the Lord will "hiss" His word to the ends of the earth. When Israel responds, she shall come with power, and her enemies shall not be able to deliver themselves. For a better understanding of the passage the reader should compare it with 2 Nephi 29:1-3; Micah 5:6-14, and the Savior's exposition in 3 Nephi 21:12-24. Here are Isaiah's words:

And He will lift up an ensign to the nations from far,

And will hiss unto them from the end of the earth;

And, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly;

None shall be weary nor stumble among them;

None shall slumber nor sleep;

Neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed,

Nor the latchet of their shoes be broken;

Whose arrows are sharp,

And all their bows bent;

Their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint,

And their wheels like a whirlwind;

Their roaring shall be like a lion.

They shall roar like young lions, yea, they shall roar,

And lay hold of the prey, and carry it way safe,

And there shall be none to deliver.

And they shall roar against them in that day

Like the roaring of the sea;

And if one look unto the land,

Behold darkness and distress,

And the light is darkened in the skies thereof.

Probably most scholars explain this passage as having reference to the Assyrians, who are to come swiftly and well disciplined to complete Israel's punishment. On the contrary, we believe it means essentially what is said of it above.

Isaiah and the Syro-Ephraimite War.—;The Syro-Ephraimite War of 734 B. C. was one of the great crises in Isaiah's early ministry. It appears that Pekah, king of Northern Israel, and Rezin of Damascus, king of Aram, desired Ahaz, king of Judah, to ally himself with them in order to resist the encroachments of Assyria. The story of what happened is discussed in Isaiah 7:1-9. Ahaz saw only the politics of the situation and preferred to maintain the friendship of Assyria rather than to enter into an alliance with Rezin and Pekah. The text of Isaiah paints a vivid picture of the dismay caused in Jerusalem by the attempt to force Ahaz into the defensive alliance. He determined to resist, and the two confederates planned to overthrow him and to place a certain Syrian, the son of Tabeel, on his throne. (7:6) Apparently Jerusalem was to be invested, and the water supply of the city seems to have caused Ahaz some concern. When the attack threatened, the king determined to ask the help of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria. (2 Kings 16:7) At this juncture the Lord bade Isaiah to take his son Shear-jashub and meet Ahaz at the "conduit of the upper pool," where the young ruler seems to have been inspecting his water supply. (7:3) There the prophet apparently counseled him against calling in Assyria's help, and assured him that the two insignificant kingdoms of Syria and Northern Israel could not prevail. Here are some of Isaiah's words:

Keep calm, and be quiet; fear not, neither let thy heart be faint, because of these two tails of smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin and Aram, and of the son of Remaliah. (7:4)

The great prophet, now also assuming his place as a practical statesman, urges him to have faith in God's word or he will not succeed:

If ye will not have faith, surely ye shall not be established. (7:9)

Ahaz and the Immanuel Prophecy.—;It appears that Ahaz had little faith in God's power to save. Isaiah, on the other hand, insists that the only path of security is loyalty to Jehovah, that foreign alliances will not save the nation. In our own time we would do well to consider the soundness of Isaiah's counsel. Atlantic Pacts and the like do not save men from war. Rather, history would seem to tell us that they stir up suspicions on the part of nations and lead to war. If men would exercise a little more genuine faith in God, He would take care of His own. We seem never to learn the lessons taught by the prophets.

Isaiah, at the Lord's behest, offers Ahaz a sign that would build up his faith:

Ask thee a sign from the Lord thy God: make it deep into Sheol [the realm of departed spirits], or high into the heavens above. (7:11)

I have translated rather freely here. The point is that Isaiah offers Ahaz a sign which may be fulfilled from any place whatever—;whether from the realms of the spirits of the dead or from heaven above. The miracle will establish the divine authority of Isaiah, whether he speaks of God or of himself. Ahaz rejected Isaiah's offer, doubtless because he didn't want to be bound in his actions and because he dreaded the truth. The prophet then announced that the Lord Himself would give him a sign, nevertheless. Then follows the great Immanuel prophecy, which is so famous and which has caused so much discussion among Christian peoples:

Behold, the virgin [a marriageable young woman] shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. [^8] Curd and honey shall he eat, when he knoweth to refuse the evil, and choose the good. Yea, before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land whose two kings thou hast a horror of shall be forsaken. The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria. (7:14-17)

What is the meaning of this prophecy or sign? Is it to be taken as representing an event of the immediate future—at is to say, (1) is an unknown young woman shortly to bear a son, the issue of an unknown father, and (2) is the son to be a sign to Ahaz? We know that within about two years both Pekah and Rezin were dethroned and their spoils taken to Assyria. Therefore it might be argued that Isaiah's words, "before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land whose two kings thou hast a horror of shall be forsaken," demand an interpretation of the sign which looks to the near future for its fulfillment. Or, on the other hand, is the sign the prophet's way of telling a truth about an event in the distant future which the unspiritual Ahaz would not fully understand, and which could be understood only by those disciples possessing the Spirit? We remember the Savior's words to His disciples:

Then the disciples came and said to him, "Why do you speak to them in parables?" And he answered them, "To you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given." (Matthew 12:10, 11. See also vss. 12-17.)

I personally doubt that the unbelieving Ahaz fully comprehended the sign that Isaiah referred to. It is significant that the Gospel of Matthew refers to the birth of Jesus as a fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy to Ahaz:

Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled

Which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying:

"Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son,

And they shall call his name Emmanuel"

(Which being interpreted is, God with us.) (Matthew 1:23)

I believe that Matthew's interpretation is the correct one.

In the remainder of Chapter 7 (vss. 17-25), Isaiah predicts the devastation that shall come to Palestine because of the clashes of Egypt and Assyria in that unfortunate land.

Further Signs of Judgment and Salvation.—;In Chapter 8:1-8 Isaiah tells in symbolical language the forthcoming invasions by Assyria. The prophet's new-born son, Mahershalal-hash-baz (the spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth), was to symbolize the fall of Damascus and Samaria (8:1-4), and verses 5-8 refer to the Assyrian invasion of Judah.

Verses 9-15 of this chapter seem designed to show that the evil and conspiring designs of nations against Israel will be frustrated. "For God is with us," says the prophet. With God on Israel's side there can be no good reason to fear:

For the Lord spoke thus to me with a strong hand, admonishing me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying: 'Say ye not: A conspiracy, concerning all whereof this people do say: A conspiracy; neither fear ye their fear, nor account it dreadful. The Lord of hosts, Him shall ye sanctify; and let Him be your fear, and let Him be your dread.' (8:11-13)

Many in Israel and Judah—ubtless the wicked—e prophet goes on to point out, will find the Lord a "stone of stumbling," and a "gin and a snare." They will "fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken." (8:14, 15)

Because of the fact that the prophet's message is not received, he indicates that his testimony is to be bound up and sealed up for his disciples' future use. (8:16-18) In spite of coming gloom, there shall eventually flash forth glorious tidings. The Gospel of Matthew indicates that Isaiah in Chapter 9:1, 2 was speaking of the Christ:

Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed into Galilee; and leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles; the people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up. (Matthew 4:12-16)

Isaiah indicates that he truly was waiting upon the Lord and looking for him (8:17) when he uttered this magnificent passage, rightly looked upon as Messianic by Christians through the ages:

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given;

And the government shall be upon his shoulder:

And his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor,

The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father,

The Prince of Peace. (9:6)

That Isaiah was looking forward to the coming of Christ there is no doubt in the minds of Latter-day Saints.

The Lord's Pent-up Wrath Against Israel.—;In chapters 9:8-10:4, Isaiah expresses the Lord's pent-up wrath against Northern Israel. This takes the form of a fine poem composed of four strophes. The prophet tells of calamities sent by the Lord in time past by way of warning against Israel because of her wickedness. Moreover, he predicts others yet to come. Each strophe of the poem ends with the solemn and impressive refrain, "for all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still." (9:12, 17, 21; 10:4; cf. 5:25) Isaiah recalls in succession foreign invasions and lost territory, losses and suffering in battle, men not sparing each other during internal strife, and, finally, wicked decrees and social unrighteousness. With captivity and judgment facing them they still persist in their crooked course. God's warnings have failed; only Divine judgment remains.

Assyria, Instrument of the Lord's Wrath.—;The remainder of Chapter 10 (verses 5-34) is devoted by Isaiah to a consideration of Assyria as an instrument or "rod" in the chastisement of the Lord's people. The prophet seems to indicate that it is not in reality the military power of Assyria that conquers Israel, but rather the indignation of God. The Assyrians are simply the whip used by Him to accomplish the purpose desired. Unfortunately, Assyria does not recognize the Divine commission which she has been given, and proceeds to act in sheer self-interest and lust of conquest. (10:7) She boasts of past successes and is confident of future easy victories. (10:8-11, 13-15) This attitude on the part of Assyria earns the Lord's displeasure:

Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed His whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the arrogant heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his haughty looks. (10:12)

He continues to manifest His displeasure in this vein:

Should the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith?

Should the saw magnify itself against him that moveth it?

As if a rod should move them that lift it up,

Or as if a staff should lift up him that is not wood. (10:15)

In verses 16-19 and 24-34 the Lord gives further evidence of His anger at Assyria, and assures His people that the burden of the enemy shall fall from their shoulders and his yoke from off their neck. In verses 20-23, however, it appears to me that Isaiah has reference again to the final escape of the remnant of Israel in the latter days from all her enemies, and of her eventual dependence upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel:

And it shall come to pass in that day

That the remnant of Israel,

And they that are escaped of the house of Jacob,

Shall no more again stay upon him that smote them;

But shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

A remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob,

Unto God the Mighty.

For though thy people, O Israel, be as the sand of the sea,

Only a remnant of them shall return;

An extermination is determined, overflowing with righteousness.

For an extermination wholly determined

Shall the Lord, the God of hosts, make in the midst of all the earth.

A Glorious Latter Day: Isaiah 11 Quoted by Moroni to Joseph Smith.—;We come now to a consideration of a glorious chapter from Isaiah. This is the eleventh chapter, famous in the annals of the Church, as well it might be. The reader of Isaiah cannot help but observe how often the prophet returns to the theme of Israel's gathering and the glory of the redeemed latter-day Zion. We believe that the Lord revealed to him the great events associated with the rise and development of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Isaiah saw these events with such clarity and understanding that when the Angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on the evening of September 21, 1823, he quoted chapter eleven in its entirety to the young prophet. In the Documentary History of the Church, Joseph Smith tells us that Moroni quoted many passages of scripture and offered many explanations. [^9] Among other things he says, "In addition to these [Mal. 3, 4], he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled." Few Old Testament scholars could believe this, but as Latter-day Saints we say it is true. We believe that Isaiah was a greater prophet than Bible scholars will admit, and even they pay great tribute to him. What is the message of Isaiah 11? What is in this chapter which is of such great moment to mankind?

The chapter divides into three logical parts: (1) Vss. 1-5, (2) Vss. 6-9, (3) Vss. 10-16. Now, let us examine each of these parts in sufficient detail to realize its importance.

A Rod to Come Forth Out of the Stem of Jesse.—;The first verse of Chapter Eleven is intriguing. It reads:

And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,

And a Branch shall grow out of his roots.

What does this verse mean? Commentators give various explanations, but one gets the feeling that they are groping in the dark. Many non-Jewish writers, however, do believe that it has Messianic connotations. The Prophet Joseph Smith gives a straight-from-the-shoulder answer to most of it. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 113, we find answers to certain questions on Scripture. Here are the parts that concern us most at this point:

Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th verses of the 11th chapter of Isaiah?

Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ.

What is the rod spoken of in the first verse of the 11th chapter of Isaiah, that should come of the Stem of Jesse?

Behold, thus saith the Lord: It is a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power. (D. & C. 113:1-4)

The "Stem of Jesse" is Christ. That is not hard to believe in view of the language of verses 2-5:

And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,

The spirit of wisdom and understanding,

The spirit of counsel and might,

The spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord.

And his delight shall be in the fear of the Lord;

And he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes,

Neither decide after the hearing of his ears;

But with righteousness shall he judge the poor

And decide with equity for the meek of the earth;

And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth,

And with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins,

And faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

The Book of Mormon gives an interesting sidelight on the interpretation of verses 4 and 5 that we should not miss. Nephi refers to them as follows:

For the time speedily cometh that the Lord God shall cause a great division among the people, and the wicked will he destroy; and he will spare his people, yea, even if it so be that he must destroy the wicked by fire. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. (2 Nephi 30:10, 11)

The next verse of Nephi's indicates that the "great division" spoken of shall precede the great millennial era of peace and righteousness spoken of in Isaiah 11:6-9.

We have clearly seen that the "Stem of Jesse" is Christ, but we are still not clear as to the identity of the "rod," despite the explanation in the Doctrine and Covenants. To be sure, it tells us that "it is a servant in the hands of Christ," etc., but an express name is not given. May I suggest that the "servant" or "rod" referred to is none other than the Prophet Joseph Smith himself. For this suggestion I am solely and alone responsible. But let the Latter-day Saint reader glance a little beyond verse 4 of Section 113 in the Doctrine and Covenants:

What is the root of Jesse spoken of in the 10th verse of the 11th chapter [i.e., of Isaiah]?

Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days. (D. & C. 113:5, 6)

I identify the individual of verse 4 with the one in verse 6. Who holds the keys of the priesthood in this dispensation? Joseph Smith. Who holds the keys of the gathering in this dispensation? Joseph Smith. Therefore the "rod" of Isaiah 11:1 is Joseph Smith. That is one of the reasons why Moroni quoted the chapter to the modern prophet, and doubtless explained to him that Isaiah saw his coming as a choice seer to this dispensation.

A Glorious Peace to Come to the Earth.—;Verses 6-9 of Isaiah 11 constitute the ancient prophet's view of the eventual reality of that glorious day looked forward to by poets and prophets for ages—e day when man and beast shall live together in peace and rest. Latter-day Saints believe that Isaiah was speaking of the great Millennial Era referred to in the Doctrine and Covenants, where the Lord reveals that He will come and "dwell with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand." (D. & C. 29:11) Moreover, He reveals the following:

And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face. And in that day whatsoever any man shall ask, it shall be given unto him. And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man. And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death. In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree; and when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious. Yea, verily I say to you, in that day when the Lord shall come he shall reveal all things—ings which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—ings most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven. (D. & C. 101:26-34; cf. Isa. 65:22)

It is clear that Joseph Smith, our modern prophet, elaborates on and explains the event in greater detail than does Isaiah. Now let us quote the ancient prophet's beautiful description of that day of peace, yet future:

And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb,

And the leopard shall lie down with the kid;

And the calf and the young lion and the fatling together;

And a little child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed;

Their young ones shall lie down together;

And the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp,

And the weaned child shall put his hand on the basilisk's den.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain;

For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord,

As the waters cover the sea. (11:6-9)

Is it to be wondered at that Isaiah has been loved and admired for centuries? But even more should Latter-day Saints love his prophecies, because we have been given greater opportunities to understand his message than the world at large.

The Recovery of the Remnant of the Lord's People.—; Verse 10 of Chapter 11 fittingly opens the division dealing with the recovery of the remnant of Israel. We have already indicated our belief that the "root of Jesse" in this verse refers to Joseph Smith, the great prophet of this dispensation, and the one to whom the Lord entrusted the keys of the gathering of Israel. Here is the verse:

And it shall come to pass in that day,

That the root of Jesse, that standeth for an ensign of the peoples,

Unto him shall the nations seek;

And his resting-place shall be glorious.

The above translation is a little clearer for our purposes than that of the Authorized Version. Joseph Smith stands for an ensign of the peoples, because he holds aloft the gospel principles to the world. The restored gospel in this age is indeed the "ensign" or standard held forth by the modern prophet. The nations have sought and will continue to seek him. The Mormon people have no hesitation in proclaiming his greatness and the importance of his message.

Isaiah perceived that when the gospel was restored the Lord would proceed to gather scattered Israel from the four corners of the earth:

And it shall come to pass in that day

That the Lord will set His hand again the second time

To recover the remnant of His people,

That shall remain from Assyria, and from Egypt,

And from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam,

And from Shinar, and from Hamath,

And from the islands of the sea.

And He will set up an ensign for the nations,

And will assemble the dispersed of Israel,

And gather together the scattered of Judah

From the four corners of the earth. (11:11, 12)

Isaiah refers to nations well known in his day, because his people wouldn't recognize the names of modern nations from whence parts of scattered Israel have been gathered to the West. Nor can it be doubted that scattered Judah is being gathered to her predicted home. The people of the world seem not to recognize the gradual fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy, though it is taking place under their very eyes.

It became necessary for Joseph Smith to obtain proper authority to preach to and gather that branch of Israel which makes up the Church today. The first gathering of Israel was done under the direction of Moses and resulted in the exodus from Egypt. Moses therefore holds the keys of the gathering of Israel. The Lord "set His hand again the second time to recover the remnant of His people" by sending Moses to confer the keys of his authority upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836. These servants of the Lord recorded his visitation in these words:

... the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. (D. & C. 110:11)

In due time the gospel will be carried to the Jews, and those not already in Palestine will be directed to gather there, because it is truly the land of their inheritance. (D. & C. 133:13) The preaching of the gospel to the Jews and their gathering will be done under the authority delivered by their great lawgiver, Moses. If Joseph Smith were here today, he might exclaim in characteristic manner: "Hear it, ye Jews, and give ear, O Judah, the Latter-day Saints are the true representatives of your long lost Messiah."

Isaiah also pointed out that the gathered remnants of Israel would not harass and vex each other as they did in ancient times after they were divided politically. Ephraim, representing the Northern Tribes, and Judah, representing those to the South, will, under the gospel banner, get along amicably, each with the other:

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart,

And they that harass Judah shall be cut off;

Ephraim shall not envy Judah,

And Judah shall not vex Ephraim. (11:13)

In verse 14, Isaiah states that the Gentiles (under the appellation "Philistines") will help his people in the gathering, and Israel's enemies (represented by their ancient names of Edom, Moab and Ammon) shall no longer have any power over them. Rather the shoe will be on the other foot: Israel shall have power over them. Finally, the Lord will perform as great a miracle as He did anciently when Israel came up out of Egypt, by providing a highway for the remnant of His people. (11:15, 16; cf. Isa. 35:8-10; 51:9-11; D. & C. 133:27) Not much has been revealed to us concerning the nature of this great manifestation still to come.

A Hymn of Thanksgiving.—;Having seen a glorious consummation to the predicted gathering of Israel's remnant, Isaiah records a beautiful hymn by the redeemed Zion, personified as a single person. Actually the hymn seems to be composed of two short hymns (verses 1-3 and 4-6), but for our purposes it may be considered as a single poem of two strophes, each of three verses. The Lord's wrath has been appeased, and He now comforts Zion. The restored friendship gives confidence in future trials and will prove a source of abundant blessings. Zion calls upon the redeemed to give thanks to the Lord and proclaim His deeds among the nations. The Lord has delivered His people and now once more dwells in the midst of them. The reader's attention is especially called to the lovely expression, "therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." (12:3) Here is the hymn in full:

And in that day thou shalt say:

'I will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord;

For though Thou was angry with me,

Thine anger is turned away, and Thou comfortest me.

Behold, God is my salvation;

I will trust, and will not be afraid;

For God the Lord is my strength and song;

And He is become my salvation.'

Therefore with joy shall ye draw water

Out of the wells of salvation.

And in that day shall ye say:

'Give thanks unto the Lord, proclaim His name,

Declare His doings among the peoples,

Make mention that His name is exalted.

Sing unto the Lord; for He hath done gloriously;

This is made known in all the earth.

Cry aloud and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion;

For great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.'

(12:1-6)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Prophecies of Isaiah, I, 80
[^2] Isaiah, p. 67. Soncino Bible Stories.
[^3] For a discussion of this view see Joseph Fielding Smith's, The Signs of the Times, pp. 45-50. Zion's Press.
[^4] In the fourth and concluding section, verses 24-31, it is assumed that Jehovah's judgment will take place because His people will inevitably reject the gracious offer made to them. Isa. 1:28-31. (Notice the allusion to practices reminiscent of Canaanite religion in verse 29). "The whole people is indicted, but it is the judges, princes, and counsellors who are denounced. Judah's disasters, which she seeks to meet by worship, are due to civic faults: bribery, corruption of justice, indifference to the rights of the poor and friendless." G. A. Smith, The Book of Isaiah (New and Revised Edition,) I, 14.
[^5] G. L. Robinson, The Book of Isaiah (First Edition), p. 69 f.
[^6] 6. Alexander R. Gordon, The Faith of Isaiah, p. 248. By permission.
[^7] 7. Meaning, God is with us
[^8] 8. D.H.C., I, 12, 13.
