Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Four

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF ISRAEL (Cont'd.)

Division 2, Chapters 13-23.

In this division we find a succession of prophecies of judgment and salvation, consisting for the most part of "burdens" on the nations living round about Palestine, and therefore of concern to Isaiah and his people. The word "burden" in this division seems mostly to connote a message of doom, though it may signify "a prophecy, oracle, or vision." The burdens are directed in order against Babylon, Philistia, Moab, Damascus, Egypt, "the wilderness of the sea" (Babylon), Dumah (Edom), Arabia, "the valley of Vision" (Jerusalem), and Tyre. Interspersed among these burdens are other matters of concern to the prophet. The theme of scattered Israel and Zion redeemed seems never to leave Isaiah's mind, and this division is no exception in this respect.

Most of the nations against which Isaiah's message of doom is directed were traditional enemies of Israel. Their cruel treatment of God's people doubtless is the reason for the prophet's pronouncements upon them.

It will not be necessary for our purposes here to treat in detail all of Isaiah's burdens upon the nations mentioned in this division. I shall make an exception of chapters 13 and 14 because they are quoted in the Book of Mormon. (See 2 Nephi 23, 24.)

The Doom of Spiritual Babylon: Chapter 13:1-13.—; Though most authorities hold that all of Chapter 13 is directed against ancient Babylon, I cannot escape the belief that in verses 1-13 (division point uncertain) Isaiah is still dealing with the events of the latter days. As I view it,—;I may be wrong—ese verses are directed against the spiritual Babylon prevalent in the world of the day when Israel is being gathered and redeemed. It is the Babylon referred to in the Lord's preface to the Doctrine and Covenants:

They [the people of the world] seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall. (D. & C. 1:16)

On another occasion when the Lord was commanding His people to gather to Zion, He said:

Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. (D. & C. 133:5)

That is the Babylon of which Isaiah seems to speak. He predicts the doom of the wicked world of the latter days before describing the end of the worldly Babylon that existed in his own generation.

In figurative language the prophet describes how the Lord musters his host and signals them to the battle against spiritual Babylon. We need not worry ourselves about the identity of His "consecrated ones," the "proudly exulting ones," and the like. They are His forces, and are described in verse 5 as the "weapons of His indignation to destroy the whole earth."

Set ye up an ensign upon the high mountain,

Lift up the voice unto them,

Wave the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.

I have commanded My consecrated ones,

Yea, I have called My mighty ones for Mine anger,

Even My proudly exulting ones.

Hark, a tumult in the mountains, like as of a great people!

Hark, the uproar of the kingdoms of the nations gathered together!

The Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.

They come from a far country, from the end of heaven,

Even the Lord, and the weapons of His indignation,

To destroy the whole earth. (13:2-5)

The very impressive language used, including the statement concerning the intended destruction of the "whole earth," must go far toward convincing one that Isaiah is describing a force greater than Babylon as it existed in the ancient world. Moreover, the destruction which follows is very powerful. The "day of the Lord" is mentioned twice (13:6, 9). Cheyne, the great English Hebraist of the past generation, describes this day as ... that crisis in the history of the world when Jehovah will interpose to rectify the evils of the present bringing joy and glory to the humble believer, and misery and shame to the proud and disobedient. [^1]

In my chapter on Joel in this volume, I tried to show (pp. 292-294) that the "day of the Lord" very frequently has reference to the judgments incident to the Second Advent of our Lord. Isaiah may be alluding, then, to events which are to take place in this dispensation. The language of this part of Isaiah is certainly not out of harmony with the descriptions of the "day of the Lord" which are given in the Doctrine and Covenants and which are used in my interpretation of the message of Joel. Here is the passage in Isaiah which has reference to the "day of the Lord":

Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand;

As destruction from the Almighty shall it come.

Therefore shall all hands be slack,

And every heart of man shall melt.

And they shall be affrighted;

Pangs and throes shall take hold of them;

They shall be in pain as a woman in travail;

They shall look aghast one at another;

Their faces shall be faces of flame.

Behold, the day of the Lord cometh,

Cruel, and full of wrath and fierce anger;

To make the earth a desolation,

And to destroy the sinners thereof out of it. (13:6-9)

As Isaiah proceeds in his description of the fall of spiritual Babylon, he makes allusions to signs that are to be seen in the heavens (cf. Joel 2:30, 31), to the punishment of the world, and what is of special interest, to the fact that the survivors among men will be so few that they will be accounted as rare as the pure gold of Ophir. Such allusions argue strongly for my interpretation

For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof

Shall not give their light;

The sun shall be darkened in his going forth,

And the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

And I will visit upon the world their evil,

And upon the wicked their iniquity;

And I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease,

And will lay low the haughtiness of the tyrants.

I will make man more rare than fine gold,

Even man than the pure gold of Ophir.

Therefore I will make the heavens to tremble,

And the earth shall be shaken out of her place,

For the wrath of the Lord of hosts,

And for the day of His fierce anger. (13:10-13)

Isaiah Predicts the End of the Babylonian Empire.—; Isaiah now turns to deal with an event nearer his own times, the end of the wicked Babylonian Empire. He devotes the remainder of Chapter 13 to that issue. The terrible destruction of Babylon is vividly described. The death of babes and youths, the ravishment of women—;Babylonians meet a terrible end at the hands of the enemy:

Every one that is found shall be thrust through;

And every one that is caught shall fall by the sword.

Their babes also shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes;

Their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them,

Who shall not regard silver

And as for gold, they not delight in it.

And their bows shall dash the young men in pieces;

And they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb;

Their eye shall not spare children. (13:15-18)

The prophet then tells in effective poetic form of the complete and eternal desolation of Babylon as a country. It is destined to become the haunt of wild animals and other denizens of the desert. Even the wandering Arabs of the desert will pass it by

And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms,

The beauty of the Chaldeans' pride,

Shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

It shall never be inhabited,

Neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation;

Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there;

Neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

But wild-cats shall lie there;

And their houses shall be full of ferrets;

And ostriches shall dwell there,

And satyrs shall dance there.

And jackals shall howl in their castles,

And wild-dogs in the pleasant palaces;

And her time is near to come,

And her days shall not be prolonged. (13:19-22)

Thus spake the prophet of God, and thus it came to pass, as history attests.

Israel to Rest From Her Travail.—;Having proclaimed the destruction of Babylon, Isaiah now looks again to the day when Israel will be chosen by the Lord, and when she will rest from her travail and hard service. Israel will be restored to her own land and have power over her enemies. Here, in beautiful prose, is his prediction:

For the Lord will have compassion on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land; and the stranger shall join himself with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. And the peoples shall take them, and bring them to their place; and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants and for handmaids; and they shall take them captive, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy travail, and from thy trouble, and from the hard service wherein thou wast made to serve, ... (14:1-3)

Israel's Taunt-Song Over Babylon.—;Isaiah has the redeemed Israel utter a taunt-song ("proverb" in Authorized Version) over fallen Babylon, personified as a king. This is one of the finest examples of Hebrew poetry in the Bible, and is found in Chapter 14:4b-21. Dr. Israel Slotki describes the passage as an ode. [^2] The beauty of this satirical song cannot be questioned. It is followed by an epilogue in verses 22, 23, which reminds one somewhat of what was said about Babylon in 13:20-22.

Verses 4b-8 portray in a general way the satisfaction and joy experienced over Babylon's downfall. Even the cypresses and cedars rejoice. Why? Because even many of them were cut down by the enemy. It is a well-known fact that the trees of Lebanon were cut down by the kings of Assyria (cf. Habakkuk 2:17), and inscriptions found in the district of Lebanon seem to confirm the Babylonian guilt in this respect:

How hath the oppressor ceased!

The exactress of gold ceased!

The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked,

The sceptre of the rulers,

That smote the peoples in wrath with an incessant stroke,

That ruled the nations in anger,

With a persecution that none restrained.

The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet;

They break forth into singing

Yea, the cypresses rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon:

Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.

(14:4b-8)

In verses 9-11 the scene changes. The Babylonian king comes down to the nether-world, Sheol, or the abode of departed spirits, where the inhabitants point out that he is as weak as they are. His former pomp and glory avail him nothing. The man who, in life, thought of himself as an immortal god now finds himself, in death, sought by maggots and worms, like other ordinary humans.

The nether-world from beneath is moved for thee

To meet thee at thy coming;

The shades are stirred up for thee,

Even all the chief ones of the earth;

All the kings of the nations are raised up from their thrones.

All they do answer and say unto thee:

'Art thou also become weak as we?

Art thou become like unto us?

Thy pomp is brought down to the nether-world,

And the noise of they psalteries;

The maggot is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.'

(14:9-11)

Again, the figure is changed in verses 12-15. Here the king of Babylon is personified as Lucifer (lit. "shining one"), the son of the morning. The figure will be recognized in its Full significance by Latter-day Saints. Our theology teaches that in man's pre-mortal existence Lucifer was an angel of authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the plan of redemption proposed for mortal men by the Savior, and was thrust down with his followers from the presence of God and the Son. The story is best told in the Pearl of Great Price:

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—;Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor. But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—;Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever. Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:1-4)

In the light of this explanation, the verses of Isaiah are clearly understood:

How art thou fallen from heaven,

O Lucifer, son of the morning!

How art thou cut down to the ground,

That didst cast lots over the nations!

And thou saidst in thy heart:

'I will ascend into heaven,

Above the stars of God will I exalt my throne;

And I will sit upon the mount of meeting,

In the uttermost parts of the north;

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds;

I will be like the Most High.

Yet thou shalt be brought down to the nether-world,

To the uttermost parts of the pit. (14:12-15)

In verses 16-19 we see the scene shifting from the world of Sheol, or the abode of the spirits of the dead, to the battlefield, where the unburied corpse of the king is exposed to the elements. In ancient times it was considered a curse not to have a decent burial

They that saw thee do narrowly look upon thee,

They gaze earnestly at thee:

'Is this the man that made the earth to tremble,

That did shake kingdoms;

That made the world as a wilderness,

And destroyed the cities thereof;

That opened not the house of his prisoners?

All the kings of the nations, all of them, sleep in glory,

Every one in his own house.

But thou art cast forth away from thy grave

Like an abhorred offshoot,

In the raiment of the slain, that are thrust through with the sword,

That go down to the pavement of the pit,

As a carcass trodden under foot.

Finally (verses 20, 21), the king is told that the desolation of his land and the slaying of his own people are the causes of the indignities heaped upon him and the decimation of his children:

Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial,

Because thou hast destroyed thy land,

Thou hast slain thy people;

The seed of evil-doers shall not be named for ever.

Prepare ye slaughter for his children

For the iniquity of their fathers:

That they rise not up, and possess the earth,

And fill the face of the world with cities. (14:20, 21)

Here the taunt-song ends and the epilogue (verses 22, 23) follows.

The remainder of the chapter is mostly devoted to a discussion of the destruction of the Assyrians who shall enter Judah, with a similar fate promised for other nations whose designs are evil (14:24-27), and to a message of doom against Philistia. (14:29-31) Of interest to us is the way in which Isaiah ends the chapter. He implies that God, who destroys the enemies of His people, will take care of His own:

What then shall one answer the messengers of the nation?

That the Lord hath founded Zion,

And in her shall the afflicted of His people take refuge.

(14:32)

Comment on the Remainder of the Division.—;As was mentioned above, there is no need, for our purposes here, to comment at length on the other "burdens" of this division. In view of what we have done for Babylon, Assyria, and Philistia, it is believed that the reader can do the same for Moab, Damascus, Egypt, and the others. He should keep in mind that at intervals Isaiah departs from his description of ruin and looks to the events of the latter days. Notice 17:4-8; 19:19-24, etc. There is a tradition in the Church that Chapter 18 has reference to America, "the land shadowing (lit. "buzzing") with wings," beyond the "rivers of Ethiopia." [^3] The reader should notice the "ensign" of verse 3 and "Mount Zion" of verse 7.

Division 3, Chapter 24-27.

The four chapters of this division are remarkable for their strength and power. Well they might be, because they contain prophecies of a great world judgment and the glorious redemption of Israel's faithful. They speak also of the terrors of the day of judgment, of the suppression of evil upon the earth, of the abolition of death and the wiping away of tears from all faces. These chapters are of great religious importance and deserve our careful reading.

The General Judgment of the Lord Upon the World.—;Chapter 24 of Isaiah deals with a general world judgment and not, as some have supposed, with the ruin of Judah. It describes an event of the latter days and in this respect reminds one somewhat of the contents of Chapter 13:1-13. Isaiah describes the Lord's day of retribution, a day which will affect all classes and ranks alike: "as with the people, so with the priest." The earth is emptied and cursed, because the inhabitants thereof have "transgressed the laws, violated the statute ("ordinance" in Authorized Version), broken the everlasting covenant." The everlasting covenant is none other than the gospel, the gospel of Jesus Christ. (Cf. Hebrews 13:20) The everlasting covenant has been violated by the people of the earth from the days of the Great Apostasy in early Christian times to the present. It is no wonder that Isaiah saw a day of universal judgment upon mankind. The punishment has begun, with more yet to come unless men repent of their iniquities and listen to the Lord's servants. Here are some of Isaiah's words:

Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty and maketh it waste,

And turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.

And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest;

As with the servant, so with his master;

As with the maid, so with her mistress;

As with the buyer, so with the seller;

As with the lender, so with the borrower;

As with the creditor, so with the debtor.

The earth shall be utterly emptied, and clean despoiled;

For the Lord hath spoken this word.

The earth fainteth and fadeth away

The world faileth and fadeth away,

The lofty people of the earth do fail.

The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof;

Because they have transgressed the laws, violated the statute,

Broken the everlasting covenant

Therefore hath a curse devoured the earth,

And they that dwell therein are found guilty;

Therefore the inhabitants of the earth waste away,

And men are left few. (24:1-6)

The prophet continues his terrible description in somewhat similar vein. Songs of deliverance are premature; even the kings of the earth, with other evil powers, will be vanquished, imprisoned, and punished. The Lord will then reign supreme from His capitals in Mount Zion and Jerusalem:

And it shall come to pass in that day,

That the Lord will punish the host of the high heaven on high,

And the kings of the earth upon the earth.

And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the dungeon,

And shall be shut up in the prison,

And after many days shall they be punished.

Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed;

For the Lord of hosts will reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem,

And before His elders shall be Glory. (24:21-23)

A Hymn of Triumph.—;The Lord's judgment having been consummated, Isaiah offers up a hymn of praise and triumph Chapter 25 is devoted entirely to this object and reminds one strongly of the lovely song in Chapter 12. The first five verses are devoted to exalting the Lord:

O Lord, Thou art my God,

I will exalt Thee, I will praise Thy name,

For Thou hast done wonderful things;

Even counsels of old, in faithfulness and truth.

For Thou hast made of a city a heap,

Of a fortified city a ruin;

A castle of strangers to be no city,

It shall never be built.

Therefore shall the strong people glorify Thee,

The city of the terrible nations shall fear Thee.

For Thou hast been a stronghold to the poor

A stronghold to the needy in his distress,

A refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat;

For the blast of the terrible ones was as a storm against the wall.

As the heat in a dry place, Thou didst subdue the noise of strangers;

As the heat by the shadow of a cloud, the song of the terrible ones was brought low. (25:1-5)

Verses 6-8 give a description of a banquet at which the Lord is the host to the peoples of all nations. The feast is, of course, of the very best viands. It doubtless is a figure or symbol of the highest spiritual and temporal blessings with which God will bless those who survive the judgments mentioned in Chapter 24. Isaiah says that God will swallow death forever, and wipe away tears from all faces. Moreover, the reproach of His people will be removed from off the whole earth. Obviously this takes place during the Millennial reign. Will there be no death during this great thousand-year period? The Doctrine and Covenants will clear up the difficulty for us, because it refers to the same period of which Isaiah speaks:

And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death. In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree; and when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious. (D. & C. 101:29-31; cf. 42:45-47)

Here are Isaiah's words:

And in this mountain will the Lord of hosts make unto all peoples

A feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees,

Of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.

And He will destroy in this mountain

The face of the covering that is cast over all peoples,

And the veil that is spread over all nations.

He will swallow up death for ever;

And the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces;

And the reproach of His people will He take away from off all the earth;

For the Lord hath spoken it. (25:6-8)

Finally, the prophet describes the joy which the saved people have in their God who has delivered them; on the other hand, Moab, a symbol of Israel's wicked enemies, is downtrodden and its pride brought to the ground:

And it shall be said in that day:

'Lo, this is our God,

For whom we waited, that He might save us;

This is the Lord, for whom we waited,

We will be glad and rejoice in His salvation.'

For in this mountain will the hand of the Lord rest,

And Moab shall be trodden down in his place,

Even as straw is trodden down in the dunghill.

And when he shall spread forth his hands in the midst thereof,

As he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim,

His pride shall be brought down together with the cunning of his hands.

And the high fortress of thy walls will He bring down, lay low,

And bring to the ground, even to the dust. (25:9-12)

A Song of Judah: The Lord's Vindication.—;Chapter 26:1-19 is another beautiful song, which is represented as being sung in Judah in the day of redemption of Israel's remnant. The redeemed first sing a song of rejoicing and portray their gratitude to the Lord:

In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah:

We have a strong city;

Walls and bulwarks doth He appoint for salvation.

Open ye the gates,

That the righteous nation that keepeth faithfulness may enter in.

The mind stayed on Thee Thou keepest in perfect peace;

Because it trusteth in Thee.

Trust ye in the Lord for ever,

For the Lord is God, an everlasting Rock.

For He hath brought down them that dwell on high,

The lofty city,

Laying it low, laying it low even to the ground,

Bringing it even to the dust.

The foot shall tread it down,

Even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.

(26:1-6)

Verses 7-10 reveal that the redeemed of Israel recognize in God's judgments and discipline that they have been taught righteousness; the wicked, on the other hand, who do not learn righteousness, will be judged. Verses 11-15 invoke destruction upon the Lord's adversaries and ask peace for Israel; thanks are extended for past mercies.

The remaining part of the song, verses 16-19, is an admission on Israel's part as to her failure in attempting to save herself. Suffering and prayer seem to have been to no avail. Then, with hope, Isaiah expresses the reality of the resurrection, the first clear statement of its kind, so some say, in the Old Testament:

Thy dead shall live, my dead bodies shall arise—;

Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust—;

For Thy dew is as the dew of light,

And the earth shall bring to life the shades. (26:19)

The Lord's Indignation.—;The last two verses of Chapter 26 express the Lord's invitation to His people to withdraw into their own quarters until He finishes the chastisement of the wicked. Israel is invited, using a modern figure, to enter her storm cellar until the cyclone is over:

Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers,

And shut thy doors about thee;

Hide thyself for a little moment,

Until the indignation be overpast.

For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of His place

To visit upon the inhabitants of the earth their iniquity;

The earth also shall disclose her blood,

And shall no more cover her slain. (26:20, 21)

We need not quote from the final chapter of this division. (27) In verse 1 the Lord threatens punishment upon three monsters, which obviously represent wicked powers in the world. Then follows (vss. 2-6) a song which shows Israel received back into favor as a fruitful vineyard. The reader will contrast this song with the unfruitful vineyard which was the theme of Chapter 5:1-7. The remainder of the chapter (verses 7-13) has to do with the Lord's dealings with Israel in punishment and redemption. It is pointed out that Israel's punishment, in comparison with that of her enemies, is very moderate. The judgments upon the enemy were punitive; those upon Israel, remedial. Better days are in store for Israel when she relinquishes idolatry and returns to God humbly penitent. When a great horn is blown—;we may interpret this as the gospel—e Israelites will be gathered "one by one" from the parts of the earth where they were dispersed, to again worship the Lord.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See D.H.C., I, 52-59 for a description of the circumstances under which the Three Witnesses and Eight Witnesses beheld the plates.
[^2] Ibid., I, 19, 20.
[^3] For a discussion of this view see Joseph Fielding Smith's, The Signs of the Times, pp. 45-50. Zion's Press.
