Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Five

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF ISRAEL (Cont'd.)

Division 4, Chapters 28-33

This important division contains a series of prophecies dealing with political matters in Judah having to do with Assyria and the Egyptian Alliance, with judgments upon Samaria, with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and, as we might expect, with the glorious future of Israel.

God's Judgments Upon Ephraim's and Judah's Rulers.—;Verses 1-6 of Chapter 28 speak of divine judgments to come upon the "drunkards of Ephraim," who probably represent Samaria, the capital of the Northern Kingdom. Some scholars (e.g., Kissane) think that Isaiah is speaking of judgments already past, but the general consensus is that of a judgment yet future, with Assyria as God's agent of destruction. I am personally inclined to believe that verses 5 and 6 form an interlude that refers to a future restoration of Israel:

In that day shall the Lord of hosts be

For a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty,

Unto the residue of His people;

And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment,

And for strength to them that turn back the battle at the gate. (28:5, 6)

Verses 7-13 of this chapter refer, quite obviously, I believe, to the equally drunken and beclouded rulers and priests of Judah. They are weary of Isaiah's warnings concerning coming disaster. The Lord's way to safety is disregarded, and their ruin is thus assured. These scoffers and "balladmongers" (vss. 14, 15) are represented as having made a "covenant with death" and with the nether-world, or world of the dead, as security against destruction. In so doing they have neglected trust in God and righteous conduct, and their policies will prove futile. To them the Lord says:

Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone,

A tried stone, a costly corner-stone of sure foundation;

He that believeth shall not make haste.

And I will make justice the line,

And righteousness the plummet;

And the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,

And the waters shall overflow the hiding-place.

(28:16, 17)

The only true stone upon which men can trust is Jesus Christ; that is what Isaiah meant. Paul so identifies the stone in Romans 9:33 and 10:11. Peter also corroborates this view in 1 Peter 2:6-8.

The Lord will overthrow their supposed security in the "covenant with death," and a "scouring scourge" shall pass through the land and the scoffers will be trodden down and exterminated. (28:18-22)

The chapter ends (vss. 23-29) with parables of sowing and threshing. These represent the fact that God disciplines His people; He will not forever punish them. Just as a farmer does not thresh various types of grain with equal severity, so God will not punish or discipline His people beyond what they deserve.

Isaiah 29: A Chapter Concerning Latter-day Wonders.—;Chapter 29 of Isaiah is to Latter-day Saints one of the most interesting and wonderful among the ancient prophet's writings. We believe that well-meaning scholars and commentators have misconstrued most of Isaiah's words. This chapter can only be understood by one who understands the spirit of the Gospel. It relates mostly to certain great events that have taken or will yet take place in this the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times.

First of all, I should mention the state of the text of Isaiah 29 as now contained in our Old Testament. Latter-day Saints have reason to believe that the present text is very faulty, particularly in respect to omissions. Many plain and precious things which were originally present in the text have either dropped out accidentally, or have been deliberately omitted, more probably the latter. The present text is not adequate. I shall therefore use the text as revised by the Prophet Joseph Smith through the spirit of revelation. With the exception of about the first seven verses, the correct text of Isaiah 29 will be found in the Book of Mormon. (See 2

Nephi 27:3 beginning with "yea, it shall be unto them," etc.) Nephi quotes the text as found by him upon the Brass Plates which were brought from Jerusalem. Joseph Smith's revision contains 32 verses as compared with 24 in the usual version.

The inspired text breaks down somewhat logically into the following topics:

Verses 1, 2. God's judgments against Ariel (Jerusalem).

3-5. God's judgments against the Nephite nation, a branch of Israel

in America.

6-10. Judgments against Gentiles and Jews of latter days who fight

against Ariel (here, meaning the latter-day Zion).

11-30. Prophetic predictions concerning circumstances surrounding the

coming forth of the Book of Mormon.

31, 32. The meek of the earth to see the wicked brought to naught; the

house of Jacob no longer to be ashamed, and to fear the God

of Israel.

Now let us deal with these topics in order. The first two verses obviously have reference to Jerusalem (here called "Ariel"), the city where David encamped:

Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices. Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow; for thus hath the Lord said unto me, It shall be unto Ariel. (29:1, 2)

The Book of Mormon indicates that verses 3-5 refer to God's judgments against that branch of Israel which came to this continent from Jerusalem about 600 B. C. They were known as Nephites, and finally, because of wickedness, met destruction about A. D. 400. The logic of the transition from verses 1 and 2 to verses 3-5 is not entirely clear. Nevertheless, Nephi, a great Book of Mormon prophet, applies Isaiah's words in verses 3-5 to the final destruction of his own people. We shall adopt his inspired interpretation. First of all, let us quote Isaiah's words:

That I the Lord will camp against her round about, and will lay siege against her with a mount, and I will raise forts against her. And she shall be brought down, and shall speak out of the ground, and her speech shall be low out of the dust; and her voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and her speech shall whisper out of the dust. Moreover the multitude of her strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away; yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly. (29:3-5)

How well Nephi makes an application of this passage will be seen in the following quotation from his prophecies:

After my seed and the seed of my brethren shall have dwindled in unbelief, and shall have been smitten by the Gentiles; yea, after the Lord God shall have camped against them round about, and shall have laid siege against them with a mount, and raised forts against them; and after they shall have been brought down low in the dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the righteous shall be written, and the prayers of the faithful shall be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not be forgotten. For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit; for the Lord God will give unto him power, that he may whisper concerning them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall whisper out of the dust. For thus saith the Lord God: They shall write the things which shall be done among them, and they shall be written and sealed up in a book, and those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not have them, for they seek to destroy the things of God. Wherefore, as those who have been destroyed have been destroyed speedily; and the multitude of their terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away—;yea, thus saith the Lord God: It shall be at an instant, suddenly—; ... (2 Nephi 26:15-18)

The next topic (vss. 6-10) in Isaiah 29 is also interpreted for us by Nephi. He points out that in the last days, the days of the Gentiles, or, to put it plainly, our own dispensation, God's judgments shall be upon iniquitous Jews and Gentiles who fight against Zion. But let us quote Isaiah and then observe Nephi's interpretation:

For they shall be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision. Yea, it shall be unto them even as unto a hungry man who dreameth, and behold, he eateth, but he awaketh and his soul is empty; or like unto a thirsty man who dreameth, and behold, he drinketh, but he awaketh, and behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite. Yea, even so shall the multitude of all the nations be that fight against mount Zion. For, behold, all ye that do iniquity, stay yourselves, and wonder; for ye shall cry out, and cry; yea, ye shall be drunken, but not with wine; ye shall stagger, but not with strong drink. For, behold, the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep. For, behold, ye have closed your eyes, and ye have rejected the prophets, and your rulers; and the seers hath he covered because of your iniquities. (29:6-10)

Here are Nephi's words:

But, behold, in the last days, or in the days of the Gentiles—;yea, behold all the nations of the Gentiles and also the Jews, both those who shall come upon this land and those who shall be upon other lands, yea, even upon all the lands of the earth, behold, they will be drunken with iniquity and all manner of abominations—;And when that day shall come they shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with thunder and with earthquake, and with a great noise, and with storm, and with tempest, and with the flame of devouring fire. And all the nations that fight against Zion, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision; ... (2 Nephi 27:1-3a)

Nephi then begins with Isaiah 29:8, and quotes the remainder of this famous chapter of the prophet-statesman. That the Book of Mormon prophet interprets this section (6:10) of Isaiah's words as having reference to the latter days there can be no doubt. It is to be observed that Nephi equates Ariel of verse 7 in Isaiah with Zion. (Cf. Isa. 29:7 with 2 Nephi 27:3)

Now let us discuss the section (vss. 11-30) dealing with the coming forth of the gold plates from which we obtained the Book of Mormon. It would be absolutely impossible for any man without the spirit of revelation to interpret this part of Isaiah 29 as having reference to the coming forth of the sacred Nephite scripture. This illustrates the fact that scholarship alone cannot provide the information necessary for the correct interpretation of many parts of the Bible. The restoration of the gospel in this age through Joseph Smith has given us the answers to many difficult Biblical problems; we can proceed confidently in many instances. When Joseph Smith received the gold plates containing the Book of Mormon from the hands of Moroni, the divine messenger, he was told that some of the plates were sealed and were not to be translated. Moreover, the seal was not to be broken. The part of Isaiah 29 we are now considering tells us about the sealed portion. (Vss. 11-16) In it is a "revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof"; the nature of the revelation is not to be disclosed to man in the "day of wickedness and abominations of the people." Here is Isaiah's description of the sealed part of the plates:

And it shall come to pass, that the Lord God shall bring forth unto you the words of a book; and they shall be the words of them which have slumbered. And behold, the book shall be sealed; and in the book shall be a revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof. Wherefore because of the things which are sealed up, the things which are sealed shall not be delivered in the day of the wickedness and abominations of the people. Wherefore, the book shall be kept from them. But the book shall be delivered unto a man, and he shall deliver the words of the book, which are the words of those who have slumbered in the dust; and he shall deliver these words unto another, but the words that are sealed he shall not deliver, neither shall he deliver the book. For the book shall be sealed by the power of God, and the revelation which was sealed shall be kept in the book until the own due time of the Lord, that they may come forth; for, behold, they reveal all things from the foundation of the world unto the end thereof. And the day cometh, that the words of the book which were sealed shall be read upon the housetops; and they shall be read by the power of Christ; and all things shall be revealed unto the children of men which ever have been among the children of men, and which ever will be, even unto the end of the earth. (29:11-16)

This passage is of tremendous interest and significance, but only a more righteous and spiritual generation than ours will be permitted to enjoy its fulfillment.

The next part of this section (vss. 17-24) deals with the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, with the Martin HarrisProfessor Anthon incident, and with the Lord's commission to Joseph Smith to translate and return the plates. When Joseph Smith obtained the plates, three witnesses were permitted by an angel from God to view them. The angel turned over the plates one by one and showed them the engravings thereon. Soon after this event, the prophet was permitted to show the plates to eight other witnesses. [^1] History also bears out the following circumstances: The Prophet Joseph Smith copied off some characters from the gold plates, and these, together with a translation of them, were taken by Martin Harris to some learned men in New York City for examination. The prophet gives his and Harris' version of the incident as follows:

. . . I commenced copying the characters off the plates. I copied a considerable number of them, and by means of the Urim and Thummim I translated some of them, which I did between the time I arrived at the house of my wife's father, in the month of December, and the February following.

Sometime in this month of February, the aforementioned Mr. Martin Harris came to our place, got the characters which I had drawn off the plates, and started with them to the city of New York. For what took place relative to him and the characters, I refer to his own account of the circumstances, as he related them to me after his return, which was as follows:

"I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyric, and Arabic; and he said that they were true characters. He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him.

"He then said to me, 'Let me see that certificate.' I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, 'I cannot read a sealed book.' I left him and went to Dr. Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation." [^2]

Whatever the world thinks of this incident, the bare fact remains that Martin Harris was so convinced of the truth of the Book of Mormon that he furnished three thousand dollars for the first printing of it. It should be mentioned that Professor Anthon was Adjunct Professor of Greek and Latin in Columbia College, New York City, and was a scholar of great eminence.

We know that in due time Joseph Smith finished the translation of the Book of Mormon and returned the plates in accordance with the Lord's instructions as given by Isaiah. In the light of the historic facts we have given, let us present Isaiah's words:

Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it, save it be that three witnesses shall behold it by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein. And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said, that the words of the faithful should speak as it were from the dead. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his words; and woe be unto him that rejecteth the word of God. But, behold, it shall come to pass, that the Lord God shall say unto him to whom he shall deliver the book, Take these words which are not sealed and deliver them to another, that he may show them unto the learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee. And the learned shall say, Bring hither the book and I will read them; and now because of the glory of the world, and to get gain will they say this, and not for the glory of God. And the man shall say, I cannot bring the book for it is sealed. Then shall the learned say, I cannot read it. Wherefore it shall come to pass, that the Lord God will deliver again the book and the words thereof to him that is not learned; and the man that is not learned shall say, I am not learned. Then shall the Lord God say unto him, The learned shall not read them, for they have rejected them, and I am able to do mine own work; wherefore thou shalt read the words which I shall give unto thee. Touch not the things which are sealed, for I will bring them forth in mine own due time; for I will show unto the children of men that I am able to do mine own work. Wherefore, when thou hast read the words which I have commanded thee, and obtained the witnesses which I have promised unto thee, then shalt thou seal up the book again, and hide it up unto me, that I may preserve the words which thou hast not read until I shall see fit in mine own wisdom to reveal all things unto the children of men. (29:17-24)

In verses 25-30 of this chapter the Lord points out that He is a God of miracles, that men draw near to him with their mouths but their hearts are far from Him, that the deaf shall hear the words of the book (of Mormon), and that the blind shall see out of obscurity. It will be best to read Isaiah's description:

For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the world that I am the same, yesterday, to-day, and for ever; and I work not among the children of men, save it be according to their faith. And again it shall come to pass, that the Lord shall say unto him that shall read the words that shall be delivered him, Forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men, therefore I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people; yea, a marvellous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise and learned shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid. And woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord. And their works are in the dark; and they say, Who seeth us and who knoweth us? And they also say, Surely, your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter's clay. But behold, I will show unto them, saith the Lord of hosts, that I know all their works. For, shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding? But behold, saith the Lord of hosts, I will show unto the children of men, that it is not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field; and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest. And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book; and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness; and the meek also shall increase, and their joy shall be in the Lord; and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. (29:25-30)

In the final section of chapter 29 (vss. 31, 32), Isaiah points out that the meek shall see the wicked and scornful brought to naught or destroyed; the redeemed house of Jacob shall not be ashamed, but sanctify the Lord:

For, assuredly as the Lord liveth, they shall see that the terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off, and they that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught. Therefore, thus saith the Lord who redeemed Abraham concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale; but when he seeth his children, the work of my hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine. (29:31, 32)

Because of the importance of the Book of Mormon and other matters in chapter 29, I have quoted the chapter entire in its inspired form as given by Joseph Smith. This text will probably not be accessible to most persons.

Wickedness of Egyptian Alliance.—;Isaiah now turns back to the problems of his own day. In Chapter 30:1-17 he denounces the politicians of Judah who seek an alliance with Egypt without first asking counsel of or looking to the Lord for help. When the Egyptian forces are driven back, the pro-Egyptian party will regret its decision to seek help

... of a people that cannot profit them,

That are not a help nor a profit,

But a shame, and also a reproach. (30:5)

The prophet points out that his people send envoys with rich gifts to the Egyptian court to no purpose (30:7) and consequently are

. . . a rebellious people,

Lying children,

Children that refuse to hear the teaching of the Lord. (30:9)

Because Judah has rejected the seers and prophets and desires to hear only "smooth things" and "delusions," (30:10) Isaiah makes clear the consequences. She will collapse suddenly and be broken as a potter's vessel:

Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel:

Because ye despise this word,

And trust in oppression and perverseness,

And stay thereon;

Therefore this iniquity shall be to you

As a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall,

Whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant.

And He shall break it as a potter's vessel is broken,

Breaking it in pieces without sparing;

So that there shall not be found among the pieces thereof a sherd

To take fire from the hearth,

Or to take water out of the cistern. (30:12-14)

He then advises his people concerning the only course of safety for them. Conversion to Israel's God, with quiet confidence in Him, is the requirement. They are not to make an alliance with other nations opposing Assyria. They are to trust in God rather than in material resources. Even if they obtain horses and have superior numbers, they shall not prevail against the enemy. (30:15-17)

Isaiah then looks into the future once more and sees the deliverance of a purified remnant of his people. In that future day his people shall walk in the way of the Lord and put away their unclean practices:

And therefore will the Lord wait, that He may be gracious unto you,

And therefore will He be exalted, that He may have compassion upon you;

For the Lord is a God of justice,

Happy are all they that wait for Him.

For, O people that dwellest in Zion at Jerusalem,

Thou shalt weep no more;

He will surely be gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry,

When He shall hear, He will answer thee.

And though the Lord give you sparing bread and scant water,

Yet shall not thy Teacher hide Himself any more,

But thine eyes shall see thy Teacher;

And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying:

'This is the way, walk ye in it,

When ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.'

And ye shall defile thy graven images overlaid with silver,

And thy molten images covered with gold;

Thou shalt put them far away as one unclean;

Thou shalt say unto it: 'Get thee hence.' (30:18-22)

The prophet now describes the future happiness and prosperity of the latter-day "Zion at Jerusalem" (30:19), when the Lord has bound up the "bruise of His people":

And He will give the rain for thy seed, wherewith thou sowest the ground,

And bread of the increase of the ground, and it shall be fat and plenteous;

In that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures.

The oxen likewise and the young asses that till the ground

Shall eat savoury provender,

Which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.

And there shall be upon every lofty mountain, and upon every high hill,

Streams and watercourses,

In the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.

Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,

And the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of the seven days,

In the day that the Lord bindeth up the bruise of His people,

And healeth the stroke of their wound. (30:23-26)

Verses 27-29 give a powerful description of the Lord coming to judgment to "sift the nations with the sieve of destruction." This description is followed (vss. 30-33) by one which portrays the destruction of Assyria. This is the usual interpretation, but in view of what has preceded (vss. 23-29) concerning the latter day "Zion at Jerusalem" and the Lord's judgment, one wonders whether Assyria in this passage may not also represent the wicked world of the latter days.

In Chapter 31 we find Isaiah again denouncing those who seek Egyptian aid against Assyria. He calls attention to the fact that

... the Egyptians are men, and not God,

And their horses flesh, and not spirit;

So when the Lord shall stretch out His hand,

Both he that helpeth shall stumble, and he that is helped shall fall,

And they all shall perish together. (31:3)

In verses 5-7, Isaiah again refers to the future restoration of Zion, when the people will have seen the evil of their ways and will have given their allegiance to the Lord. Like a bird hovering over its young, so the Lord will protect and deliver Jerusalem. The last two verses (8, 9) show that Assyria shall fall, not by human power, but through the power and intervention of God:

Then shall Asshur fall with the sword, not of man,

And the sword, not of men, shall devour him;

And he shall flee from the sword,

And his young men shall become tributary.

And his rock shall pass away by reason of terror,

And his princes shall be dismayed at the ensign,

Saith the Lord, whose fire is in Zion,

And His furnace in Jerusalem. (31:8, 9)

Here, again, as in Chapter 30, I am not sure but that Isaiah is alluding not only to the material destruction of ancient Assyria, but also to the destruction of spiritual Assyria of the latter days. May not "ensign" be the gospel in the latter days (cf. 11:10) and the "princes" a reference to leaders of the wicked world? It is a thought which I will not press too far. There are difficulties in the passage which commentators have not solved satisfactorily.

An Aristocracy of Character.—;In Chapter 32:1-8 Isaiah seems to behold a day when "the aristocracy of birth and wealth will be replaced by an aristocracy of character." (Delitzsch) Judah, delivered from her enemies, and purified, will begin a new age. There will be righteous government, with careful regard for the laws of God and men. The weak will be protected, the distressed succored, the wrong-doer punished, and the fool and the knave no longer honored:

Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness,

And as for princes, they shall rule in justice.

And a man shall be as in a hiding-place from the wind,

And a covert from the tempest;

As by the watercourses in a dry place,

As in the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

And the eyes of them that see shall not be closed,

And the ears of them that hear shall attend.

The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge,

And the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.

The vile person shall be no more called liberal,

Nor the churl said to be noble.

For the vile person will speak villany,

And his heart will work iniquity,

To practise ungodliness, and to utter wickedness against the Lord,

To make empty the soul of the hungry,

And to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.

The instruments also of the churl are evil;

He deviseth wicked devices

To destroy the poor with lying words,

And the needy when he speaketh right.

But the liberal deviseth liberal things;

And by liberal things shall he stand. (32:1-8)

The scene is then shifted back, and women of Judah are warned (vss. 9-14) by Isaiah that their ease will be broken by distress and sorrow, and the desolation of Judah will continue until

... the spirit be poured upon us from on high,

And the wilderness become a fruitful field,

And the fruitful field be counted for a forest.

Then justice shall dwell in the wilderness,

And righteousness shall abide in the fruitful field.

And the work of righteousness shall be peace;

And the effect of righteousness quietness and confidence for ever.

And my people shall abide in a peaceable habitation,

And in secure dwellings, and in quiet resting-places.

And it shall hail, in the downfall of the forest;

But the city shall descend into the valley.

Happy are ye that sow beside all waters,

That send forth freely the feet of the ox and the ass.

(32:15-20)

This passage is, of course, a reference to Zion's restoration and the peace, righteousness, and happiness that shall attend it. In Chapter 32 the reader will perceive that verses 1-8 and 15-20 refer to conditions in the redeemed Zion, and verses 9-14 are given by the prophet as a warning of the desolation that shall precede its redemption.

The Overthrow of the Spoiler and the Restoration of Zion.—;The last chapter of this division, Chapter 33, deals apparently with the spoiler, in this case Assyria, and the eventual deliverance and restoration of Zion. The reader must be impressed with Isaiah's constant return to the theme of a redeemed Zion. Verse 1 is in the nature of a prologue that spells woe to the spoiler. In verses 2-9 we have a prayer, apparently from the exiles of Israel, in which they ask the Lord to be gracious to them and in which they acknowledge His might and goodness. They then portray their condition when in captivity and when desolate. The Lord's reply is given in verses 10-13. He will be exalted, thwart Israel's extermination, and destroy the wicked nations. Then (vss. 14-16) the nature of the new Zion is described. Those who are capable of dwelling with God are first described:

The sinners in Zion are afraid;

Trembling hath seized the ungodly:

'Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire?

Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?'

He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly;

He that despiseth the gain of oppressions,

That shaketh his hands from holding of bribes,

That stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood,

And shutteth his eyes from looking upon evil;

He shall dwell on high;

His place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks;

His bread shall be given, his waters shall be sure.

Verses 17-19 have posed a problem to commentators, but inasmuch as they allude to the redeemed Zion, the king referred to may be the Messiah whose land stretches afar. The terror of the conqueror shall no longer exist; he who counted the spoils of Israel and whose language the people did not understand, shall no more be seen by them. Then follows (vss. 20-24) another beautiful description of Zion at Jerusalem:

Look upon Zion, the city of our solemn gatherings;

Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a peaceful habitation,

A tent that shall not be removed,

The stakes whereof shall never be plucked up,

Neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

But there the Lord will be with us in majesty,

In a place of broad rivers and streams;

Wherein shall go no galley with oars,

Neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.

For the Lord is our Judge,

The Lord is our Lawgiver,

The Lord is our King;

He will save us.

Thy tacklings are loosed;

They do not hold the stand of their mast,

They do not spread the sail;

Then is the prey of a great spoil divided;

The lame take the prey.

And the inhabitant shall not say: 'I am sick';

The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Book of Isaiah, I, 419.
[^2] Ibid., p. 398.
