Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Six

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF ISRAEL (Cont'd.)

Division 5, Chapters 34, 35

Chapters 34 and 35 of Isaiah are, by common consent of scholars, associated as a unit. It is generally assumed that the doom and destruction of Edom is dealt with in Chapter 34, and that this is contrasted with the restoration and redemption of Israel in Chapter 35. It will be recalled by the reader that the Edomites were descendants of Esau, the brother of Jacob. The hatred of the Edomites for the Israelites was demonstrated on every possible occasion— [^1] much so, in fact, that the prophets of Israel constantly denounced them for their wickedness, or referred to them as a symbol of the wicked world. (See chapter on Obadiah.) Their doom and destruction was freely predicted by the prophets.

The Nations Summoned to a World Judgment: Edom's Destruction.—;In Chapter 34:1-4, the prophet calls upon the whole world to hearken to a great announcement. The indignation of the Lord is against all nations, and his terrible judgments are to be poured out upon them. A scene of carnage and destruction is described similar to that spoken of by the prophet Zephaniah. (See Zeph. 1:2, 3 and our chapter on that prophet.)

Here are the prophet's words:

Come near, ye nations, to hear,

And attend, ye peoples;

Let the earth hear, and the fulness thereof,

The world, and all things that come forth of it.

For the Lord hath indignation against all the nations,

And fury against all their host;

He hath utterly destroyed them,

He hath delivered them to the slaughter.

Their slain also shall be cast out,

And the stench of their carcasses shall come up,

And the mountains shall be melted with their blood.

And all the host of heaven shall moulder away,

And the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll;

And all their host shall fall down,

As the leaf falleth off from the vine,

And as a falling fig from the figtree. (34:1-4)

Doubtless this judgment is the same as that spoken of by the Lord in the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear: Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh; and the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth. And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people; for they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant. (D. & C. 1:11-15)

It is my considered opinion that the passage from Isaiah has reference to the destruction of spiritual Edom, the wicked world of the latter days. This seems to be in harmony with the Doctrine and Covenants 1:36, where the Lord says that He is coming down in "judgment upon Idumea, or the world." The reader will notice that the remainder of Isaiah 34 mentions the destruction of Edom, and the desolate nature of her land is specifically pointed out in verses 9-15. The attention of the reader is specially called to the fact that right in the midst of the description of Edom's destruction we find the following passage:

For the Lord hath a day of vengeance,

A year of recompense for the controversy of Zion. (Vs. 8)

Now the Lord's "controversy" concerning Zion— here I believe Isaiah has reference to the restored, redeemed Zion —;involves all of the enemies of Israel. For that reason, it seems to me, Chapter 34 is not only a description of the destruction of the ancient Edomites, but as well a description of the wicked world of the latter days, fitly symbolized by the name of Israel's old enemy. It may be well to quote some of Isaiah's powerful words concerning Edom:

For My sword hath drunk its fill in heaven;

Behold, it shall come down upon Edom,

And upon the people of My ban, to judgment.

The sword of the Lord is filled with blood,

It is made fat with fatness,

With the blood of lambs and goats,

With the fat of the kidneys of rams;

For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah,

And a great slaughter in the land of Edom.

And the wild-oxen shall come down with them,

And the bullocks with the bulls;

And their land shall be drunken with blood,

And their dust made fat with fatness.

For the Lord hath a day of vengeance,

A year of recompense for the controversy of Zion.

And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch,

And the dust thereof into brimstone,

And the land thereof shall become burning pitch.

It shall not be quenched night nor day,

The smoke thereof shall go up for ever;

From generation to generation it shall lie waste:

None shall pass through it for ever and ever.

(34:5-10;italics ours.)

A Revelation Concerning the Ransomed of the Lord.—;Isaiah now reveals in beautiful verse the glory, salvation, and future happiness of the Lord's redeemed Israel. It would appear that Chapter 35 has been partly fulfilled in our coming to the West. (See D. & C. 45:71; cf. Isa. 35:10) Isaiah doubtless also meant to apply the words of this chapter to the return of the Jews and other tribes to Palestine. In any event, the fact remains that he had reference to a glorious part of the gospel plan—e return and redemption of God's people. First, glad tidings are extended to Zion:

The wilderness and the parched land shall be glad;

And the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice,

Even with joy and singing;

The glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it,

The excellency of Carmel and Sharon;

They shall see the glory of the Lord,

The excellency of our God.

Strengthen ye the weak hands,

And make firm the tottering knees.

Say to them that are of a fearful heart: 'Be strong, fear not';

Behold, your God will come with vengeance,

With the recompense of God He will come and save you.

(35:1-4)

Then the prophet shows that the unfortunates of Israel shall have their situation changed to joy, prosperity shall come, there shall be no more oppression, the unclean and unholy shall not be there, and the redeemed shall walk there with everlasting joy upon their heads:

Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,

And the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.

Then shall the lame man leap as a hart,

And the tongue of the dumb shall sing;

For in the wilderness shall water break out,

And streams in the desert.

And the parched land shall become a pool,

And the thirsty ground springs of water;

In the habitation of jackals herds shall lie down,

It shall be an enclosure for reeds and rushes.

And a highway shall be there, and a way,

And it shall be called The way of holiness;

The unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those;

The wayfaring men, yea fools, shall not err therein.

No lion shall be there,

Nor shall any ravenous beast go up thereon,

They shall not be found there;

And the ransomed of the Lord shall return,

And come with singing unto Zion,

And everlasting joy shall be upon their heads;

They shall obtain gladness and joy,

And sorrow and sighing shall flee away. (35:5-10)

Division 6, Chapters 36-39.

This division of Isaiah consists mostly of prose narrative dealing with two significant episodes during the reign of Hezekiah in which the prophet took a leading role. Chapters 36 and 37 are concerned with Sennacherib's invasion of Judah, his arrogant demands for Jerusalem's surrender, Hezekiah's prayer and Isaiah's message of assurance, the destruction of the Assyrian host, and the departure of Sennacherib to Nineveh; chapters 38 and 39 give an account of Hezekiah's sickness, Isaiah's promise to him of fifteen years added life, the king's song of thanksgiving, the sending of envoys to Hezekiah by Merodach-baladan of Babylonia, Isaiah's rebuke of Hezekiah for showing his treasures, and the threat of future exile of all in his house to Babylonia. The fact that the prophet is the central figure in these two episodes is probably the reason why the four chapters were added to his book.

The reader will notice that this whole division is almost identical with 2 Kings 18:13-20:19. It must be quite obvious, then, that either the account in Kings is borrowed from Isaiah or vice versa, or both have borrowed from a common source. Most scholars throw aside the latter hypothesis, because it seems quite unlikely that the two writers would agree so exactly in both extent and arrangement of their borrowing from an original common source. Scholars today very generally agree that these four chapters were originally written or compiled by the author of the Book of Kings and at a later time incorporated into the Book of Isaiah. The reasons for this conclusion are these: (1) Isaiah 37:38 mentions the murder of Sennacherib which took place in 681 B. C. This event probably occurred some time after the death of Isaiah. (2) The narrative reproduces expressions that are characteristic of the writer of Kings. (3) The inverted order of the chronology of events is typical of the writer of Kings. (Notice that chapters 38 and 39 are chronologically earlier than 36 and 37.) (4) In certain places where the two writings differ, Kings offers fuller details, of which the text of Isaiah seems to be an abridgment. (Compare Isa. 36:2, 3, 17, 18 with 2 Kings 18:17, 18, 32; Isa. 38:4, 7, 8 with 2 Kings 20:3, 9-11.)

On the other hand, the Catholic scholars, Knabenbauer and Schloegl, maintain that the text in this section of Isaiah was written by the prophet, and later incorporated in his book by the writer of Kings. The great German Protestant scholar, Franz Delitzsch, also defended Isaiah's authorship of these chapters, justifying his position by an appeal to 2 Chronicles 26:22, which represents Isaiah as Uzziah's historian.

The main differences between the text in Kings and that of Isaiah are these: (1) The account in 2 Kings 18:14-16, concerning the payment of tribute to Sennacherib, is not in Isaiah; (2) Hezekiah's song of thanksgiving in Isaiah 38:9-20 is not found in Kings; (3) the natural sequence found in 2 Kings 20:6-11 is altered in Isaiah.

Isaiah's Prophecy Against Sennacherib, King of Assyria.—;When Sennacherib came up against Jerusalem in the year 701 B. C., his envoy Rab-shakeh treated with Hezekiah's representatives, Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah, advising the surrender of Jerusalem. Rab-shakeh stood and in a loud voice so that even bystanders on the walls could hear, said in the Jewish tongue:

Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria. Thus saith the king: Let not Hezekiah beguile you, for he will not be able to deliver you; neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying:

The Lord will surely deliver us; this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king of Assyria: Make your peace with me, and come out to me; and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig-tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern; until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards. Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying: The Lord will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria? Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? Who are they among all the gods of these countries, that have delivered their country out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? (36:13-20)

Hezekiah's messengers returned to him with the words of Rab-shakeh. The King, in great mourning, sent messengers to Isaiah saying:

It may be the Lord thy God will hear the words of Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to taunt the living God, and will rebuke the words which the Lord thy God hath heard; wherefore make prayer for the remnant that is left. (37:4)

Isaiah replied in his characteristic manner, telling Hezekiah not to fear, because the king of Assyria would return home, there to be slain;

Thus shall ye say to your master: Thus saith the Lord: Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed Me. Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return unto his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land. (37:6, 7)

When Rab-shakeh returned to Sennacherib, he found that king fighting against Libnah instead of Lachish. Then the king heard that Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia, was coming against him. This news prompted Sennacherib again to forcefully demand of Hezekiah that Jerusalem be surrendered. When the frightened Hezekiah received the king of Assyria's letter, he went into the house of the Lord and spread it before God and prayed:

O Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, that sittest upon the cherubim, Thou art the God, even Thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; Thou hast made heaven and earth. Incline Thine ear, O Lord, and hear; open Thine eyes, O Lord, and see; and hear all the words of Sennacherib, who hath sent to taunt the living God. Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the countries, and their land, and have cast their gods into the fire; for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone; therefore they have destroyed them. Now therefore, O Lord our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that Thou art the Lord, even Thou only. (37:16-20)

We have to admire the faith of Hezekiah and his trust in God.

Isaiah sent word to the king that inasmuch as he had prayed, the Lord would deliver Jerusalem and the Assyrian host would not harm it. Included in the answer is a magnificent taunt-song on Sennacherib which everyone is advised to read. (See 37:22-29)

The narrative points out how Isaiah's predictions against the Assyrians were literally fulfilled:

And the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand; and when men arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went, and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sarezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. (37:36-38)

The Sickness of Hezekiah and His Miraculous Recovery.—;We now come to the second episode of this division in which Isaiah took a prominent role. (Chapters 38 and 39) This episode, as before mentioned, is supposed by some to have taken place many years before Sennacherib's advance against Jerusalem. E. J. Kissane, by combining the data contained in 2 Kings 18:2 and Isaiah 38:5, assigns the episode to the fourteenth year of Hezekiah's reign, which would be about 714 B. C. [^2] He then changes 36:1 to read "twenty-sixth (?) year of king Hezekiah." [^3]

According to the narrative, Hezekiah became very ill, and Isaiah told him to set his house in order, because he was going to die. (38:1) The king then prayed earnestly to the Lord:

'Remember now, O Lord, I beseech Thee, how I have walked before Thee in truth and with a whole heart, and have done that which is good in Thy sight.' And Hezekiah wept sore. (38:3)

There is a valuable lesson to be learned from this prayer: The reader will notice that Hezekiah could remind the Lord of his good life, "I have walked before Thee in truth and with a whole heart," before asking His favor. Too often, men ask God for help when their lives do not merit it.

In response to Hezekiah's prayer the Lord sent Isaiah to give him good news:

Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father: 'I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears; behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city. And this shall be the sign unto thee from the Lord, that the Lord will do this thing that He hath spoken: behold, I will cause the shadow of the dial, which is gone down on the sun-dial of Ahaz, to return backward ten degrees.' So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down. (38:4-8)

Again the Lord rewarded the king for his faith and good works through the instrumentality of the great Isaiah. When Hezekiah recovered, he wrote the hymn of thanksgiving recorded in 38:10-20.

This division ends with the narration of an incident involving Isaiah, Hezekiah, and envoys from Merodach-baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon. The envoys from Babylon came to congratulate Hezekiah upon his recovery. Very foolishly the king showed them all his treasures and "all his dominion." Isaiah came to him and learned all that he had done. The great prophet-statesman then prophesied to the monarch:

Hear the word of the Lord of hosts: Behold, the days come, that all that is in thy house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith the Lord. And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be officers in the palace of the king of Babylon. (39:5-7)

Isaiah taught the king the value of a little humility and common sense. Hezekiah's inexcusable blunder was bound to excite the desire of Babylonia to obtain Jerusalem.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A twofold postulate is made to the effect that a prophet always spoke out of a definite historical situation to the present needs of the people among whom he lived; and that a definite historical situation shall be pointed out for each prophecy. The Jewish and the Christian Churches (apart from the gently hinted doubts of Ibn Ezra in the twelfth century A. D.) have until the last one hundred and fifty years unhesitatingly assigned the whole to Isaiah, the son of Amoz. Such a strong and persistent tradition cannot honestly be set aside without positive and compelling historical evidence. Such is missing. Subjective analysis of the text of Isaiah, the results of which are disputed, cannot be accounted sufficient grounds upon which to put aside the ancient tradition. Is the text of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon word for word the same as that of the King James Version? If it is, the claims made that the original on the gold plates harks back to the time of Isaiah can be denied. In other words, the Book of Mormon should be thrown out of court as a witness to the original text of Isaiah. This would be a reasonable action because every Biblical scholar knows that the Hebrew text of Isaiah upon which the King James Version mainly depends has been corrupted somewhat in the course of transmission through the centuries. If the Book of Mormon reproduced all these corruptions, there would be plain evidence that Joseph Smith did not translate from a really ancient text of Isaiah. The Second Isaiah, pp. 4, 5
[^2] The literary style of those chapters held not to be from Isaiah is very different from those which are admitted to be that prophet's. The Septuagint and other ancient versions of scripture give absolutely no hint of the multiple authorship of Isaiah. It is a most surprising fact that the Septuagint (Greek) translation of Isaiah which was made from the Hebrew about 200 B. C. does not give us the name of a single one of the ten or more "prophets" that are assumed by various critics to have contributed to Isaiah's book. "Singular ... that history should have lost all knowledge of this Isaianic series of prophets. Singular ... that it should be these prophets whose names had the common fortune of being forgotten, although in point of time they all stood nearer to the collector than the old prophet who was their model, and after whom they had formed themselves." [^10] What is the testimony of the ancient Greek, Syriac, and Latin versions of Isaiah respecting that in the Book of Mormon? These versions have also become corrupted in the course of transmission through the ages, but by the laws of chance they ought to agree in some instances with the readings of the Book of Mormon where the latter differs from the Ibid., p. 13.
[^3] The theological ideas of the non-Isaianic portions of the prophecy differ from those of Isaiah. To quote Driver again: Christ and His Apostles assigned the book to Isaiah. The New Testament quotes from thirty-two chapters of Isaiah. Many of these chapters are quoted from several times. Fourteen chapters from 1-25 are represented and eighteen chapters from 40-66; the distribution is excellent. There is not the slightest hint anywhere in the New Testament that any other prophet than Isaiah the son of Amoz was the author of the quoted passages. In fact, the emphasis is the other way. Notice that Christ quotes the prophecy in Isaiah 61:1, 2 and expressly states that it was fulfilled at that time (see Luke 4:18-21). Luke, a capable historian, writes that Christ was given "the book of the prophet Isaiah" (Luke 4:17) from which he quoted the fulfilled prophecy. Observe also that the learned and critical Paul, who quotes Isaiah so often and from so many different places (see especially Romans), knows of no equivalent to "Deutero" or "Trito" Isaiah. Biblical Commentary on the Prophecies of Isaiah, translated from third German edition, Vol. II, p. 62.
