Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Eight

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMEN OF ISRAEL (Cont'd.)

Division 7, Chapters 40-66

Isaiah's writings in this division reveal the prophet in a somewhat different mood from what we have before discovered. The prophet is at his best in chapters 40-66. There are glorious prophecies in this section to be appreciated by those who are willing to pay the price. This is a division in which the prophet is a foreteller of the future par excellence. Isaiah speaks not only of the final deliverance and redemption of his people, but of the fact that they are to be a light to the nations. He describes the incomparable power, wisdom, greatness, holiness, and majesty of God. The restoration of Israel from Babylon's power, the work of Cyrus, the liberator, the downfall of Babylon and her glory, the life, mission, and work of the Messiah, and the glory of the New Jerusalem are additional important items handled by the great prophet-statesman.

For convenience in study it is usual to divide this portion of Isaiah into three groups of almost equal length: chapters 40 to 48, chapters 49 to 55, and chapters 56-66. There is much of merit in the breakdown of individual chapters by scholars, though I shall by no means always follow their interpretations of the text.

Consolation Concerning Israel's Final Deliverance.—;Contrary to the usual belief, Isaiah 40:1-11 does not have especial reference to Israel's deliverance from the sufferings of the Babylonian Exile. Israel was compelled to suffer much long after that time, and, indeed, her sufferings are not yet complete. In these verses the prophet is referring to events that are yet to take place or that have already taken place in our age. In a word, these events are those of this dispensation, the dispensation in which the gospel has been restored, the dispensation in which Israel is to be gathered (Isa. 11:11)

and redeemed. Let us look at the text of the first five verses:

Comfort ye, comfort ye My people,

Saith your God.

Speak ye consolingly to Jerusalem,

And proclaim unto her,

That her time of service is fulfilled,

That her guilt is paid off;

That she hath received of the Lord's hand

Double for all her sins.

Hark! one calleth:

'Make ye clear in the wilderness the way of the Lord,

Make plain in the desert a highway for our God.

Every valley shall be lifted up,

And every mountain and hill shall be made low;

And the rugged shall be made level,

And the rough places a plain;

And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed,

And all flesh shall see it together;

For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.' (40:1-5)

The Gospel of Matthew refers to John the Baptist as the one spoken of in 40:3:

For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying: The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. (Matthew 3:3)

John likewise testified to the priests and Levites of his day that he was the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy:

He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias. (John 1:23; cf. Luke 3:4-6)

Many commentators either blithely pass these passages by or assert that the passage from Isaiah is used metaphorically. We believe, however, that Isaiah not only saw John's mission to prepare the way of the Lord in mortality, but also saw that the Baptist's mission was to extend to this dispensation. It will be remembered that the resurrected John came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on May 15, 1829, and conferred the keys of the Aaronic priesthood upon them. In this way he went "before" the Lord in this age of the gospel. (D. & C. 13) It will be remembered also that Jesus spoke of John the Baptist and identified him as the messenger referred to in Malachi 3:1:

For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. (Matt. 11:10)

When the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on the evening of September 21, 1823, he quoted the context of the passage referred to by the Savior. It is doubtful that the heavenly messenger would have done this unless it had reference to events of this dispensation, an explanation of which would be useful to the young prophet. Therefore, when the Savior identified John as the "messenger" of Malachi 3:1, it was equivalent to saying that John's mission extended to our own age. And most assuredly the reference to the Lord's coming in Malachi 3:1-3 can have reference only to His future Advent. No one had difficulty in "abiding" His coming in mortality, neither did He act as refiner's fire and fuller's soap at that time. But John has come, thus preceding his Master, who will eventually "purify the sons of Levi" as Malachi predicted.

Isaiah also refers to great cosmic disturbances which are apparently to take place about the time that the "glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh . . . see it together." This is in accordance with modern revelation (D. & C. 29:14; 109:74; 133:19-24, 44), which again argues for the fact that Isaiah was speaking of the latter days.

Verses 6-8 of Isaiah 40 testify that man is as grass, as contrasted with God's power. His word will stand forever and cannot be frustrated by the puny efforts of man to the contrary.

In verses 9-11 the one (the Church?) who imparts good tidings to Zion is told to get into the high mountain and proclaim the coming of our Lord as the shepherd of His people:

O thou that tellest good tidings to Zion,

Get thee up into the high mountain;

O thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem,

Lift up thy voice with strength;

Lift it up, be not afraid;

Say unto the cities of Judah:

'Behold your God!'

Behold, the Lord God will come as a Mighty One,

And His arm will rule for Him,

Behold, His reward is with Him,

And His recompense before Him.

Even as a shepherd that feedeth his flock,

That gathereth the lambs in his arm,

And carrieth them in his bosom,

And gently leadeth those that give suck. (40:9-11)

Latter-day Saints claim that this passage has been fulfilled, at least in part, by our people since the organization of the Church. Part of our mission is to proclaim the imminent advent of our Lord and prepare His people for that glorious appearance. The message will eventually be sent to the Jews in accordance with the spirit expressed by Isaiah.

The remainder of the chapter (40:12-31) is devoted to a beautiful poem extolling the omnipotence, wisdom, majesty, and glory of God. The last few verses are devoted to showing a doubtful Israel that God can accomplish the promised restoration:

Why sayest thou, O Jacob,

And speakest, O Israel:

'My way is hid from the Lord,

And my right is passed over from my God'?

Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard

That the everlasting God, the Lord,

The Creator of the ends of the earth,

Fainteth not, neither is weary?

His discernment is past searching out.

He giveth power to the faint;

And to him that hath no might He increaseth strength.

Even the youths shall faint and be weary,

And the young men shall utterly fall;

But they that wait for the Lord shall renew their strength;

They shall mount up with wings as eagles;

They shall run, and not be weary;

They shall walk, and not faint. (40:27-31)

The Lord's Controversy With the Pagan Gods.—;Chapter 41 is a challenge of the Lord to the nations, in which He proposes to demonstrate His right to be sole deity and, therefore, His unquestioned superiority over dumb idols. The Lord, not unmindful of the mission of His "servant," Israel, to the nations, defends its cause and shows His love for His people. Here is the Lord's call to the nations to assemble and try the case:

Keep silence before Me, O islands,

And let the peoples renew their strength;

Let them draw near, then let them speak;

Let us come near together to judgment. (41:1)

The Lord then inquires, "Who hath raised up one from the east at whose steps victory attendeth?" The name of the person is not given, but most commentators assume that Cyrus, the great Persian conquerer of Babylon, is the one Isaiah has in mind. (See 44:28; 45:1) There has been a dispute on this point even from ancient times. St. Jerome identified him with the Messiah, and the Targums (ancient Aramaic translations) with Abraham. Verse 25 also comes into the question, because the Lord speaks of raising up "one from the north." This person is usually assumed to be the same one as in verse 2. The writer is frank to say that he has not, even after much study and meditation, been able to determine the person meant. In any event, the Lord makes known that He is the one who has raised up the individual referred to:

Who hath raised up one from the east

At whose steps victory attendeth?

He giveth nations before him,

And maketh him rule over kings;

His sword maketh them as the dust,

His bow as the driven stubble.

He pursueth them, and passeth on safely;

The way with his feet he treadeth not.

Who hath wrought and done it?

He that called the generations from the beginning.

I, the Lord, who am the first,

And with the last am the same. (41:2-4)

Verses 6 and 7 reveal the nations drawing near, but apparently encouraging each other to continue in their usual course of action. Then the Lord upholds and defends His people Israel. He speaks of them for the first time as His "servant," a title well suited to Abraham, the father of the faithful, who came from the "ends of the earth" in response course of action. Then the Lord upholds and defends His people:

But thou, Israel, My servant,

Jacob whom I have chosen,

The seed of Abraham My friend;

Thou whom I have taken hold of from the ends of the earth,

And called thee from the uttermost parts thereof,

And said unto thee: 'Thou art My servant,

I have chosen thee and not cast thee away';

Fear thou not, for I am with thee,

Be not dismayed, for I am thy God;

I strengthen thee, yea, I help thee;

Yea, I uphold thee with My victorious right hand.

Behold, all they that were incensed against thee

Shall be ashamed and confounded;

They that strove with thee

Shall be as nothing, and shall perish.

Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them,

Even them that contended with thee;

They that warred against thee

Shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.

For I the Lord thy God

Hold thy right hand,

Who say unto thee: 'Fear not, I help thee.'

Fear not, thou worm Jacob,

And ye men of Israel;

I help thee, saith the Lord,

And thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

Behold, I make thee a new threshing-sledge

Having sharp teeth;

Thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small,

And shalt make the hills as chaff.

Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away,

And the whirlwind shall scatter them;

And thou shalt rejoice in the Lord,

Thou shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel. (41:8-16)

When the Lord has finished stating His own case (verse 20), He challenges the pagan gods to give a suitable answer. Which of them can predict their purposes in advance and bring it to pass? As for the Lord, He is predicting in advance the appearance of someone from the north who will beat down and subdue all rulers who come up against him. The future will verify the truth of His prediction and show that He alone is God. The pagan gods are "nothing," and their words are "things of nought," "vanity and nought," "wind and confusion."

Produce your cause, saith the Lord;

Bring forth your reasons, saith the King of Jacob.

Let them bring them forth, and declare unto us

The things that shall happen;

The former things, what are they?

Declare ye, that we may consider,

And know the end of them;

Or announce to us things to come.

Declare the things that are to come hereafter,

That we may know that ye are gods;

Yea, do good, or do evil,

That we may be dismayed, and behold it together.

Behold, ye are nothing,

And your work a thing of nought;

An abomination is he that chooseth you.

I have roused up one from the north, and he is come,

From the rising of the sun one that calleth upon My name;

And he shall come upon rulers as upon mortar,

And as the potter treadeth clay.

Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know?

And beforetime, that we may say that he is right?

Yea, there is none that declareth,

Yea, there is none that announceth,

Yea, there is none that heareth your utterances.

A harbinger unto Zion will I give: 'Behold, behold them',

And to Jerusalem a messenger of good tidings.

And I look, but there is no man;

Even among them, but there is no counsellor,

That, when I ask of them, can give an answer.

Behold, all of them,

Their works are vanity and nought;

Their molten images are wind and confusion. (41:21-29)

Christ, The Servant of the Lord: His Mission and Work of Redemption.—;In Chapter 41:8 we find Israel referred to as "My Servant"; in Chapter 42:1-9 we have one of the four famous "Servant Songs" (the others are found in 49:1-13; 50:4-11; 52:13-53:12) in which the allusion to "My servant" is assuredly to an idealized figure, not to Israel. The Christian tradition is most certainly right in seeing the fulfillment of these prophecies in Jesus, the Christ. Isaiah did indeed proclaim in beautiful poetry the gentle nature, mission, call, and redeeming power of our Lord. In this first of the Servant Songs, Isaiah proclaims that the Spirit will be with Him, that He will bring justice and righteousness to the nations, that meekness and peace are the means He will use, not violence, and that He will not fail in His mission or be crushed. Latter-day Saints believe that verse 7 is an allusion to the Lord's saving power beyond the grave. He will, through His matchless power, "bring out the prisoners from the dungeon, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house." The gospel will be preached to the spirits of men who have passed from this life, and thus they will be given an opportunity to release themselves from spiritual darkness and the power of the Adversary. The "Servant" is none other than man's Savior and Deliverer. Here is the Song:

Behold My servant, whom I uphold;

Mine elect, in whom My soul delighteth;

I have put My spirit upon him,

He shall make the right to go forth to the nations.

He shall not cry, nor lift up,

Nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.

A brusied reed shall he not break,

And the dimly burning wick shall he not quench;

He shall make the right to go forth according to the truth.

He shall not fail nor be crushed,

Till he have set the right in the earth;

And the isles shall wait for his teaching.

Thus saith God the Lord,

He that created the heavens, and stretched them forth,

He that spread forth the earth and that which cometh out of it,

He that giveth breath unto the people upon it,

And spirit to them that walk therein:

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness,

And have taken hold of thy hand,

And kept thee, and set thee for a covenant of the people,

For a light of the nations;

To open the blind eyes,

To bring out the prisoners from the dungeon,

And them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house.

I am the Lord, that is My name;

And My glory will I not give to another,

Neither My praise to graven images.

Behold, the former things are come to pass,

And new things do I declare;

Before they spring forth I tell you of them. (42:1-9)

There follows a new song of praise to the Lord who will prove Himself mighty against His enemies, who will make darkness light in redeeming Israel, and make ashamed those who trusted in graven and molten images. (42:10-17)

The remainder of Chapter 42 (verses 18-25) is devoted to the Lord's reproach of His people. The Lord's servant—;here Israel is meant once more—;is deaf and blind, deaf to the words which it should carry out, and blind to the works of God which it should proclaim (Orelli). Because of its spiritual insensibility, its blindness and hardness, Israel has failed in its world mission. Despite the fact that the Lord gave "Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers," (vs. 24) His people did not profit or become wiser by their sufferings:

Therefore He poured upon him the fury of His anger,

And the strength of battle;

And it set him on fire round about, yet he knew not,

And it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. (42:25)

The Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.—;Despite the Lord's condemnation of Israel, the scene now changes. The Prophet Isaiah Portrays Israel as still the beloved of God and shows that a brilliant future still awaits His people. Chapter 43:1 gives a picture of Israel already redeemed. The verbs are "prophetic perfects," expressing a future action as already accomplished:

But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob,

And He that formed thee, O Israel:

Fear not, for I have redeemed thee,

I have called thee by thy name, thou art Mine. (43:1)

Then in metaphorical language the Lord shows how the course of history will go in the redemption of His people. He will be with them through all dangerous situations and conditions; Israel will be ransomed and gathered, even at the cost of rich and powerful nations, from the four parts of the earth:

When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee,

And through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee;

When thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned,

Neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

For I am the Lord thy God,

The Holy One of Israel, thy Savior;

I have given Egypt as thy ransom,

Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

Since thou art precious in My sight, and honourable,

And I have loved thee;

Therefore will I give men for thee,

And peoples for thy life.

Fear not, for I am with thee;

I will bring thy seed from the east;

And gather thee from the west;

I will say to the north: 'Give up'

And to the south: 'Keep not back,

Bring My sons from far,

And My daughters from the end of the earth;

Every one that is called by My name,

And whom I have created for My glory,

I have formed him, yea, I have made him.'

The blind people that have eyes shall be brought forth,

And the deaf that have ears. (43:2-8)

The nations are again assembled for the trial. (Cf.41:1) Are there any among them that dare predict Israel's redemption? Can any of them foretell events and bring them to pass like the Lord? He alone can do it, prophecy is His evidence; beside Him there is no Savior:

All the nations are gathered together,

And the peoples are assembled;

Who among them can declare this,

And announce to us former things?

Let them bring their witnesses, that they may be justified;

And let them hear, and say: 'It is truth.'

Ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord,

And My servant whom I have chosen;

That ye may know and believe Me, and understand

That I am He;

Before Me there was no God formed

Neither shall any be after Me.

I, even I, am the Lord;

And beside Me there is no savior.

I have declared, and I have saved,

And I have announced,

And there was no strange god among you;

Therefore ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord, and I am God.

Yea, since the day was I am He,

And there is none that can deliver out of My hand;

I will work, and who can reverse it? (43:9-13)

The Lord now announces the downfall of Babylon. Because of Israel, God's chosen people, the Lord has given command to bring about the defeat and fall of the army and power of the great foe. God will overthrow Babylon even as Pharaoh and his hosts were quenched as a wick in the waters of the Red Sea. (43:14-17) The new Exodus of God's people will far surpass the wonders of the old. (43:18-21)

The Lord now looks back upon the history of His people. They had done little to please Him: Prayer had been forgotten, suitable sacrifices were lacking, and they had wearied Him with their iniquities. Nevertheless, the Lord is blotting out their transgressions for His own sake. (43:22-28)

Israel to Attract the Nations.—;Following the Lord's reproach of His people, He again calls to them and assures them that He has chosen them. He will help them, pour water upon their thirsty land, and bless their descendants. The day will come when the nations will regard it as an honor to be associated with Israel and to be numbered among the Lord's people:

Yet now hear, O Jacob My servant,

And Israel, whom I have chosen;

Thus saith the Lord that made thee,

And formed thee from the womb, who will help thee:

Fear not, O Jacob My servant,

And thou, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.

For I will pour water upon the thirsty land,

And streams upon the dry ground;

I will pour My spirit upon thy seed,

And My blessing upon thine offspring;

And they shall spring up among the grass,

As willows by the watercourses.

One shall say: 'I am the Lord's';

And another shall call himself by the name of Jacob;

And another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord,

And surname himself by the name of Israel. (44:1-5)

The Impotence of Idols.—;Chapter 44:6-23 is a poem which develops the theme treated in 40:18 ff.—e futility and nothingness of idols as contrasted with the tremendous power and majesty of God. Verses 6-8 are preliminary and point out that the Lord, Israel's King and Redeemer, is the only true God; His power is attested by the prediction or planning of future events, as His people are witnesses. Beside Him there is no Rock. Then (verses 9-20) the Lord conducts the reader into a place where idols are manufactured. How stupid it is to suppose that mere men should be able with axes, hammers, planes and compasses to produce a god worthy of worship! How inconsistent it is for man to take from the same block of wood a piece with which to make a fire and another to make into a god! The idolaters seem to know nothing, neither do they understand; otherwise they would have nothing to do with idols. Israel is exhorted (verses 21-22) to remember the Lord's words about the idols; as the Lord's servants they are expected not to forget God their Deliverer and Redeemer. The poem ends with a lyric song of thanksgiving. (Vs. 23)

The Mission of Cyrus to Restore the Lord's People from the Babylonian Exile.—;Chapters 44:24-45:13 show that the Lord who creates the heavens, orders events, and tells the future, can restore His people from exile and raise up a deliverer for Israel. Cyrus the Persian is named as the person who is the Lord's shepherd and the performer of His pleasure respecting Jerusalem. Here are the first of Isaiah's words concerning him:

Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer,

And He that formed thee from the womb:

I am the Lord, that maketh all things;

That stretched forth the heavens alone;

That spread abroad the earth by Myself;

That frustrateth the tokens of the impostors,

And maketh diviners mad;

That turneth wise men backward,

And maketh their knowledge foolish;

That confirmeth the word of His servant,

And performeth the counsel of His messengers;

That saith of Jerusalem: 'She shall be inhabited';

And of the cities of Judah: 'They shall be built,

And I will raise up the waste places thereof';

That saith to the deep: 'Be dry,

And I will dry up thy rivers';

That saith of Cyrus: 'He is My shepherd,

And shall perform all My pleasure';

Even saying of Jerusalem: 'She shall be built';

And to the temple: 'Thy foundation shall be laid.'

(44:24-28)

Cyrus is spoken of in the most extravagant and unusual terms. He is the Lord's "anointed" whose duty it is to "subdue nations" and loose the "loins of kings." The Lord will go before him and give him the "hidden riches of secret places." Cyrus will be called for Israel's sake; the Lord will gird him, though the king will not have known Him. The world will realize through Cyrus that there is no god beside Him:

Thus saith the Lord to His anointed,

To Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden,

To subdue nations before him

And to loose the loins of kings;

To open the doors before him,

And that the gates may not be shut:

I will go before thee,

And make the crooked places straight;

I will break in pieces the doors of brass,

And cut in sunder the bars of iron;

And I will give thee the treasures of darkness

And hidden riches of secret places,

That thou mayest know that I am the Lord,

Who call thee by thy name, even the God of Israel.

For the sake of Jacob My servant,

And Israel Mine elect,

I have called thee by thy name,

I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known Me.

I am the Lord, and there is none else,

Beside Me there is no God;

I have girded thee, though thou hast not known Me;

That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west,

That there is none beside Me;

I am the Lord, and there is none else;

I form the light, and create darkness;

I make peace, and create evil;

I am the Lord, that doeth all these things.

Drop down, ye heavens, from above,

And let the skies pour down righteousness;

Let the earth open, that they may bring forth salvation,

And let her cause righteousness to spring up together;

I the Lord have created it.

Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker,

As a potsherd with the potsherds of the earth!

Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it: 'What makest thou?'

Or: 'Thy work, it hath no hands'?

Woe unto him that saith unto his father: 'Wherefore begettest thou?'

Or to a woman: 'Wherefore travailest thou?'

Thus saith the Lord,

The Holy One of Israel, and his Maker:

Ask Me of the things that are to come;

Concerning My sons, and concerning the work of My hands, command ye Me.

I, even I, have made the earth,

And created man upon it;

I, even My hands, have stretched out the heavens,

And all their host have I commanded.

I have roused him up in victory,

And I make level all his ways;

He shall build My city,

And he shall let Mine exiles go free,

Not for price nor reward,

Saith the Lord of hosts. (45:1-13)

Isaiah's prediction of the coming of Cyrus is one of the most striking prophecies in all scripture. Numerous commentators deny that Isaiah could foresee Cyrus so clearly as to be able to call him by name. They commonly claim, therefore, that this part of Isaiah was written by someone during the Exile and after Cyrus had given Israel help (see Chapter Seven on literary problem of Isaiah)—;in other words, after the event. Nevertheless, it is of great interest to find that the Jewish historian Josephus accepted Isaiah's words and even quotes letters from Cyrus confirming the prophet's predictions. Part of the account of Josephus is quoted herewith:

. . . he (God) stirred up the mind of Cyrus, and made him write this throughout all Asia:—;

Thus saith Cyrus the king.— [^1]nce God Almighty hath appointed me to be king of the habitable earth, I believe that he is that God which the nation of the Israelites worship; for indeed he foretold my name by the prophets, and that I should build him a house at Jerusalem, in the country of Judea.

This was known to Cyrus by his reading the book which Isaiah left behind him of prophecies; for this prophet said that God had spoken thus to him in a secret vision:—;

My will is, that Cyrus, whom I have appointed to be king over many and great nations, send back my people to their own land, and build my temple.

This was foretold by Isaiah one hundred and forty years before the temple was demolished. Accordingly, when Cyrus read this, and admired the divine power, an earnest desire and ambition seized upon him to fulfill what was so written; so he called for the most eminent Jews that were in Babylon, and said to them, that he gave them leave to go back to their own country, and to rebuild their city Jerusalem, and the temple of God, for that he would be their assistant and that he would write to the rulers and governors that were in the neighborhood of their country of Judea, that they should contribute to them gold and silver for the building of the temple, and, besides that, beasts for their sacrifices. (Antiq. XI, 1, 2)

Chapter 45:14-25 deals with Israel's triumph over the nations. Verses 14-17 emphasize that nations, formerly the oppressors of Israel, shall pay homage to God's people. The makers of idols shall be confounded and confused, but Israel shall not be ashamed or confounded "world without end."

In verses 18-25 the Lord is represented as the creator of the earth—;He created it for man to dwell in and not for chaos and confusion. The seed of Jacob seek not the Lord in vain; He will not leave His promises unfulfilled. God does not hide in darkness but is revealed through justice and righteousness. The escaped of the nations will realize that idolatrous worship is devoid of power and ability to save. All people are exhorted to turn to God their Lord and Savior. Every knee shall bow and tongue confess that in the Lord alone is victory and strength.

Only in the Lord, shall one say of Me, is victory and strength;

Even to Him shall men come in confusion,

All they that were incensed against Him.

In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel

Be justified, and shall glory. (45:24,25)

The Lord Versus Babylonian Gods.—;Chapter 46 contrasts the Lord with the impotent deities of Babylon. In the coming destruction of this great world power, her idols will be placed upon the backs of weary beasts. But Bel, the chief deity of Babylon (Jer. 50:2), and Nebo, interpreter of the gods, will be unable to help and bear up their people. Both the people and their gods will become captive. (46:1,2) On the other hand, the Lord, who has borne His people from the beginning, will continue to carry and deliver them. The worthless deities of Babylon can in no wise be compared with the God of Israel. (46:3-5)

Men with gold and silver may hire a goldsmith to fashion them a god. The god is set up in some spot, but though "one cry unto him, he cannot answer, nor save him out of his trouble." Israel is exhorted to remember this fact and stand fast. (46:6-8)

Past history shows that the Lord is the true God and there is none like Him. He who has declared "the end from the beginning, and from ancient times things that are not yet done" will call a "bird of prey from the east, the man of My counsel from a far country." In other words, the Lord who foretells the future and brings it to pass will call Cyrus to put into operation His plan, and Cyrus will accomplish it successfully. (46:9-11)

The chapter ends with a prediction of the deliverance and salvation of Zion. (46:12, 13)

A Taunt-Song On the Fall of Babylon.—;Chapter 47 is a lyric outburst, or dirge, corresponding to the ode on the king of Babylon in 14:4-21. The song is in four strophes or stanzas as follows: (1) Vss. 1-4; (2) vss. 5-7; (3) vss. 8-11; (4) vss. 12-15. Ewald, the great German Hebraist, declares that "though formed upon such models as Ezek. XXVI., XXXII, it ranks the highest poetically among all the similar voices of song which in chaps. XL-LXVI, find utterance." [^2]

Babylon is addressed as a "tender and delicate" queen, who must do the work and wear the garments of a slave; the Lord will bring retribution upon her because of her crimes. (47:1-4) She was chosen as the Lord's agent in the chastisement of Israel, but she showed no mercy upon her subjects; for this reason her crimes will be requited. (47:5-7) She now sits securely and confident, but ruin will come upon her suddenly and completely. Her sorceries and enchantments will be of no avail. (47:8-11) Babylon's counselors, astrologers, stargazers, and prognosticators will alike be unable to see the coming disaster, and will perish. There will be "none to save thee." (47:12-15).

Because of the effectiveness and beauty of this song we shall present it entire:

Come down, and sit in the dust,

O virgin daughter of Babylon,

Sit on the ground without a throne,

O daughter of the Chaldeans;

For thou shalt no more be called

Tender and delicate.

Take the millstones, and grind meal;

Remove thy veil,

Strip off the train, uncover the leg,

Pass through the rivers.

Thy nakedness shall be uncovered,

Yea, thy shame shall be seen;

I will take vengeance,

And will let no man intercede.

Our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is His name,

The Holy One of Israel.

Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness,

O daughter of the Chaldeans;

For thou shalt no more be called

The mistress of kingdoms.

I was wroth with My people,

I profaned Mine inheritance,

And gave them into thy hand;

Thou didst show them no mercy;

Upon the aged hast thou very heavily

Laid thy yoke.

And thou saidst:

'For ever shall I be mistress';

So that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart,

Neither didst remember the end thereof.

Now therefore hear this, thou that art given to pleasures,

That sittest securely,

That sayest in thy heart:

'I am, and there is none else beside me;

I shall not sit as a widow,

Neither shall I know the loss of children';

But these two things shall come to thee in a moment

In one day,

The loss of children, and widowhood;

In their full measure shall they come upon thee,

For the multitude of thy sorceries,

And the great abundance of thine enchantments.

And thou hast been secure in thy wickedness,

Thou hast said: 'None seeth me';

Thy wisdom and thy knowledge,

It hath perverted thee;

And thou hast said in thy heart:

'I am, and there is none else beside me.'

Yet shall evil come upon thee;

Thou shalt not know how to charm it away;

And calamity shall fall upon thee;

Thou shalt not be able to put it away;

And ruin shall come upon thee suddenly,

Before thou knowest.

Stand now with thine enchantments,

And with the multitude of thy sorceries,

Wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth;

If so be thou shalt be able to profit,

If so be thou mayest prevail.

Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels;

Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers,

The monthly prognosticators,

Stand up, and save thee From the things that shall come upon thee.

Behold, they shall be as stubble;

The fire shall burn them;

They shall not deliver themselves

From the power of the flame;

It shall not be a coal to warm at,

Nor a fire to sit before.

Thus shall they be unto thee

With whom thou hast labored;

They that have trafficked with thee from thy youth

Shall wander every one to his quarter;

There shall be none to save thee. (47:1-15)

The Lord Recapitulates His Message to Israel.—;Chapter 48 is in certain respects a recapitulation or summary of points touched on in chapters 40-47. The chapter is of special importance to students of the Book of Mormon because it is quoted in full in 1 Nephi 20.

Verses 1 and 2 are addressed to the religious hypocrites of Israel; these come out of the waters of baptism (cf. 1 Nephi 20:1 modern edition) and profess allegiance to the Lord, but "not in truth, nor in righteousness."

The Lord had foretold events in Israel's history long before they came to pass, lest in their hardness and obstinacy the people should claim that their idols and images had brought them to pass. (48:3-5)

Now that the people have heard the Lord's predictions and witnessed their fulfillment, they must realize that God alone foresees and rules the destinies of nations. At this time the purposes of the Lord are declared on the eve of their fulfillment, lest the people should declare that they already knew them. (48:6-8)

It is for the Lord's sake and for His praise that He has refrained from cutting Israel off. His people have been refined and tried by affliction in order that God's name should not be profaned and His glory given to another. (48:9-11)

The Lord now declares to them that He is eternal; He has created the earth and the heavens and all things obey Him. (48:12, 13)

The work and victory of Cyrus is again alluded to; the Lord will make his way prosperous. From the beginning the Lord has made the matter clear; with the crisis near at hand He has sent Isaiah with the message of deliverance:

Assemble yourselves, all ye, and hear;

Which among them hath declared these things?

He whom the Lord loveth shall perform His pleasure on Babylon,

And show His arm on the Chaldeans.

I, even I, have spoken, yea, I have called him;

I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous. (48:14-15; cf. 1 Nephi 20:14-15)

The Lord now addresses Himself again to His people as one who teaches and leads them for their own profit. If they would but hearken to Him, their peace and righteousness would be as a river, or as the waves of the sea; they would have a numerous posterity and secure immunity from destruction. These words to Israel are well worth quoting:

Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer,

The Holy One of Israel:

I am the Lord thy God,

Who teacheth thee for thy profit,

Who leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go.

Oh that thou wouldest hearken to My commandments!

Then would thy peace be as a river,

And thy righteousness as the waves of the sea;

Thy seed also would be as the sand,

And the offspring of thy body like the grains thereof;

His name would not be cut off

Nor destroyed from before Me. (48:17-19)

The Babylonian exiles are now bidden to depart from their captors with songs of praise to the Lord who has redeemed them and led them miraculously through the deserts:

Go ye forth from Babylon,

Flee ye from the Chaldeans;

With a voice of singing

Declare ye, tell this,

Utter it even to the end of the earth;

Say ye: 'The Lord hath redeemed

His servant Jacob.

And they thirsted not

When He led them through the deserts;

He caused the waters to flow

Out of the rock for them;

He cleaved the rock also,

And the waters gushed out.

There is no peace,

Saith the Lord concerning the wicked. (48:20-22)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] G.L. Robinson, The Book of Isaiah, Rev. Ed., pp. 145 f. By permission.
[^2] In this passage Abinadi refers to Christ as the "Father" in the sense that He has the attributes or "fulness" of the Father (D. & C. 93:4); the Father and Son are one God in the sense that they have harmony of purpose and common attributes. For a full discussion see exposition, "The Father and the Son," by The First Presidency and The Twelve as found in James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, Thirtieth Ed. in English, 1950, pp. 465-473.
