Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Nine

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF ISRAEL (Cont'd)

The Second Servant Song: The Mission of the Lord and Gathering of Israel.—;Chapter 49:1-13 is the second "Servant Song" of the series already mentioned. (See what is said in connection with 42:1-9.) Here the Savior (the "Servant") seems to be speaking of His mission in connection with scattered Israel. He is called by God from His mother's womb (49:1,5); he is despondent and His work seems vain (49:4); but he is charged to recover and raise up the scattered tribes of Israel. He will be a light to the Gentiles (49:6; cf. Luke 2:32) and bring salvation to the ends of the earth. He will be for a covenant of the people to make them inherit the desolate lands. (49:8) Chapter 49 is found quoted in the Book of Mormon. Because of the fact that the Book of Mormon version contains notable restorations of the text that have been long lost, I shall quote extensively from it. Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, seems to be interpreting certain parts of Chapter 49:1-13 when he says:

Wherefore, the things of which I have read are things pertaining to things both temporal and spiritual; for it appears that the house of Israel, sooner or later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations. And behold, there are many who are already lost from the knowledge of those who are at Jerusalem. Yea, the more part of all the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away. And since they have been led away, these things have been prophesied concerning them, and also concerning all those who shall hereafter be scattered and be confounded, because of the Holy One of Israel; for against him will they harden their hearts; wherefore, they shall be scattered among all nations and shall be hated of all men. (1 Nephi 22:3-5)

The "Servant Song" to which Nephi must have been alluding is given herewith in the prose of the Book of Mormon:

. . . Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out, because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Israel. Listen, O isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far: the Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me; and said unto me: Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain; surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. And now, saith the Lord—at formed me from the womb that I should be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him—ough Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. And he said: It is a light thing that thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the ends of the earth. Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to servant of rulers: Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful. Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable time have I heard thee, O isles of the sea, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee my servant for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; that thou mayest say to the prisoners: Go forth; to them that sit in darkness: Show yourselves. They shall feed in the way, and their pastures shall be in all high places. They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them; for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted. And then, O house of Israel, behold, these shall come from far; and lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; for the feet of those who are in the east shall be established; and break forth into singing, O mountains; for they shall be smitten no more; for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. (1 Nephi 21:1-13)

The Lord's People Not Forgotten By Him.—;In the remainder of the chapter (49:14-26), Zion's objections to the Lord's ways because of a lack of faith are answered. The grasp of the enemy is not too great for the Lord, who will deliver His people. Again, we quote from the Nephite version of the text, after which Nephi's explanation of certain parts of it will be presented:

But, behold, Zion hath said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me—t he will show that he hath not. For can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, O house of Israel. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me. Thy children shall make haste against thy destroyers; and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee. Lift up thine eyes round about and behold; all these gather themselves together, and they shall come to thee. And as I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on even as a bride. For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants; and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. The children whom thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the first, shall again in thine ears say: The place is too strait for me; give place to me that I may dwell. Then shalt thou say in thine heart: Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? And who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where have they been? Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people; and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their face towards the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. For shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captives delivered? But thus saith the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children. And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; they shall be drunken with their own blood as with sweet wine; and all flesh shall know that I, the Lord, am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. (1 Nephi 21:14-26)

Nephi's interpretation of the text, more especially verses 22-26, is this:

And it meaneth that the time cometh that after all the house of Israel have been scattered and confounded, that the Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land; and by them shall our seed be scattered. And after our seed is scattered the Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which shall be of great worth unto our seed; wherefore, it is likened unto their being nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and upon their shoulders. And it shall also be of worth unto the Gentiles; and not only unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Israel, unto the making known of the covenants of the Father of heaven unto Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. And I would, my brethren, that ye should know that all the kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed unless he shall make bare his arm in the eyes of the nations. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel. Wherefore, he will being them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel. And the blood of that great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall turn upon their own heads; for they shall war among themselves, and the sword of their own hands shall fall upon their own heads, and they shall be drunken with their own blood. And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord. And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and that great whore, who hath perverted the right ways of the Lord, yea, that great and abominable church, shall tumble to the dust and great shall be the fall of it. (1 Nephi 22:7-14)

With the aid of Nephi's words Chapter 49 can be fairly well understood.

The Lord Has Not Divorced Israel.—;In Chapter 50:1-3, the Lord argues vehemently— with Israel itself—at He has never cast His people away. True, because of unfaithfulness, the Lord has punished Israel and has cast them aside, but the rejection was never permanent or intended to be such. Israel was sold to its enemies and in one sense divorced, but under the Mosaic law (Deut. 24:1-4) a marriage could not be legally dissolved unless the wife received from her husband a "bill of divorcement." Therefore, the Lord argues, He can take His people back because Israel was never legally separated from Him. Moreover, the Lord never had any creditors; consequently, His rights over His own children have not been jeopardized. In ancient times children might be sold into slavery in order to provide means for the payment of a debt. The allusion to creditors is made because of this custom. Chapter 50 of Isaiah is also quoted in the Book of Mormon with a better text. For that reason I shall use it here. Verses 1-3 follow:

Yea, for thus saith the Lord: Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever? For thus saith the Lord: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement? To whom have I put thee away, or to which of my creditors have I sold you? Yea, to whom have I sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. Wherefore, when I came, there was no man; when I called, yea, there was none to answer. O house of Israel, is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem, or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make their rivers a wilderness and their fish to stink because the waters are dried up, and they die because of thirst. I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. (2 Nephi 7:1-3)

The Prophet Jacob quoted these verses and seems to refer to them and to some verses in Chapter 51 when he says:

And now, my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel—;That he has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise. Behold, my beloved brethren, I speak unto you these things that ye may rejoice, and lift up your heads forever, because of the blessings which the Lord God shall bestow upon your children. (2 Nephi 9:1-3)

The Third Servant Song: The Savior Speaks of Himself and His Work.—;In the third Servant Song (50:4-11), the Savior is represented as soliloquizing concerning Himself and His labors. God gives Him power to speak as the learned (cultivated and fluent) with Israel. His humility is manifested in that God opened His ear to let Him know what He should tell His people, and He did not rebel or turn away backward. He delivered the message as ordered. (50:4, 5)

He describes the bitter scorn and terrible treatment He will receive at the hands of His persecutors; in His patience and gentleness in the face of abuse He is sustained by God, who is near and helps Him. (50:6-9)

Sorrow and retribution await those who oppose Him and refuse to trust in Him. (50:10, 11)

The Servant Song is hereby presented in its prose form as given in the Book of Mormon:

The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season unto thee, O house of Israel. When ye are weary he waketh morning by morning. He waketh mine ear to hear as the learned. The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. I gave my back to the smiter, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair. I hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded. Therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. And the Lord is near, and he justifieth me. Who will contend with me? Let us stand together. Who is mine adversary? Let him come near me, and I will smite him with the strength of my mouth. For the Lord God will help me. And all they who shall condemn me, behold, all they shall wax old as a garment, and the moth shall eat them up. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light? Behold all ye that kindle fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire and in the sparks which ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand—;ye shall lie down in sorrow. (2 Nephi 7:4-11)

The Lord's Message of Encouragement to His People.—; The Lord now proceeds to give the righteous among His people an encouraging message. First of all, they are told to recall their illustrious ancestors, Abraham and Sarah, "the pit from whence ye are digged." Those worthies were childless, but God remembered them; similarly He will remember the promises made to His people Israel. In the latter days the Lord will comfort Zion, the remnant of His people; He will change the waste places to which they come, and there will be joy and gladness among them. Here the Lord is speaking of Israel's final gathering and not of the Babylonian exiles, as most commentators suppose. The revelation of God shall go forth to the nations and judge them. The nations will seek guidance from Him, and the righteous will be assured of His eternal favor and salvation. Though the heavens vanish and the earth wax old like a garment, the Lord's plan of deliverance will endure. The Lord's people, in whose heart He has written His law, are not to be discouraged or afraid of the reproaches and revilings of men; for the oppressors shall perish as though eaten by moths or worms. (51:1-8)

The Lord is then addressed—;who the speaker is is not clear, though it may be Israel— follows:

Awake, awake! Put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in the ancient days. Art thou not he that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? Art thou not he who hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over? Therefore, the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy and holiness shall be upon their heads; and they shall obtain gladness and joy; sorrow and mourning shall flee away. (2 Nephi 8:9-11; cf. Isa. 51:9-11)

This passage is an appeal to the Lord to show His power as He did in the days of the exodus from Egypt. Rahab is a poetical name for Egypt meaning "proud"; the dragon is also probably a symbol for either Pharaoh or Egypt. In response to God's power His people shall return in the latter days to Zion with singing and everlasting joy. (Cf. 35:10)

Israel's God assures her that it is He who comforts her; why should she be afraid of mortal men, who are like unto grass? The fury of the oppressor is nothing before God's power. Israel is the Lord's envoy, and it is His desire to establish her and restore Zion. (51:12-16)

Isaiah now calls upon Jerusalem, as if she were in a stupor because of punishments received, and with none to guide her among her children, to awake and stand:

Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury—ou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling wrung out— none to guide her among all the sons she hath brought forth; neither that taketh her by the hand, of all the sons she hath brought up. (2 Nephi 8:17, 18; cf. Isa. 51:17, 18)

Having paid the Lord's penalty for transgression, Israel will now hear the good news of her restoration.

The Lord addresses Jerusalem (representing Israel) and tells her of some events that will come to pass in her restoration, and also that He will see to it that she will no longer have to drink the cup of His fury. Verses 19 and 20 deserve special comment. In the conventional translations, verse 19 begins with "These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for [or bemoan] thee?" The Book of Mormon Version shows that the text should read: "These two sons are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee—; . . ." This reading then makes sense in the light of verse 20, which refers to "thy sons." For the convenience of the reader the two verses follow:

These two sons are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee—; thy desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword— by whom shall I comfort thee? Thy sons have fainted, save these two; they lie at the head of all the streets; as a wild bull in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. (2 Nephi 8:19, 20; cf. Isa. 51:19, 20)

Who are the "two sons" mentioned in this passage? Isaiah doubtless has reference to the two great prophets who will be raised up to save the Jews from some as yet unknown enemy that will invest Jerusalem. John the Revelator saw their work in his great vision of the future and writes of it as follows:

And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein. But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand and two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth. And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. (Rev. 11:1-13)

When Isaiah has finished telling about the episode involving the "two sons," he continues to address Jerusalem as "thou afflicted, and drunken, and not with wine," that is to say, as one in a stupor because of punishment and not because of strong drink. He tells her that God will plead her cause and that she will not have to drink the cup of fury any more. Quite to the contrary, as in Jeremiah's vision (Jer. 25:15 ff.), the cup of God's wrath will pass from Jerusalem to the nations, her oppressors. Those nations that previously said, "Bow down, that we may go over," an allusion to the ancient custom of forming a footpath of prostrate prisoners of war over whose bodies the conquerors walked (cf. Josh. 10:24) —; will now feel the weight of God's power.

Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, and not with wine: Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord and thy God pleadeth the cause of his people; behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again. But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; who have said to thy soul: Bow down, that we may go over— thou hast laid thy body as the ground and as the street to them that went over. (2 Nephi 8:21-23; cf. Isa. 51:21-23)

A Call to Zion of the Latter Days.—;Chapter 52:1, 2 contains a remarkable appeal to Zion to put on festive garments and to loose herself from the bands of her neck:

Awake, awake,

Put on thy strength, O Zion;

Put on thy beautiful garments,

O Jerusalem, the holy city;

For henceforth there shall no more come into thee

The uncircumcised and the unclean.

Shake thyself from the dust;

Arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem;

Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck,

O captive daughter of Zion.

What is the meaning of this passage, and what is its importance in this generation? The prophet Joseph Smith once gave the answer in response to a question. This answer is found in D. & C. 113:7-10 as follows:

Questions by Elias Higbee: What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52nd chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion— what people had Isaiah reference to?

He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost.

What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck; 2nd verse?

We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See the 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles.

Moroni, the last great Nephite prophet, seems also to have understood Isaiah's message and in his farewell words makes an allusion to it:

And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled. (Moroni 10:31)

He indeed looked forward to our day, when God's work should no more be confounded or overthrown.

The Lord points out that His people will be redeemed without price. He mentions Israel's oppressors, Egypt and Assyria, by name and declares that Assyria distressed His people without cause. Those who rule over them howl, and the Lord's name is blasphemed. This triumph of the oppressor dishonors Him, and Israel is eventually to witness a demonstration of His power that will convince them of the fidelity of His promises:

For thus saith the Lord:

Ye were sold for nought;

And ye shall be redeemed without money.

For thus saith the Lord God:

My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there;

And the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.

Now therefore, what do I here, saith the Lord,

Seeing that My people is taken away for nought?

They that rule over them do howl, saith the Lord,

And My name continually all the day is blasphemed.

Therefore My people shall know My name;

Therefore they shall know in that day

That I, even He that spoke, behold, here I am. (52:3-6)

A message of glad tidings and deliverance is now given to Zion:

How beautiful upon the mountains

Are the feet of the messenger of good tidings,

That announceth peace, the harbinger of good tidings,

That announceth salvation;

That saith unto Zion:

'Thy God reigneth!'

Hark, thy watchmen! they lift up the voice,

Together do they sing;

For they shall see, eye to eye,

The Lord returning to Zion. (52:7, 8)

The prophet Abinadi in the Book of Mormon makes notable references to this passage. Speaking of the prophets, he says:

And these are they who have published peace, who have brought good tidings of good, who have published salvation; and said unto Zion: Thy God reigneth! And O how beautiful upon the mountains were their feet! And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that are still publishing peace! And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those who shall hereafter publish peace, yea, from this time henceforth and forever! And behold, I say unto you, this is not all. For O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that is the founder of peace, yea, even the Lord, who has redeemed his people; yea, him who has granted salvation unto his people; for were it not for the redemption which he hath made for his people, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, I say unto you, were it not for this, all mankind must have perished. (Mosiah 15:14-19)

Then, speaking of the distant future, Abinadi declares:

And now I say unto you that the time shall come that the salvation of the Lord shall be declared to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Yea, Lord, thy watchmen shall lift up their voice; with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion. (Mosiah 15:28, 29)

Abinadi definitely assigns the fulfillment of this passage to the latter days when the Lord "shall bring again Zion."

Verses 9-12 form a conclusion to what has just preceded. The waste places are urged to break into song when the Lord has redeemed His people and comforted them. All nations shall see His salvation when Israel's exiles are brought home to Zion in the latter days:

Break forth into joy, sing together,

Ye waste places of Jerusalem;

For the Lord hath comforted His people,

He hath redeemed Jerusalem.

The Lord hath made bare His holy arm

In the eyes of all the nations;

And all the ends of the earth shall see

The salvation of our God.

Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence,

Touch no unclean thing;

Go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean,

Ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.

For ye shall not go out in haste,

Neither shall ye go by flight;

For the Lord will go before you,

And the God of Israel will be your rearward.

(52:9-12; cf. Mosiah 15:30, 31; D. & C. 133:1-5)

The Fourth "Servant Song."—;The fourth and last of the "Servant Songs" appears in chapters 52:13-53:12. It is in this song that Isaiah reaches the climax of his "inspired symphony." (G.L. Robinson) The heights of Hebrew prophecy are also to be found here. The great prophet describes the mission and death of the Christ with such precision that Professor Robinson says of it:

So far as fact and accuracy of description are concerned it might well have been composed after the tragedy on Calvary. Polycarp called it "the golden passional of the Old Testament." [^1]

Some writers describe this beautiful song as being composed of five strophes of three verses each; others (cf. E. J. Kissane) declare it to consist of six strophes of four and five verses, alternately. The poem describes the Savior's future exaltation (52:13-15), His humble and lowly career (53:1-3), His suffering (vss. 4-6), His resignation, fortitude and submission (vss. 7-9), and finally, His reward and triumph through suffering (vss. 10-12). I am printing herewith the entire song in the beautiful language of the Authorized Version, set in poetic form:

Behold, my servant shall deal prudently,

He shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.

As many were astonied at thee;

His visage was so marred more than any man,

And his form more than the sons of men:

So shall he sprinkle many nations;

The kings shall shut their mouths at him:

For that which had not been told them shall they see;

And that which they had not heard shall they consider.

Who hath believed our report?

And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant,

And as a root out of dry ground:

He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him,

There is no beauty that we should desire him.

He is despised and rejected of men;

A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief:

And we hid as it were our faces from him;

He was despised, and we esteemed him not.

Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows:

Yet we did esteem him stricken,

Smitten of God, and afflicted.

But he was wounded for our transgressions,

He was bruised for our iniquities:

The chastisement of our peace was upon him;

And with his stripes we are healed.

All we like sheep have gone astray;

We have turned every one to his own way;

And the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

He was oppressed, and he was afflicted,

Yet he opened not his mouth;

He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter,

And as a sheep before her shearers is dumb,

So he opened not his mouth.

He was taken from prison and from judgment:

And who shall declare his generation?

For he was cut off out of the land of the living:

For the transgression of my people was he stricken.

And he made his grave with the wicked,

And with the rich in his death;

Because he had done no violence,

Neither was any deceit in his mouth.

Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief:

When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin,

He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,

And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied:

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many;

For he shall bear their iniquities.

Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great,

And he shall divide the spoil with the strong;

Because he hath poured out his soul unto death:

And he was numbered with the transgressors:

And he bare the sin of many,

And made intercession for the transgressors.

(52:13-53:12)

Many scholars in our own generation cannot bring themselves to acknowledge that this great song refers to the mission and death of Christ. But our own Book of Mormon confirms the voice of tradition by proclaiming that the song does refer to our Lord. The Prophet Abinadi quotes Isaiah 53 in its entirety and then expounds it as follows:

I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people. And because he dwelleth in flesh be shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son—; the Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and Son— they are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth. [^2] And thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or the Son to the Father, being one God, suffereth temptation, and yieldeth not to the temptation, but suffereth himself to be mocked, and scourged, and cast out, and disowned by his people. And after all this, after working many mighty miracles among the children of men, he shall be led, yea, even as Isaiah said, as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. Yea, even so he shall be led, crucified, and slain, the flesh becoming subject even unto death, the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father. And thus God breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men—;having ascended into heaven, having the bowels of mercy; being filled with compassion toward the children of men; standing betwixt them and justice; having broken the bands of death, taken upon himself their iniquity and their transgressions, having redeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice. And now I say unto you, who shall declare his generation? Behold, I say unto you, that when his soul has been made an offering for sin he shall see his seed. And now what say ye? And who shall be his seed? Behold I say unto you, that whosoever has heard the words of the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied concerning the coming of the Lord—;I say unto you, that all those who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord would redeem his people, and have looked forward to that day for a remission of their sins, I say unto you, that these are his seed, or they are the heirs of the kingdom of God. For these are they whose sins he has borne; these are they for whom he has died, to redeem them from their transgressions. And now, are they not his seed? Yea, and are not the prophets, every one that has opened his mouth to prophesy, that has not fallen into transgression, I mean all the holy prophets ever since the world began? I say unto you that they are his seed. (Mosiah 15:1-13)

As far as Latter-day Saints are concerned, this passage confirms our belief that Isaiah was speaking of the Christ who was to come.

A Poem of Zion Restored.—;Isaiah now turns from his description of the mission and suffering of the Christ to give us a great poem depicting the restoration of Zion in the latter days. Our interpretation of this poem is guided by words uttered by the Savior himself when He appeared as a resurrected, glorified being to the Nephite people on this continent. In His ministry among these people, He predicted that in the latter days (modern times) His Church would be established among the faithful gentiles who would be numbered among the "remnant of Jacob" and assist in building the New Jerusalem on this land. Our Lord then spoke of the gospel being preached among the descendants of the Nephites before Him ("remnant of this people") and of the gathering of the dispersed of Israel from among all nations. Here are some of His words:

And them shall the work of the Father commence at that day, even when this gospel shall be preached among the remnant of this people. Verily I say unto you, at that day shall the work of the Father commence among all the dispersed of my people, yea, even the tribes which have been lost, which the Father hath led away out of Jerusalem. Yea, the work shall commence among all the dispersed of my people, with the Father, to prepare the way whereby they may come unto me, that they may call on the Father in my name. Yea, and then shall the work commence, with the Father, among all nations, in preparing the way whereby his people may be gathered home to the land of their inheritance. And they shall go out from all nations; and they shall not go out in haste, nor go by flight, for I will go before them, saith the Father, and I will be their rearward. (3 Nephi 21:26-29)

Then follow these significant words:

And then shall that which is written come to pass:

The Savior then quotes Isaiah 54 in its entirety. In other words, the fulfillment and setting of this beautiful poem is to be found in this dispensation. Part of it has doubtless already been fulfilled since the restoration of the gospel; the remainder will be in a time yet future.

The interpretation of the poem seems to be this: Zion is depicted as a lonely widow who is to be no more bereaved, but a mother of many children. She will be enlarged and inherit space of the Gentiles; ruined cities will again be inhabited:

Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear,

Break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail;

For more are the children of the desolate

Than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord.

Enlarge the place of thy tent,

And let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations, spare not;

Lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.

For thou shalt spread abroad on the right hand and on the left;

And thy seed shall possess the nations,

And make the desolate cities to be inhabited. (54:1-3)

No more will she be confounded or ashamed, because she will be the Lord's beloved wife:

Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed;

Neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame;

For thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth,

And shalt not remember the reproach of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.

For thy maker, thy husband,

The Lord of Hosts is his name;

And thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel—;

The God of the whole earth shall be called. (54:4, 5)

The Lord acts as a husband who invites back a divorced wife and announces to her that His anger is gone and His love has returned:

For the Lord hath called thee

As a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit,

And a wife of youth, when thou wast refused,

Saith thy God.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee,

But with great mercies will I gather thee,

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment,

But with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,

Saith the Lord thy Redeemer. (54:6-8)

Just as in the days of Noah He covenanted that water should no more cover the earth, so now He swears that Zion shall never more be cast off. Though the mountains depart and the hills be removed, His kindness shall never more depart from her:

For this, the waters of Noah unto me,

For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah

Should no more go over the earth,

So have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee.

For the mountains shall depart

And the hills be removed,

But my kindness shall not depart from thee,

Neither shall the covenant of my people be removed,

Saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.

(54:9, 10)

The Lord describes the building of Zion with precious materials. All of her children shall be taught of Him and great shall be their peace. They shall be established in righteousness and be free from fear and oppression:

O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest,

And not comforted!

Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors,

And lay thy foundations with sapphires.

And I will make thy windows of agates,

And thy gates of carbuncles,

And all thy borders of pleasant stones.

And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord;

And great shall be the peace of thy children.

In righteousness shalt thou be established;

Thou shalt be far from oppression for thou shalt not fear,

And from terror for it shall not come near thee.

Behold, they shall surely gather together against thee, not by me;

Whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. (54:11-15)

Inasmuch as the Lord created the smith who forges weapons, He can also destroy them. No weapon raised against Zion shall prosper, and the Lord will condemn every tongue that speaks against her:

Behold, I have created the smith

That bloweth the coals in the fire,

And that bringeth forth an instrument for his work;

And I have created the waster to destroy.

No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper;

And every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.

This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,

And their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.

(54:16, 17)

When the Savior finished quoting this beautiful scripture to His great Nephite audience, He made this impressive comment concerning it:

And now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah. For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles. And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake. (3 Nephi 23:1-3)

An Exhortation to Israel and Others to Receive God's Word.—;Chapters 55:1-56:8 are in the nature of a summons or exhortation for Israel of the latter days— others who may be joined to them— accept the gospel and make a covenant with God. The universal nature of the call is remarkable; to be sure, Israel is the chosen of the Lord, but the alien who joins himself to God's people shall not be cut off:

Neither let the alien,

That hath joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying:

'The Lord will surely separate me from His people';

Neither let the eunuch say:

'Behold, I am a dry tree.'

For My house shall be called

A house of prayer for all peoples.

Saith the Lord God who gathereth the dispersed of Israel:

Yet will I gather others to him, beside those of him that are gathered. (56:3, 7, 8)

The Book of Mormon teaches the same doctrine. (3 Nephi 21:11-25)

The blessings of the gospel in the latter day Zion are described under the figure of food and drink:

Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye for water,

And he that hath no money;

Come ye, buy, and eat;

Yea, come, buy wine and milk

Without money and without price.

Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread?

And your gain for that which satisfieth not?

Hearken diligently unto Me, and eat ye that which is good,

And let your soul delight itself in fatness.

(55:1, 2; cf. 2 Nepehi 9:49-51)

Those who accept the Lord's invitation will make an everlasting covenant with Him and become sharers of the "sure mercies of David":

Incline your ear, and come unto Me;

Hear, and your soul shall live;

And I will make an everlasting covenant with you,

Even the sure mercies of David.

Behold, I have given him for a witness to the peoples,

A prince and commander to the peoples.

Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not,

And a nation that knew not thee shall run unto thee;

Because of the Lord thy God,

And for the Holy One of Israel, for He hath glorified thee. (55:3-5)

The reference to David poses a problem. Who is this David, "a prince and commander to the peoples"? The reader will profit by examining 2 Samuel 7:8-16; 23:5; Psalm 18:50; 89:28-49, where the covenant the Lord made with David is referred to. But David the king transgressed, and his blessing is to be conferred on another by his name and lineage in the latter days. Of David the Prophet Joseph Smith says:

A murderer, for instance, one that sheds innocent blood, cannot have forgiveness. David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah; but he could only get it through hell: he got a promise that his soul should not be left in hell.

Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood; and the Priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage.

It seems entirely possible that Isaiah is referring to a David yet to be raised up to the people of Israel.

In order to reap the promises of the Lord, Isaiah advises his readers to seek God while He may be found and turn from their evil way; He will pardon them and show that He has power to achieve His purposes. (55:6-9) The purpose will be achieved with the restoration of Israel and the redemption of Zion. (Vss. 10-13) Chapter 56:1-8 deals with the Lord's summary of man's obligations to keep justice, do righteousness, observe the Sabbath and the like. These obligations are the same for both Israelites and aliens.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] However, the Prophet Joseph Smith quotes the passage from Isaiah in Luke 4:18, as having reference to salvation for the dead. See Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Third Edition, 1942, p. 219; also Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, Third Edition, pp. 176-177.
[^2] Professor Cheyne comments on this as follows: " 'Should I arrange all the preliminary circumstances for the restoration of my people, and stop there? . . . the expansiveness of Zion is such that nought but Omnipotence will be able to check it, and as Omnipotence has no motive for checking it, Zion has nothing to fear either in heaven or on earth." The Prophecies of Isaiah, II, 122
