Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Ten

ISAIAH, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF ISRAEL (Concluded)

A Protest Against Israel's Apostasy.—;In chapters 56:9-57:21, Isaiah records the Lord's words protesting the idolatry and apostasy of His people. This section breaks down into three parts: (1) rebuke of Israel's leaders (56:9-12); (2) rebuke of the people (57:1-13); (3) a promise to the righteous and penitent of comfort and blessing; there is no peace to the wicked (57:14-21)

In the first part, the nations under the figure of beasts are summoned to devour Israel (represented as a flock). The latter's "watchman" (false prophets) are said to be blind and without knowledge; their "dogs" (nobles) are dumb, lazy, greedy, and without the power to bark; the "shepherds" (rulers) have no understanding—ey are negligent and concerned only with their own gain, not to mention being wine bibbers.

The second part points out that the righteous among the people are allowed to perish and no one takes it to heart. The remainder of the people are spoken of as "sons of the sorceress," "the seed of the adulterer and the harlot." Israel's past infidelities are reviewed; her immoralities, pagan worship in valleys, hills, and houses, are laid bare to the reader. In spite of the fact that the Lord was the nation's true protector, the people did not trust in Him or fear Him; nevertheless, only through Him can Israel be delivered. Those who take refuge in Him shall possess the land and inherit His holy mountain.

The third and last part deals with the future. The Lord will give command that the stumbling blocks be taken out of the road of His people. The way for the penitent and humble of Israel will be opened for their return. The Lord will restrain His anger, lest the people be destroyed and His purposes be thwarted. The people of Israel were punished because of their selfishness and injustice, and were put far away because of their apostasy; but now the Lord has seen their ways and will comfort and heal them. Only the Lord's true followers will partake of His promised blessings; for the wicked there shall be no peace.

Formal Religion Versus True Fasting and Obedience.—;In the very first chapter of Isaiah we saw how in the prophet's time Israel's religion had degenerated into mere formalism and ceremonial. (Isa. 1:10-17) Rites and ceremonies were duly and correctly observed, but the inward spirit of true religion was lacking. Chapter 58 again emphasizes to the people of Israel the fact that if they are to be partakers of the Lord's blessings, they must not continue to violate His law. Their ceremonial worship does not meet His requirements. In verses 1 and 2 the Lord proclaims to His people that their sins and transgressions make their prayers of no avail. They apparently seek to know God's way and draw near to Him, but all in vain.

In response to the people's complaints that their fasting is of no avail, Isaiah replies that they violate the Sabbath by working on the fast day, and break the moral law by their strife, violence, and contention. The hollowness and falseness of their outward piety is seen in the fact that on their fastday they pursue their business as usual and "smite with the fist of wickedness." Outwardly they appear to rest, but actually avoid loss by ruthlessly driving others to their own advantage. (Vss. 3-5)

Isaiah then points out the requirements of true fasting and other genuine religious observance. If Israel will observe justice, free the oppressed, and deal kindly with the poor, her light shall break forth as the morning and she shall be happy and prosperous. Her descendants shall build the waste places, and Israel shall be called "The repairer of the breach," "The restorer of paths to dwell in."

Is not this the fast that I have chosen?

To loose the fetters of wickedness,

To undo the bands of the yoke,

And to let the oppressed go free,

And that ye break every yoke?

Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry,

And that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house?

When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him,

And that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?

Then shall thy light break forth as the morning,

And thy healing shall spring forth speedily;

And thy righteousness shall go before thee,

The glory of the Lord shall be thy rearward.

Then shalt thou call, and the Lord will answer;

Thou shalt cry, and He will say: 'Here I am.'

If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke,

The putting forth of the finger, and speaking wickedness;

And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry,

And satisfy the afflicted soul;

Then shall thy light rise in darkness,

And thy gloom be as the noonday;

And the Lord will guide thee continually,

And satisfy thy soul in drought,

And make strong thy bones;

And thou shalt be like a watered garden,

And like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places,

Thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations;

And thou shalt be called The repairer of the breach,

The restorer of paths to dwell in. (58:6-12)

In the last two verses (13, 14), the people are promised that if they truly observe the sabbath rest by turning away from their objectionable business practices, the Lord will make them to "ride upon the high places of the earth" and deliver to them the heritage of their father Jacob. In this passage Isaiah emphasizes, as does the Prophet Jeremiah (Jer. 17:20-27), the importance of proper sabbath observance in true religion.

Israel's Guilt—;The Lord's Intervention.—;In Chapter 58 we observed Isaiah explaining to Israel that her sins prevented her from obtaining the Lord's favor; he also indicated the course necessary if her pleas for deliverance were to be recognized. Chapter 59 continues the theme, but the emphasis is laid on Israel's guilt.

The chapter begins by pointing out that Israel's misery is not due to the fact that the Lord hasn't power to save, but rather because her iniquities have separated her and her God. Bloodshed, violence, injustice, and lies prevent the Lord from listening to her:

Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save,

Neither His ear heavy, that it cannot hear;

But your iniquities have separated

Between you and your God,

And your sins have hid His face from you,

That He will not hear.

For your hands are defiled with blood,

And your fingers with iniquity;

Your lips have spoken lies,

Your tongue muttereth wickedness.

None sueth in righteousness,

And none pleadeth in truth;

They trust in vanity, and speak lies,

They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. (59:1-4)

Isaiah then makes an interesting comparison in order to drive home the principle of retribution. One who eats the contents of the eggs of a venomous serpent dies; if one weaves spiders' webs, he cannot make garments worth wearing; similarly, wicked men who do acts of violence and who plot desolation and destruction can obtain in the end nothing but trouble; they shall not know peace. (59:5-8)

The prophet represents the people as confessing that their sins testify against them, that justice is far from them, that they have denied the Lord, practiced oppression, and spoken falsely. They admit that they have groped like the blind in the darkness. (59:9-15)

The Lord chastised Israel, but now He designs to intervene in her behalf because of her forlorn and helpless condition. Like a divine warrior He puts on righteousness as a coat of mail, and garments of vengeance to repay His enemies because of their deeds:

And the Lord saw it, and it displeased Him

That there was no justice;

And He saw that there was no man,

And was astonished that there was no intercessor;

Therefore His own arm brought salvation unto Him;

And His righteousness, it sustained Him;

And He put on righteousness as a coat of mail,

And a helmet of salvation upon His head,

And He put on garments of vengeance for clothing,

And was clad with zeal as a cloak.

According to their deeds, accordingly He will repay,

Fury to His adversaries, recompense to His enemies;

To the islands He will repay recompense.

So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west,

And His glory from the rising of the sun;

For distress will come in like a flood,

Which the breath of the Lord driveth. (59:15-19)

Finally, the Lord gives an assurance to His people that redemption will come to Zion, unto the righteous remnant of Jacob. This, of course, refers to Israel's redemption in the latter days, a theme of which we have found Isaiah to be so fond:

And a redeemer will come to Zion,

And unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob,

Saith the Lord.

And as for Me, this is My covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and My words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. (59:20,21)

The Glory of Zion, the New Jerusalem.—;Chapter 60 of Isaiah is one of the great highlights of the book, because it treats of the glory of God which shall rest upon the redeemed city of Zion. Latter-day Saints know that this city of Zion of which Isaiah writes so beautifully is none other than the New Jerusalem spoken of in our modern scriptures. The prophet's words cannot be fully understood without the explanations now available to our people. When the resurrected Savior appeared to the Nephites, a branch of the house of Israel, upon this continent, He explained that the day would come when the New Jerusalem would be established among their descendants:

And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob [Gen. 49:22-26]; and it shall be a New Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you. (3 Nephi 20:22)

He further explained that in the latter days the Gentiles, if faithful, should have the opportunity to join His Church, which should be established upon this land, and assist in building up the city which should be called the New Jerusalem:

But if they [the Gentiles] will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance; and they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem. And then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New Jerusalem. And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst. (3 Nephi 21:22-25)

Hundreds of years before the Savior uttered these words, one of His prophets among an earlier people upon this land spoke of the New Jerusalem that should in due time be established upon it. This prophet, whose name was Ether, spoke of this land as a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord:

And that it was the place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord. Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ, and he spake concerning a New Jerusalem upon this land. And he spake also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come—er it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of Israel. And that a New Jerusalem should be built upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph, for which things there has been a type. (Ether 13:3-6)

In more recent times the Lord instructed the Prophet Joseph Smith about the New Jerusalem in the following words:

And with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that ye may purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed unto you. And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God; And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion. And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another. And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand. And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion. singing with songs of everlasting joy. (D. & C. 45:65-71)

Notice from this quotation that the New Jerusalem is Zion. The Latter-day Saints were not able to build up the city in the early days of the Church, but the time will surely come when they are able to accomplish the Lord's will in the matter. With these explanations, we may now turn to Isaiah's prophecy with greater understanding.

First of all the prophet describes the light and glory of God which rests upon the city. This light is contrasted with the darkness which covers the earth and its peoples. The nations and kings shall profit because of Zion's deliverance:

Arise, shine, for thy light is come,

And the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth,

And gross darkness the peoples;

But upon thee the Lord will arise,

And His glory shall be seen upon thee.

And nations shall walk at thy light,

And kings at the brightness of thy rising. (60:1-3)

Israel's sons and daughters are next seen gathering from the nations of the earth, assisted by the facilities and wealth of the Gentile nations:

Lift up thine eyes round about, and see:

They all are gathered together, and come to thee;

Thy sons come from far,

And thy daughters are borne on the side.

Then thou shalt see and be radiant,

And thy heart shall throb and be enlarged;

Because the abundance of the sea shall be turned unto thee,

The wealth of the nations shall come unto thee. (60:4,5)

The caravans of the east are next represented as gathering the gold and rich spicery of that region which are to adorn and praise the house of the Lord:

The caravan of camels shall cover thee,

And of the young camels of Midian and Ephah,

All coming from Sheba;

They shall bring gold and frankincense,

And shall proclaim the praises of the Lord.

All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee,

The rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee;

They shall come up with acceptance on Mine altar,

And I will glorify My glorious house. (60:6-7)

The scattered exiles are represented by Isaiah as flying home to Zion like doves to their cotes. The ships of Tarshish bring Zion's sons from afar and their wealth with them to glorify the Lord:

Who are these that fly as a cloud,

And as the doves to their cotes?

Surely the isles shall wait for Me,

And the ships of Tarshish first,

To bring thy sons from far,

Their silver and their gold with them,

For the name of the Lord thy God,

And for the Holy One of Israel, because He hath glorified thee. (60:8,9)

Aliens and kings shall assist in building Zion's walls; her gates shall be open continually, that the wealth of nations may pour in. Those nations that refuse to serve God shall utterly perish. The glory of Lebanon, with its variety of woods, shall beautify the Lord's house. The descendants of Israel's enemies shall bend to Zion's needs; those who despised Israel shall bow down and call the city "The Zion of the Holy One of Israel":

And aliens shall built up thy walls,

And their kings shall minister unto thee;

For in My wrath I smote thee,

But in My favour have I had compassion on thee.

Thy gates also shall be open continually,

Day and night, they shall not be shut;

That men may bring unto thee the wealth of the nations,

And their kings in procession.

For that nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish;

Yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee,

The cypress, the plane-tree, and the larch together;

To beautify the place of My sanctuary,

And I will make the place of My feet glorious.

And the sons of them that afflicted thee

Shall come bending unto thee

And all they that despised thee shall bow down

At the soles of thy feet;

And they shall call thee The city of the Lord,

The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. (60:10-14)

Israel, though forsaken and hated in former times, will now come into her own and be the joy of generations. Kings will contribute to her welfare, and they shall know that their true leader is the Lord, the Mighty One of Jacob. The most precious metals shall adorn Zion. Her officers shall be just and righteous. There will be no more violence nor destruction within her borders. The light of the moon and sun will no more be needed; the Lord will be Zion's everlasting light. Israel's mourning will be at an end. All of Zion's inhabitants shall be righteous and inherit their possessions for ever. The Lord will make His people a mighty nation:

Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated

So that no man passed through thee,

I will make thee an eternal excellency,

A joy of many generations.

Thou shalt also suck the milk of the nations,

And shall suck the breast of kings;

And thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Savior,

And I, the Mighty One of Jacob, thy Redeemer.

For brass I will bring gold,

And for iron I will bring silver,

And for wood brass,

And for stones iron;

I will also make thy officers peace,

And righteousness thy magistrates.

Violence shall no more be heard in thy land,

Desolation nor destruction within thy borders;

But thou shalt call thy walls Salvation,

And thy gates Praise.

The sun shall be no more thy light by day,

Neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee;

But the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light,

And thy God thy glory.

Thy sun shall no more go down,

Neither shall thy moon withdraw itself;

For the Lord shall be thine everlasting light,

And the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

Thy people also shall be all righteous,

They shall inherit the land for ever;

The branch of My planting, the work of My hands,

Wherein I glory.

The smallest shall become a thousand,

And the least a mighty nation;

I the Lord will hasten it in its time. (60:15-22)

Isaiah's mighty vision is often read by commentators as a lovely poem, but few of them believe in its future accomplishment. But Latter-day Saints look to the day when men will declare that Isaiah proclaimed the truth. We believe in his words and proclaim their future fulfillment.

A Prophecy of Isaiah Fulfilled By Our Lord.—;Having described the future glory of Zion, the New Jerusalem, Isaiah looks through the stream of time to the mortal mission of the Messiah, the great Redeemer and Consoler of his people. It was quite natural for the great prophet to do so. The glorious vision of Zion made Isaiah contemplate on the goodness, mercy, and love of the Savior, who would bring about such a marvelous deliverance to Israel and the righteous Gentiles. In words intended not only for the Babylonian exiles, but for the righteous of Israel through the ages, Isaiah reports our Lord's gentle message:

The spirit of the Lord God is upon me;

Because the Lord hath anointed me

To bring good tidings unto the humble;

He hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted,

To proclaim liberty to the captives,

And the opening of the eyes to them that are bound;

To proclaim the year of the Lord's good pleasure,

And the day of vengeance of our God;

To comfort all that mourn. (61:1,2)

When, during His mortal life, our Lord entered the synagogue in Nazareth on the Sabbath and read this passage, He did so knowing full well that it referred to Him. The account in Luke 4:16-21 quotes Isaiah's text somewhat freely after the Septuagint translation, but we may take it for granted that the translation given above is nearer what Jesus read to His audience. At any rate, He said of the passage, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." We may be sure that Jesus interpreted the words in the noblest spiritual sense. Through Him good tidings would come to the humble throughout the earth. The Gospel or "glad tidings" would bring hope and joy to the broken-hearted and comfort all that mourn. The two phrases, "liberty to the captives," and "year of the Lord's good pleasure," are commonly understood to refer to the great jubilee year of the Hebrew people, which came every fifty years, bringing comfort and consolation to many freed from slavery or restored to the possession of their property. [^1] (Lev. 25:8-55) What that year signified to the troubled individual the coming redemption will mean for the nation.

Isaiah speaks of the eventual prosperity of the Lord's people; they will rebuild the waste places, receive the homage of aliens, and enjoy the wealth of nations. Men will recognize the men of Israel as the "priests of the Lord," "the ministers of our God." (61:3-6)

No more will Israel suffer insults and shame away from her own land. The Lord, who loves justice and hates robbery, will give them recompense and make an everlasting covenant with them. All nations shall recognize their offspring and acknowledge that God has blessed them. (61:7-9)

Chapter 61 ends with a beautiful poem in which the New Jerusalem seems to be the speaker:

I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,

My soul shall be joyful in my God;

For He hath clothed me with the garments of salvation,

He hath covered me with the robe of victory,

As a bridegroom putteth on a priestly diadem,

And as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.

For as the earth bringeth forth her growth,

And as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth;

So the Lord God will cause victory and glory

To spring forth before all the nations. (61:10,11)

The Lord's Determination Respecting His People and the City of Zion.—;In Chapter 62:1-9 the Lord (some think it is the prophet) expresses His irrevocable purpose to vindicate Zion's cause, and to see her fame and glory acknowledged among the nations. Zion, now forsaken and desolate, will be espoused to the Lord and become as dear to Him as the bride to the bridegroom. Watchmen (probably angelic beings), set upon Jerusalem's walls, are to constantly remind the Lord of His promise to make the city a praise in the earth. The Lord has sworn by His right arm that never again will enemies be permitted to consume Israel's food and drink; His own people shall partake of the fruits of their own labors and praise their God:

For Zion's sake will I not hold My peace,

And for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest,

Until her triumph go forth as brightness,

And her salvation as a torch that burneth.

And the nations shall see thy triumph,

And all kings thy glory;

And thou shalt be called by a new name,

Which the mouth of the Lord shall mark out.

Thou shalt also be a crown of beauty in the hand of the Lord,

And a royal diadem in the open hand of thy God.

Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken,

Neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate;

But thou shalt be called, My delight is in her,

And thy land, Espoused;

For the Lord delighteth in thee,

And thy land shall be espoused.

For as a young man espouseth a virgin,

So shall thy songs espouse thee;

And as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride,

So shall thy God rejoice over thee.

I have set watchmen

Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem,

They shall never hold their peace

Day nor night:

'Ye that are the Lord's remembrancers,

Take ye no rest,

And give Him no rest,

Till He establish,

And till He make Jerusalem A praise in the earth.'

The Lord hath sworn by His right hand,

And by the arm of His strength;

Surely I will no more give thy corn

To be food for thine enemies;

And strangers shall not drink thy wine,

For which thou hast labored;

But they that have garnered it shall eat it,

And praise the Lord,

And they that have gathered it shall drink it

In the courts of My sanctuary. (62:1-9)

The people of Israel are now summoned to depart out of captivity. It may be presumed that heaverly forces prepare the way before them. The Lord's people are to be called "The Holy people, the redeemed of the Lord":

Go through, go through the gates,

Clear ye the way of the people;

Cast up, cast up the highway,

Gather out the stones;

Lift up an ensign over the peoples.

Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed

Unto the end of the earth:

Say ye to the daughter of Zion:

'Behold, thy salvation cometh;

Behold, His reward is with Him,

And His recompense before Him.'

And they shall call them The holy people,

The redeemed of the Lord;

And thou shalt be called Sought out,

A city not forsaken. (62:10-12)

The Coming of the Lord to Judgment.—;Verses 1-6 of Chapter 63 present one of the most dramatic and awe-inspiring images in the Old Testament. It represents the Lord coming as a glorious conquering figure, in blood-red apparel, from the direction of Edom, here a possible general term for all lands associated with tyranny and oppression. The use of the names of Edom and Bozrah, in verse 1, has caused much discussion among scholars. The Edomites were Israel's traditional enemies, and the mention of their land in this context seems very abrupt and hard to explain. Some commentators take Edom to be a name symbolic of the enemies of Israel; others believe that since Mount Seir (Edom) represents the traditional abode of the Lord, the passage means simply that He is coming from His abode to help Israel. Section 133 of our Doctrine and Covenants makes an interesting allusion to this and other verses, but before we present its readings let us quote verses 1-6 in full from the Authorized Version:

Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat? I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me. And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.

The Doctrine and Covenants seems to make clear that the whole passage has reference to the imminent Advent of our Lord in judgment. Section 133:42, 43 reads:

O Lord, thou shalt come down to make thy name known to thine adversaries, and all nations shall tremble at thy presence—;when thou doest terrible things, things they look not for;. . .

This forceful reference to the Lord's coming is followed in verses 46-51 with very clear allusions to Isaiah 63:1-4. In the quotation which follows the words in italics indicate these allusions:

And it shall be said: Who is this that cometh down from God in heaven with dyed garments; yea, from the regions which are not known, clothed in his glorious apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? And he shall say: I am he who spake in righteousness, mighty to save. And the Lord shall be red in his apparel, and his garments like him that treadeth in the wine vat. And so great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his face in shame (cf. Isa. 24:23), and the moon shall withhold its light, and the stars shall be hurled from their places. (Cf. Isa. 13:9-12) And his voice shall be heard: I have trodden the winepress alone, and have brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me; and I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart. (D. & C. 133:46-51)

In my opinion, the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspiration does much to clarify the meaning of the passage from Isaiah. It places the time of the fulfillment of Isaiah's words as being yet in the future. The Lord's red or dyed garments are symbolical of the blood of His enemies, which is spilled when He takes righteous vengeance upon them. The figure of treading the winepress is rightfully held to describe conquest or the taking of vengeance. (Cf. Joel 3:13; Lam. 1:15) The words Edom and Bozrah may possibly have been missing in verse 1 of Isaiah's text when it was originally written; in other words, the present text may be a corrupted one.

Verse 4 of the chapter from Isaiah indicates the reason why the Lord treads down the "peoples." The time for the fulfillment of His promises to the chosen Israel is at hand, and for this it becomes necessary to overthrow its oppressors. The expression, "My year of redemption," is doubtless an allusion to the year of Jubilee, when it was customary to set free Hebrew slaves. (See Lev. 25:39, 40; Exo. 21:2 ff.; Deut. 15:12 ff.)

In the remainder of Chapter 63 (verses 7-19) the speaker seems to be exiled Israel. The Lord's goodness to His people is recalled; He rescued them from bondage and showed them love and pity. (Vss. 7-9) When they rebelled and grieved His holy spirit, the Lord became their foe and fought against them; then they remembered the miracles of the exodus and sought His aid. The spirit of the Lord gave them rest and He again led His people. (Vss. 10-14)

A Prayer of the Lord's People.—;A prayer is given for the Lord to look upon His people once more in yearning and compassion. Why does the Lord restrain Himself, now that His people are in a plight similar to that of their ancestors? Let the Lord intervene for His people's sake and strike terror into the nations. (Vss. 15-19) The prayer continues through Chapter 64. The people humbly confess their sins and shortcomings, admitting that the Lord has hidden His face from them because of their iniquities. (64:5-7) Having done this, they plead:

But now, O Lord, Thou art our Father;

We are the clay, and Thou our potter,

And we all are the work of Thy hand.

Be not wroth very sore, O Lord,

Neither remember iniquity for ever;

Behold, look, we beseech Thee, we are all Thy people.

Thy holy cities are become a wilderness,

Zion is become a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.

Our holy and our beautiful house,

Where our fathers praised Thee,

Is burned with fire;

And all our pleasant things are laid waste.

Wilt Thou refrain Thyself for these things, O Lord?

Wilt Thou hold Thy peace, and afflict us very sore?

(64:8-12)

The Lord's Answer to the People's Prayer.—;In 65:1-7, the Lord answers the petition of His people. He points out that He had given Israel access to Himself, but apparently few had sought Him out. He had spread out His hands in welcome and friendship, but the rebellious people had passed Him by "in a way that is not good." The people provoked their Lord continually, not only in their own peculiar ways, but also by adopting questionable foreign practices such as eating "swine's flesh and the broth of abominable things":

A people that provoke Me

To My face continually,

That sacrifice in gardens,

And burn incense upon bricks;

That sit among the graves,

And lodge in the vaults;

That eat swine's flesh,

And broth of abominable things is in their vessels;

That say: 'Stand by thyself,

Come not near to me, for I am holier than thou';

These are a smoke in My nose,

A fire that burneth all the day.

Behold, it is written before Me;

I will not keep silence, except I have requited,

Yea, I will requite into their bosom. (65 :3-6)

Israel's Faithful Remnant and the Apostate Factions.—; Isaiah taught consistently the doctrine that a little remnant of Israel should be saved. (1:9, 25; 4:3, 6:13; 10:19, 21; 17:5, 6; 24:13) To be sure, Israel would be delivered in the latter days, but only the righteous. Suffering and death would be the lot of the wicked. (57:20, 21) In 65:8-10 the Lord reveals that He will preserve Israel's faithful remnant in the redeemed Zion, just as the owner of an unfruitful vineyard gleans out the good clusters from his harvest:

Thus saith the Lord:

As, when wine is found in the cluster,

One saith: 'Destroy it not,

For a blessing is in it';

So will I do for My servants' sakes,

That I may not destroy all.

And will bring forth a seed out of Jacob,

And out of Judah an inheritor of My mountains;

And Mine elect shall inherit it,

And My servants shall dwell there.

And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks,

And the valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down in,

For My people that have sought Me.

The apostates who have turned from the Lord and taken over the practices of foreign cults are consigned to destruction, because they refuse to repent:

But ye that forsake the Lord,

That forget My holy mountain,

That prepare a table for Fortune,

And that offer mingled wine in full measure unto Destiny,

I will destine you to the sword,

And ye shall all bow down to the slaughter;

Because when I called, ye did not answer,

When I spoke, ye did not hear;

But ye did that which was evil in Mine eyes,

And chose that wherein I delighted not. (65:11, 12)

The fate of the righteous is then contrasted with that of the wicked. The righteous are to have food and drink in abundance; the wicked will suffer a lack of both. The righteous will rejoice and sing; the wicked will cry and wail. The apostates will leave their name as a curse unto the Lord's elect, but the faithful remnant shall be called by a new name. The righteous shall become a nation transformed; they will honor the God of truth, and their former troubles will be forgotten. (65:13-16)

The Lord then describes a redeemed Zion as a new heaven and a new earth. (Cf. Rev. 21:1-5) Sickness and suffering will probably not be as prevalent as now, for people will live out their allotted spans of life and enjoy the fruits of their own labors. No more will the enemy pre-empt Israel's property. The Lord will bless His people with revelation (vs. 24), and the world will be at peace (cf. 11:6-10):

For behold, I create new heavens

And a new earth;

And the former things shall not be remembered,

Nor come into mind.

But be ye glad and rejoice for ever

In that which I create;

For, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,

And her people a joy.

And I will rejoice in Jerusalem,

And joy in My people;

And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her,

Nor the voice of crying.

Theer shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man,

That hath not filled his days;

For the youngest shall die a hundred years old,

And the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed.

And they shall build houses, and inhabit them;

And they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

They shall not build, and another inhabit,

They shall not plant, and another eat;

For as the days of a tree shall be the days of My people,

And Mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.

They shall not labor in vain,

Nor bring forth for terror;

For they are the seed blessed of the Lord,

And their offspring with them.

And it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer,

And while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

The wolf and the lamb shall feed together,

And the lion shall eat straw like the ox,

And dust shall be the serpent's food.

They shall not hurt nor destroy

In all My holy mountain,

Saith the Lord. (65:17-25)

The Lord's Summation.—;Chapter 65 ends on a note of triumph. The Lord's work with His people brings about the redemption of Zion, and a golden era of peace ensues wherein nothing shall "hurt nor destroy" in all His domain. The final chapter of Isaiah sums up or recapitulates the Lord's advice to His people. First of all, the Lord tells of His mighty power. Though His people build temples to His name (which they do at His command for righteous purposes), that He may have a house worthy to come to upon the earth, yet they should remember that even their best work is inadequate to justly honor the God of heaven. For

Thus saith the Lord:

The heaven is My throne,

And the earth is My footstool;

Where is the house that ye may build unto Me?

And where is the place that may be My resting-place?

For all these things hath My hand made,

And so all these things came to be,

Saith the Lord. (66:1, 2a)

Nevertheless, the Almighty will deign to look upon and take notice of that man who has a contrite and humble spirit and who "trembles" at His word, that is, who displays devotion and eagerness to serve God.

But on this man will I look,

Even on him that is poor and of contrite spirit,

And trembleth at My word. (66:2b)

Following this, the Lord denounces sacrifices and unspiritual offerings made by unrighteous and unholy men who had adopted heathen rites and abominations. To be sure,

Israel had been commanded to offer sacrifice by Moses the great Law-giver, but this was not to be accompanied by orgies and religious practices foreign to God's people. It was not sacrifice as such which the Lord denounced, but rather the wicked who delighted in abominable things:

He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man;

He that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he broke a dog's neck;

He that offereth a meal-offering, as if he offered swine's blood;

He that maketh a memorial-offering of frankincense, as if he blessed an idol;

According as they have chosen their own ways,

And their soul delighteth in their abominations;

Even so I will choose their mockings,

And will bring their fears upon them;

Because when I called, none did answer;

When I spoke, they did not hear,

But they did that which was evil in Mine eyes,

And chose that in which I delighted not. (66:3, 4)

The Lord proceeds to address Zion, who is personified as the humble and contrite of all generations in Israel's history. He tells her that her brethren who hated her and cast her out "for my name's sake" now want to glorify the Lord in order that they may gaze upon her joy and good fortune. But the Lord will have none of this hypocrisy:

Hear the word of the Lord,

Ye that tremble at His word:

Your brethren that hate you, that cast you out for My name's sake, have said:

'Let the Lord be glorified,

That we may gaze upon your joy',

But they shall be ashamed.

Hark! an uproar from the city,

Hark! it cometh from the temple,

Hark! the Lord rendereth recompense to His enemies. (66:5, 6)

Zion is then personified as having travailed and brought forth a man child (figurative of a speedy increase of population). Professor Cheyne many years ago rightly observed that the "child" is the Israel of the latter days. Having brought forth, there will be nothing to stop the progress of God's people. The Lord will not leave His business unfinished. Enemies may make light of the prediction of Zion's redemption, but the Lord will fulfill His promise:

Before she travailed, she brought forth;

Before her pain came,

She was delivered of a man-child.

Who hath heard such a thing?

Who hath seen such things?

Is a land born in one day?

Is a nation brought forth at once?

For as soon as Zion travailed,

She brought forth her children.

Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth?

Saith the Lord;

Shall I that cause to bring forth shut the womb? [^2]

Saith thy God. (66:7-9)

The Lord's faithful are invited to share in and partake of the joy, glory and abundance in the redeemed Zion. The wealth of the nations will be there, and her inhabitants will be nursed, "borne upon the side and dandled upon the knees" by her erstwhile enemies:

Rejoice ye with Jerusalem,

And be glad with her, all ye that love her;

Rejoice for joy with her,

All ye that mourn for her;

That ye may suck, and be satisfied

With the breast of her consolations;

That ye may drink deeply with delight

Of the abundance of her glory.

For thus saith the Lord:

Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river,

And the wealth of the nations like an overflowing stream,

And ye shall suck thereof;

Ye shall be borne upon the side,

And shall be dandled upon the knees.

As one whom his mother comforteth,

So will I comfort you;

And ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice,

And your bones shall flourish like young grass;

And the hand of the Lord shall be known toward His servants,

And He will have indignation against His enemies. (66:10-14)

In the next passage (vss. 15-17) it seems evident to me that Isaiah, shocked at the wickedness and abominations of his own people, predicts the Lord's judgments upon them at or about the time of His terrible Second Coming in glory:

For, behold, the Lord will come in fire,

And His chariots shall be like the whirlwind;

To render His anger with fury,

And His rebuke with flames of fire.

For by fire will the Lord contend,

And by His sword with all flesh;

And the slain of the Lord shall be many.

They that sanctify themselves and purify themselves

To go unto the gardens,

Behind one in the midst,

Eating swine's flesh, and the detestable thing, and the mouse,

Shall be consumed together, saith the Lord. (66:15-17)

The prophet knows well the works and thoughts of those of his own generation who fight against God. Nevertheless, he has the satisfaction of seeing the day of Israel's gathering, cleansing and redemption, a day when there will be gathered those of all nations and tongues to see the miracles and glory wrought by the Almighty. There will be, as it were, new heavens and a new earth, in which Israel's descendants will remain safe and secure. All flesh shall worship before God and men shall see the destruction wrought upon His enemies:

For I [know] their works and their thoughts; [the time] cometh, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and shall see My glory. And I will work a sign among them, and I will send such as escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard My fame, neither have seen My glory; and they shall declare My glory among the nations. And they shall bring all your brethren out of all the nations for an offering unto the Lord, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to My holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring their offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. And of them also will I take for the priests and for the Levites, saith the Lord. For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before Me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain.

And it shall come to pass,

That from one new moon to another,

And from one sabbath to another,

Shall all flesh come to worship before Me,

Saith the Lord.

And they shall go forth, and look

Upon the carcasses of the men that have rebelled against Me;

For their worm shall not die,

Neither shall their fire be quenched;

And they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.

And it shall come to pass,

That from one new moon to another,

And from one sabbath to another,

Shall all flesh come to worship before Me

Saith the Lord. (66:18-24)

Verily we can exclaim, as did our Lord to the ancient Nephites upon this continent, "Great are the words of Isaiah." (3 Nephi 23:1)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] H. L. Willett, The Prophets of Israel, p. 96. By permission
[^2] The Boo of the Prophet Jeremiah, 1xxix-1xxxi.
