Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Eleven

JEREMIAH, PROPHET OF REBUKE AND JUDGMENT

Jeremiah and His Times.—;The name of Jeremiah is of doubtful meaning. Some writers have thought that it signifies "Jehovah hurls"; others suggest "Jehovah founds, sets, appoints." The Old Testament tells more about Jeremiah than of any other prophet. According to the superscription (1:1) of his book, Jeremiah was a son of Hilkiah, "of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin." Most authorities assume that he was a descendant of Abiathar, David's priest, whom Solomon banished to the relatively insignificant little town. When Joshua had entered Canaan, he gave to the children of Aaron, the Priest, a number of cities as an inheritance and Anathoth was one of them. (See Josh. 21:13-19) It is quite probable, therefore, that Hilkiah's priestly ancestors had lived in the town for generations. Abiathar was a descendant of Eli; Jeremiah may therefore have descended from a distinguished family of priests. (See 1 Kings 2:26, 27) Anathoth was probably located very near the present little Arab village of 'Anata. It takes over an hour to walk the distance separating it on the northeast from Jerusalem, about four miles from the capital city. The village of 'Anata is not a very prepossessing place, and one is greeted by barking dogs and a few dirty, ragged children. Anathoth was located within the confines of the territory of Benjamin. For that reason Jeremiah's forbears must have been identified with the kingdom of Israel and not with Judah, as was the prophet. It will be remembered that many years before Jeremiah's time Israel had been taken captive by the Assyrians. After 723 B.C., therefore, Jeremiah's family must have concerned itself more and more with the fortunes of the kingdom of Judah.

The superscription of the Book of Jeremiah further tells us that the prophet began his ministry in the thirteenth year of Josiah's reign, which would be about 626 B. C. Since Jeremiah was very young when called to the ministry (see Jer. 1:6, 7), we may assume that he was born about the year 645 B. C. or perhaps even a little later. We know that the prophet preached during the reigns of the last five kings of Judah, namely, Josiah, Jehoahaz (Shallum), Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah, and for a considerable time into the Captivity, perhaps until about 575 B. C. Therefore, his ministry probably extended over a period of fifty years, and the prophet must have died at about seventy years of age.

The days of Jeremiah were among the most difficult and momentous in all Jewish history. How stirring the times were in which the prophet lived— how sad—;is shown by the fact that the Lord commanded him not to marry.

Thou shalt not take thee a wife,

Neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place. (16:2)

The reason for this command is given in these words:

For thus saith the Lord concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bore them, and concerning their fathers that begot them in this land:

They shall die of grievous deaths;

They shall not be lamented, neither shall they be buried. . . (16:3, 4)

Jeremiah's life was, accordingly, to be filled with grief and sorrow. His suffering was to be even more poignant because his own brethren and kinsmen in Anathoth opposed him.

For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father,

Even they have dealt treacherously with thee,

Even they have cried aloud after thee;

Believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee. (12:6)

All of this, in addition to the rejection of his message by his countrymen, was to fill the cup of bitterness full to overflowing. Few men except the Savior Himself have experienced such abject sorrow or have felt the weight of their nation's sin as he did. We ought not to be surprised that occasionally his soul rebelled against it. One is reminded of Job when Jeremiah exclaims:

I am become a laughing-stock all the day,

Every one mocketh me.

* * *

Cursed by the day

Wherein I was born;

The day wherein my mother bore me,

Let it not be blessed. (20:7, 14)

With the exception of Josiah, all of the kings of Judah during Jeremiah's ministry were unworthy men under whom the country suffered severely. Even during the reign of an earlier king, the wicked Manasseh, the Baal cult was restored among the Jews, and there was introduced the worship of the heavenly planets in accordance with the dictates of the Assyro-Babylonian religion. Jeremiah therefore found idolatry, hill-worship, and heathen religious practices rampant among his people. Heathen idols stood in the temple (32:34), children were sacrificed to Baal-Moloch (7:31; 19:5; 32:35), and Baal was especially invoked as the usual heathen deity. The worship of the "queen of Heaven" ought also to be mentioned. (7:18; 44:19) The corruption of the nation's religious worship was, of course, accompanied by all manner of immorality and unrighteousness, against which the prophet had continually to testify. The poor were forgotten. Jeremiah was surrounded on all sides by almost total apostasy. But professional prophets there were aplenty. Says Dr. H. L. Willett:

He was surrounded by plenty of prophets, but they were the smooth, easy-going, popular, professional preachers whose words awakened no conscience, and who assured the people that the nation was safe in the protecting care of God. This was a true message in Isaiah's day, but that time was long since past, and Jerusalem was destined for captivity. Thus Jeremiah was doomed to preach an unwelcome message, while the false prophets persuaded the people that he was unpatriotic, uninspired, and pessimistic. (14:13, 14) [^1]

Jeremiah seems not to have participated directly in the religious reforms of Josiah, which were inaugurated in the eighteenth year of his reign (621 B. C.), when the "book of the Law or covenant" was found in the temple by Hilkiah the high priest. (See 2 Kings 22:8-23:25) Nevertheless, the prophet did give commandments to the people that were in accordance with the general spirit of the king's reforms. (11:1-17) When Josiah was slain at the battle of Megiddo (608 B. C.), Jeremiah composed lamentations which were written down in honor of the king. (2 Chron. 35:25)

Because of the severity of Jeremiah's prophecies, the men of Anathoth (his native town) attempted to take his life (11:18-23); for that reason the prophet settled in Jerusalem. When he predicted the temple's destruction and the city of Jerusalem with it for the sins of the people (cf. e.g., chs. 7-10), the wrath of the priests and false prophets was aroused, and he was placed in the stocks. (20:1-6) Later he was seized by false priests, prophets, and their retainers and threatened with death. (26:1-9) Only the intervention of certain other officials saved him. (26:16-19)

It is to be noticed that when Jehoiachin succeeded his father on the throne of Judah (usual chronology 597 B. C.), he was carried off to Babylon as a prisoner by Nebuchadrezzar, as had been predicted by Jeremiah. (2 Kings 24:8-17; Jer. 22:20-30) The Babylonians then appointed Zedekiah, Josiah's third son, to be king. In time, Zedekiah refused to pay tribute to Babylon, and sought to make an alliance with Egypt. (Ezek. 17:11-16; 2 Chron. 36:11-13) Jeremiah pleaded with Zedekiah and his people to keep the covenants made with Babylonia. (27:12-22) But the prophet's advice was disregarded, and about 593 B. C. (Book of Mormon chronology) the Babylonians, with Nebuchadrezzar at their head, came with a large army and besieged Jerusalem. To be sure, the Egyptian army came out to break up the siege, but the Lord assured Jeremiah that it would return to its own land and the Babylonians would proceed to destroy the Jewish capital. (37:5-8) The prophet attempted at this time to go to the land of Benjamin, but was detained, beaten, and cast into prison. (37:12-15) At his request, Zedekiah gave command that Jeremiah's prison quarters be changed from the house of Jonathan the scribe to the "court of the guard." (37:20, 21) Jeremiah continued to warn the Jews that resistance to the Babylonians was futile. As a result he was cast into a miry pit. (38:1-6) From this pit he was eventually rescued by Ebed-melech, an Ethiopian officer, with the permission of the king. (38:7-13)

As had been predicted by Jeremiah, Jerusalem was sacked and burned by the Babylonians after a two-year siege. (590 B. C.) Zedekiah's sons were put to death before his very eyes, and he was blinded and carried to Babylon. (2 Kings 25:7; Jer. 39:6, 7) Out of respect for Jeremiah and the advice given by him to King Zedekiah, the prophet was restored to freedom and given the choice either of going to Babylon with a good position or of remaining with the poorer classes of his own people who were left behind. (38:11-14; 40:1-6) He elected, as the Scripture shows, to remain with Gedaliah, one of his faithful followers and new governor of the land. In due time, the Jews murdered Gedaliah and fled into Egypt, forcing Jeremiah to come with them. (41:1-3; 43:4-7) According to ancient tradition (Tertullian, St. Jerome, Pseudo-Epiphanius, Roman Martyrology), Jeremiah was stoned to death by the Jews because he threatened them with the coming judgments of God. Rabbinical tradition has it (Seder Olam Rabba, 26) that after Nebuchadrezzar had conquered Egypt in 568 B.C., he brought Jeremiah and Baruch the scribe back to Babylonia. However, the Jewish historian Josephus gives an account to the effect that they were led back at a much earlier time. (Antiq., X, 9, 7)

Jeremiah was a very sensitive and lovable person. He was a sincere and ardent patriot, who loved his nation so much that it wrung his soul to see its destruction on the way. So great was his love that at times he seemed blind to the higher claims of justice and righteousness, and the Lord found it necessary to rebuke him.

Though Moses and Samuel stood before Me, yet My mind could not be toward this people; cast them out of My sight, and let them go forth. (15:1)

Jeremiah's timidity was such that one wonders at his rugged powers of endurance. Through much of his ministry he stood almost alone; he had relatively few followers to encourage him and spur him on to greater efforts.

The very human qualities displayed by Jeremiah make us love him, though at times we wonder how he dared speak as he did. Gentle and patient as he was, occasionally the machinations of his enemies caused him to break out in a very storm of fury. (18:21) Here, as if that were not enough, his wrath at times came up against the Lord because of the persecution he received:

Wilt Thou indeed be unto me as a deceitful brook,

As waters that fail? (15:18)

Jeremiah was a great poet. He knew the human heart to its depths, and possessed a power of remarkably terse and vivid expression. (See 4:23-25; 9:21, 22, as examples of his poetry.)

Professor L. Elliott Binns emphasizes the qualities of reality, simplicity, picturesqueness, vividness, and directness of Jeremiah's style, not to mention his use of imagery and symbolical figures. [^2]

Characteristics Of The Book Of Jeremiah.—;The Book of Jeremiah is rather complex and involved in structure, as is shown by the fact that it is much differently divided by commentators. Perhaps the reasons for this fact may be explained thus:

In the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim (604 B. C.), the Lord commanded Jeremiah to write down all of the words previously given him, in the hope that Judah would repent of her evil. Jeremiah called his scribe, Baruch, and dictated all of the words of the Lord. These were written upon one roll. We need not suppose that some of Jeremiah's utterances had not been written down before; the chances are that they were. But there is no assurance that the order of the prophecies as written down by Baruch was the same as before. Furthermore, when Baruch, at Jeremiah's solicitation, read the prophecies to the people of Jerusalem, the king heard of them and insisted on a reading. After three or four columns had been read to him, he callously took a penknife, cut the manuscript in pieces, and committed it to the flames. Jeremiah then re-dictated the words of the Lord and "added besides unto them many like words." (See Chap. 36.) How did these prophecies reach the form in which we now have them? The book seems to indicate that if the prophecies were originally written in chronological order, that order has been disturbed. It certainly has no clear systematic arrangement. There are many knotty problems concerning the text of Jeremiah that we should like to see cleared up. Apparently Jeremiah's prophecies were considerably worked over by later scribes. In the Greek translation (Septuagint) of Jeremiah there are approximately 2700 fewer words than in our Hebrew text, a clear indication of editorial revision.

We offer to the student who is reading Jeremiah for the first time the following analysis of the book:

Introduction: Chapter 1. Jeremiah's call to the ministry.

I. Chapters 2-45. Prophecies against Judah and Jerusalem.

A. Discourses uttered during the reigns of Josiah and Jehoiachim (2-20)

(1) Chapters 2-6. Sinful Judah and her future punishment and devastation.

(2) Chapters 7-10. Threat of exile despite false trust in temple; Judah's idolatry and sundry other sins.

(3) Chapters 11-13. Judah warned to obey the Lord's covenant; the people's infidelity and a symbolical representation of their exile.

(4) Chapters 14-17. Prophet's prayer for his people not acceptable even in time of drought; Jeremiah not to marry; Israel's gathering in latter days; sin of Judah; the keeping of the Sabbath.

(5) Chapters 18-20. Judah's exile and destruction depicted by symbols of pot and earthen bottle. Jeremiah arrested and placed in stocks.

B. Prophecies of various periods until Jerusalem's fall (21-39)

(1) Chapters 21-29. Punishment of the Lord to be meted out to kings of Judah, the nobles, people, and false prophets by the Chaldeans under Nebuchadrezzar. Israel's eventual redemption; the seventy years of captivity and return.

(2) Chapters 30-33. Israel and Judah to be restored in latter days; a new covenant. Jeremiah buys a field.

(3) Chapters 34,35. Prediction of Zedekiah's fate; a shameful breach of vows to servants and handmaids; the loyalty of Rechabites to their vows.

(4) Chapter 36. King Jehoiakim burns the roll of Jeremiah. The prophet re-dictates the scriptures.

(5) Chapters 37-39. Jeremiah mistreated and thrown into prison. Jerusalem captured by the Babylonians; Zedekiah's sons put to death and the king carried to Babylon; Jeremiah treated kindly by the enemy.

C. Jeremiah's prophecies and the events that take place after fall of Jerusalem. (40-45).

(1) Chapters 40,41. Jeremiah with Gedaliah at Mizpah; Gedaliah assassinated.

(2) Chapters 42,43. Jeremiah's warning to the Jews not to migrate to Egypt is unheeded.

(3) Chapter 44. Jeremiah predicts evil upon the Jews in Egypt because of their idolatry.

(4) Chapter 45. Baruch the scribe comforted by Jeremiah.

II. Chapters 46-51. Prophecies of Jeremiah against the nations.

A. Chapter 46. Against Egypt.

B. Chapter 47. Against Philistia.

C. Chapter 48. Against Moab

D. Chapter 49:1-6. Against Ammon.

E. Chapter 49:7-22. Against Edom.

F. Chapter 49:23-27. Against Damascus.

G. Chapter 49:28-33. Against Arabia.

H. Chapter 49:34-39. Against Elam.

I. Chapters 50, 51. Against Babylon

Historical Appendix.—;Chapter 52. An excerpt, mainly from 2 Kings 24:18-25:30. An account of the capture and destruction of Jerusalem during the reign of Zedekiah; the slaughter of captives; the liberation of Jechoiachin.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D.H.C., VI, 364.
[^2] See L. E. Binns, The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah, p. 14.
