Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twelve

JEREMIAH, PROPHET OF REBUKE AND JUDGMENT (Cont'd.)

Jeremiah's Call to the Ministry.—;The account of Jeremiah's call is especially interesting because it involves a doctrinal principle not mentioned in the call of any other prophet. The Lord said to the youth:

Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee,

And before thou camest forth out of the womb, I set you apart;

A prophet to the nations I appointed thee. (1:5)

This passage points to the fact that God knew Jeremiah before he came to this earth in the flesh. Even as the Gospel of John (1:1, 2) indicates that the Christ was in the presence of God before His sojourn in mortality, so the scripture quoted above implies that the intelligent spirit of Jeremiah was in God's favor before his earthly advent. In fact, the gospel teaches that the spirits of all men were known to God before the foundation of this world. (Moses 4:1-4; Abraham 3:22-28) Not only did God know Jeremiah before he was born, but He also set him apart or appointed him to be a prophet in mortality. This fact is in harmony with the Prophet Joseph Smith's statement concerning the appointment of men to the ministry in this life:

Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. [^1]

It is obvious that God does not leave His work to chance. He sees the qualifications of His servants in advance and calls them to the labors they can perform best.

When he heard his call, Jeremiah, then a young man, was astounded at the Lord's words and replied:

Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak; for I am a boy. (1:6)

The Lord was not impressed by his answer, and in that fact young people may extract a profound lesson:

Say not: I am a child;

For to whomsoever I shall send thee thou shalt go,

And whatsoever I shall command thee thou shalt speak.

Be not afraid of them;

For I am with thee to deliver thee

Saith the Lord. (1:7, 8; cf. 1 Nephi 3:7)

The Lord told Jeremiah that He had put him over nations and kingdoms

To root out and to pull down

And to destroy and to overthrow;

To build, and to plant. (1:10)

The prophet was then shown an almond tree and a boiling pot that faced northward. These symbols meant respectively that God would "watch" His word to perform it and that an evil from the north should bring judgments upon Judah for its wickedness. And "judgment" is the watchword of Jeremiah's ministry.

Jeremiah's Indictment of Judah and Prediction of Future Punishment.—;Jeremiah's whole ministry was an indictment of Judah for her sin—t that, indeed, there were no bright spots in his conception of her future. The prophet was commanded of the Lord to remind the Jews of Israel's original faithfulness to Him. Israel is represented as Jehovah's bride, a concept adopted apparently from Hosea 2:2-20. Anciently it was a common custom for Semitic peoples to look upon the god of their nation as being wedded to the land, and upon themselves as the fruit of the union. [^2] In this instance Israel's affection for the Lord is acknowledged, and the special favor in which His people were held is indicated:

Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying: Thus saith the Lord:

I remember for thee the affection of thy youth,

The love of thine espousals;

How thou wentest after Me in the wilderness,

In a land that was not sown.

Israel is the Lord's hallowed portion,

His first-fruits of the increase;

All that devour him shall be held guilty,

Evil shall come upon them,

Saith the Lord. (2:2, 3)

The Lord asks what unrighteousness the people have found in Him, and appeals to the kindness displayed to them when He brought their fathers out of Egypt into a goodly land. (2:4-7) Even the leaders of the land, including the priests whose responsibility was to teach the people, have gone astray.

The priests said not: 'Where is the Lord?'

And they that handle the law knew Me not,

And the rulers transgressed against Me;

The prophets also prophesied by Baal,

And walked after things that do not profit. (2:8)

The nation is charged with having changed its gods and with having forsaken the one true God, the fountain of living waters, for that which is foolish and unprofitable.

Hath a nation changed its gods,

Which yet are no gods:

But My people hath changed its glory

For that which doth not profit.

Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this,

And be horribly afraid, be ye exceeding amazed,

Saith the Lord.

For My people have committed two evils:

They have forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters,

And hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns,

That can hold no water. (2:11-13)

The spirit of harlotry seems to have permeated Judah, as it had her sister kingdom, Israel, over a hundred years before. The Lord makes a comparison between the two nations:

And the Lord said unto me in the days of Josiah the king: 'Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel did? she went up upon every high mountain and under every leafy tree, and there played the harlot. And I said: After she hath done all these things, she will return unto Me; but she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it. And I saw, when, forasmuch as backsliding Israel had committed adultery, I had put her away and given her a bill of divorcement, that yet treacherous Judah her sister feared not; but she also went and played the harlot; and it came to pass through the lightness of her harlotry, that the land was polluted, and she committed adultery with stones and with stocks; and yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not returned unto Me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the Lord—; (3:6-10; see also 2:20-25; 3:1-3)

Judah's unrepentant spirit, however, was to bring upon her the Lord's just vengeance. This would be accomplished by a fierce nation from afar. Death and destruction would ensue:

Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far,

O house of Israel, saith the Lord;

It is an enduring nation,

It is an ancient nation,

A nation whose language thou knowest not,

Neither understandest what they say.

Their quiver is an open sepulchre,

They are all mighty men.

And they shall eat up thy harvest, and thy bread,

They shall eat up thy sons and thy daughters,

They shall eat up thy flocks and thy herds,

They shall eat up thy vines and thy fig-trees;

They shall batter thy fortified cities,

Wherein thou trustest, with the sword. (5:15-17)

In Chapter 6 another description of the invader in all his glory and terror is given:

Thus saith the Lord:

Behold, a people cometh from the north country,

And a great nation shall be roused from the uttermost parts of the earth.

They lay hold on bow and spear,

They are cruel, and have no compassion;

Their voice is like the roaring sea,

And they ride upon horses;

Set in array, as a man for war,

Against thee, O daughter of Zion. (6:22, 23)

Thus the prophet warned his people, but all in vain.

The Lord to Remember Israel and Judah Despite Present Guilt.—;It sorrowed Jeremiah that his people were so faithless and so deaf to the pleadings of God. Nevertheless, he must have taken comfort in the fact that the Jews— Israel as well—;would, in the latter days, return as a righteous remnant and be the Lord's. The scattered sons of Israel were to return, doubtless as a result of missionary activities, "one of a city, and two of a family" to Zion, where leaders would feed them with knowledge and understanding. Jerusalem, too, is mentioned as a center of gathering. Here are the Lord's words to Jeremiah describing these great and miraculous events:

Go, and proclaim these words toward the north, and say:

Return, thou backsliding Israel,

Saith the Lord;

I will not frown upon you;

For I am merciful, saith the Lord,

I will not bear grudge for ever.

Only acknowledge thine iniquity,

That thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy God,

And hast scattered thy ways to the strangers

Under every leafy tree,

And ye have not hearkened to My voice,

Saith the Lord.

Return, O backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I am a lord unto you, and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion; and I will give you shepherds according to My heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. And it shall come to pass, when ye are multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the Lord, they shall say no more: The ark of the covenant of the Lord; neither shall it come to mind; neither shall they make mention of it; neither shall they miss it; neither shall it be made any more. At that time they shall call Jerusalem The throne of the Lord; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord, to Jerusalem; neither shall they walk any more after the stubbornness of their evil heart. In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers. (3:12-18)

The Latter-day Saints believe that part of this great prediction has been literally fulfilled in the gathering of Israel to this continent, and that the remainder is in the process of fulfillment.

Character and Good Deeds, Not the Temple, the Only Guarantee of National Salvation.—;Chapter seven is remarkable for the way in which it emphasizes character and good conduct as the key to the nation's salvation, rather than institutions and hollow worship. It seems that the Jews had a false sense of security in their temple. They had been enjoying relative peace and freedom from the interference of foreign nations. Possibly they felt that their worship and their temple gave them these blessings. But Jeremiah comes to the gate of the Lord's house and quickly disabuses them. His words show that the Jews had no vital moral or spiritual sense of the sacredness of the holy edifice. Their trust in the Temple had a purely material and worldly basis. They apparently did not understand that the Temple was a watch tower and a fortress for God's people only under conditions of righteousness. The Jews had falsely supposed it to be a rallying place in the days of their wickedness and indulgence. Jeremiah showed that under such conditions the Temple would share the fate of Shiloh and be destroyed:

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:

Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. Trust ye not in lying words, saying: 'The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, are these'. Nay, but if ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye thoroughly execute justice between a man and his neighbor; if ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt; then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever. Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit. Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and offer unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye have not known, and come and stand before Me in this house, whereupon My name is called, and say: 'We are delivered', that ye may do all these abominations? Is this house, whereupon My name is called, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, I, even I, have seen it, saith the Lord. For go ye now unto My place which was in Shiloh, where I caused My name to dwell at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of My people Israel. And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, and I spoke unto you, speaking betimes and often, but ye heard not, and I called you, but ye answered not; therefore will I do unto the house, whereupon My name is called, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. And I will cast you out of My sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim. (7:3-15)

Latter-day Saints may well take heed of Jeremiah's words. We are the only people in the world who really understand temples and their uses. But these edifices will serve us and help protect us only on conditions of righteousness. If we gratify our sins and make worship a mockery, we, too, can expect God's blessings no longer. Jeremiah was right.

Further Predictions of Evil.—;After the prophet had been told no longer to intercede for his people (7:16-20), he delivered this terrible indictment and prediction:

For the children of Judah have done that which is evil in My sight, saith the Lord; they have set their detestable things in the house whereon My name is called, to defile it. And they have built the high places of Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded not, neither came it into My mind. Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter; for they shall bury in Topheth, for lack of room. And the carcasses of this people shall be food for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shall frighten them away. Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; for the land shall be desolate. (7:30-34)

Following this Jeremiah points out that even the departed shall not escape the enemy. He will dig up the bodies of the dead and strew them upon the face of the land. In the ancient world, it should be remembered, it was considered of dreadful consequence not to have a decent burial. Thus did the prophet emphasize the terrible retribution that would befall his people. (8:1-3) In the chapters which immediately follow (8:4-10:25), Jeremiah continues to dwell upon the theme that the sequel of national sin and treachery is complete ruin and dissolution. How sadly shaken he was by the sins of his people may be gleaned from this quotation:

Oh that my head were waters,

And mine eyes a fountain of tears,

That I might weep day and night

For the slain of the daughter of my people!

(9:1 in usual verse division. Cf Mormon 6:16-22.)

Judah Warned to Obey the Lord's Covenant—;The People's Infidelity and Exile.—;Jeremiah proceeds to point out that they had violated the terms of a covenant which the Lord had made with them. There is no general agreement as to what covenant is referred to. Many persons believe the reference is to the covenant made by King Josiah and his people after the finding of the book of the Law in the Temple. (2 Kings 23:3) I personally believe it more natural to assume that the covenant referred to is the one made by Israel at the time of the Exodus. (See Deut. 27:26; Lev. 26:3, 12) Notice the language:

The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying: 'Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and say thou unto them: Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: Cursed be the man that heareth not the words of this covenant, which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, saying: Hearken to My voice, and do them, according to all which I command you; so shall ye be My people, and I will be your God; that I may establish the oath which I swore unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this day.' Then answered I, and said: 'Amen, O Lord.' (Jer. 11:1-5)

Jeremiah's warning was in vain. The Lord pointed out to him that there was a conspiracy among the Jews and that they had turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers. Their gods were as numerous as their cities, and the number of altars set up to Baal was according to the number of streets in Jerusalem. But, warned the Lord, their gods would not save them in the time of their trouble. In view of their spiritual condition the prophet was commanded not to pray for the people. Nor would the Lord hear their cries unto Him. (11:9-14)

The prophet's unfortunate experiences with the wicked of his generation lead him to contend with Jehovah and ask why it is that the wicked prosper and the land mourns:

Right wouldest Thou be, O Lord,

Were I to contend with Thee,

Yet will I reason with Thee:

Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?

Wherefore are all they secure that deal very treacherously?

Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root;

They grow, yea, they bring forth fruit;

Thou art near in their mouth,

And far from their reins.

But Thou, O Lord, knowest me,

Thou seest me, and triest my heart toward Thee;

Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter,

And prepare them for the day of slaughter.

How long shall the land mourn,

And the herbs of the whole field wither?

For the wickedness of them that dwell therein, the beasts are consumed, and the birds;

Because they said: 'He seeth not our end.'

(12:1-4)

Jeremiah's Words remind one of Job's comments under a different situation:

The just, the innocent man is a laughing stock,

* * *

The tents of robbers prosper,

And they that provoke God are secure,

In whatsoever God bringeth into their hand.

(Job 12:4, 6)

It is generally believed that Jeremiah's outburst is one of the earliest passages in the Old Testament, if not the earliest, dealing with the eternal problem of why the wicked prosper.

The Lord answers Jeremiah with a lament over His people. I regard this lament as a prediction of sad events to come rather than as a description of a holocaust already accomplished. Here are the Lord's words:

I have forsaken My house,

I have cast off My heritage;

I have given the dearly beloved of My soul

Into the hand of her enemies.

My heritage is become unto Me

As a lion in the forest;

She hath uttered her voice against Me;

Therefore have I hated her.

Is My heritage unto Me as a speckled bird of prey?

Are the birds of prey against her round about?

Come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field,

Bring them to devour.

Many shepherds have destroyed My vineyard,

They have trodden My portion under foot,

They have made My pleasant portion

A desolate wilderness.

They have made it a desolation,

It mourneth unto Me, being desolate;

The whole land is made desolate,

Because no man layeth it to heart.

Upon all the high hills in the wilderness spoilers are come;

For the sword of the Lord devoureth

From the one end of the land even to the other end of the land;

No flesh hath peace.

They have sown wheat, and have reaped thorns;

They have put themselves to pain, they profit not;

Be ye then ashamed of your increase,

Because of the fierce anger of the Lord.

(12:7-13)

Chapter 13 contains an excellent symbolical representation of the coming Exile of the Jews. The prophet is commanded to buy a linen girdle (or waist cloth) and put it on. Then comes a second command to go to the Euphrates and hide the girdle in a cleft of the rock. After a long period of time the prophet is commanded to go and recover the girdle. He does, but finds it marred and "profitable for nothing." The parable (vss. 1-7) is followed by an explanation. (Vss. 9-11) Critics have differed greatly as to the explanation of the details of the parable. The parable, so it seems to me, should not be pressed too far by logical Westerners. Its general outlines and explanation, however, seem reasonably clear. The girdle represents the whole house of Israel, including Judah. "For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto Me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith the Lord, . . ." (13:11) By reason of the iniquities of the Lord's people (in this case the Jews), they will become separated from Him. The coming Captivity into Babylon could well be represented by the hiding of the girdle near the Euphrates. The fact that the girdle was "marred" in its hiding place simply indicates that the close relationship between God and the Jews had been strained to the breaking point. "Thus saith the Lord:

After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem, even this evil people, that refuse to hear My words, that walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and are gone after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, that it be as this girdle, which is profitable for nothing." )13:9, 10) In relation to the "marring" of the girdle, it should be kept in mind that even in the Captivity the people would continue to serve other gods. (See 16:13.) A contract or compact between two parties may be easily broken if one of them does not live up to its specifications.

A Drought and Its Consequences.—;Chapters 14 and 15 deal with the discussions between Jeremiah and the Lord concerning a great drought which seems to have plagued man and beast alike. The effects of it are described in these words:

The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the droughts.

Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish,

They bow down in black unto the ground;

And the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.

And their nobles send their lads for water:

They come to the pits, and find no water;

Their vessels return empty;

They are ashamed and confounded, and cover their heads.

Because of the ground which is cracked,

For there hath been no rain in the land,

The plowmen are ashamed, they cover their heads.

Yea, the hind also in the field calveth, and forsaketh her young,

Because there is no grass.

And the wild asses stand on the high hills,

They gasp for air like jackals;

Their eyes fail, because there is no herbage. (14:1-6)

Though water is never very plentiful in Palestine even in good years, the unusually severe sufferings entailed by the drought at this time seem to have led even Jeremiah to act as mouth in a prayer for his people:

Though our iniquities testify against us,

O Lord, work Thou for Thy name's sake;

For our backslidings are many,

We have sinned against Thee.

O Thou hope of Israel,

The Savior thereof in time of trouble,

Why shouldest Thou be as a stranger in the land,

And as a wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night?

Why shouldest Thou be as a man overcome,

As a mighty man that cannot save?

Yet Thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us,

And Thy name is called upon us;

Leave us not. (14:7-9)

The Lord rejects the prayer and again requests that Jeremiah not offer a petition in behalf of the people:

Thus saith the Lord unto this people:

Even so have they loved to wander,

They have not refrained their feet;

Therefore the Lord doth not accept them,

Now will He remember their iniquity,

And punish their sins.

And the Lord said unto me: 'Pray not for this people for their good. When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt-offering and meal-offering, I will not accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.' Then said I: 'Ah, Lord God! Behold, the prophets say unto them: Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.' Then the Lord said unto me: 'The prophets prophesy lies in My name; I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I unto them; they prophesy unto you a lying vision, and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their own heart. Therefore thus saith the Lord: As for the prophets that prophesy in My name, and I sent them not, yet they say: Sword and famine shall not be in this land, by sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed; and the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they shall have none to bury them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters; for I will pour their evil upon them.' (14:10-16)

Nevertheless, the insistent prophet does pray for the people, reminding the Lord not to break His covenant with them. (14:19-22) The Almighty, nettled by his persistence, vigorously rejects the plea:

Then said the Lord unto me: 'Though Moses and Samuel stood before Me, yet My mind could not be toward this people; cast them out of My sight, and let them go forth. And it shall come to pass, when they say unto thee: Whither shall we go forth? Then thou shalt tell them: Thus saith the Lord: Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such are for captivity, to captivity. And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the Lord: the sword to slay, and the dogs to drag, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and to destroy. And I will cause them to be a horror among all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem. (15:1-4)

Jeremiah's despair knows no bounds. The Lord rejects his prayer for the people, and yet his mission to them must still be one of warning and denunciation, with all the deep hatred it was bound to arouse:

Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me

A man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth!

I have not lent, neither have men lent to me;

Yet every one of them doth curse me.

* * *

Thou, O Lord, knowest;

Remember me, and think of me, and avenge me of my persecutors;

Take me not away because of Thy long-suffering;

Know that for Thy sake I have suffered taunts.

Thy words were found, and I did eat them;

And Thy words were unto me a joy and the rejoicing of my heart;

Because Thy name was called on me,

O Lord God of hosts.

I sat not in the assembly of them that make merry, nor rejoiced;

I sat alone because of Thy hand;

For Thou hast filled me with indignation.

Why is my pain perpetual,

And my wound incurable, so that it refuseth to be healed?

Wilt Thou indeed be unto me as a deceitful brook,

As waters that fail? (15:10, 15-18)

The Lord promises His prophet that good shall attend him and that even his enemies shall yet make supplication to him. Though the people fight him, they shall not prevail; the Lord will save him and redeem him out of the hands of the wicked.

The Lord said: 'Verily, I will release thee for good; verily I will cause the enemy to make supplication unto thee in the time of evil and in the time of affliction. Can iron break iron from the north and brass? Thy substance and thy treasures will I give for a spoil without price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders. And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou knowest not; for a fire is kindled in My nostril, which shall burn upon you.'

* * *

Therefore, thus saith the Lord:

If thou return, and I bring thee back,

Thou shalt stand before Me;

And if thou bring forth the precious out of the vile,

Thou shalt be as My mouth;

Let them return unto thee,

But thou shalt not return unto them.

And I will make thee unto this people a fortified brazen wall;

And they shall fight against thee,

But they shall not prevail against thee;

For I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee,

Saith the Lord.

And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked,

And I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.

(15:11-14, 19-21)

A Glorious Promise of Israel's Gathering.— [^3]udents of the prophets are bound to notice how often they revert to the theme of Israel's eventual gathering and redemption. In the midst of a context depicting the wickedness, punishment, and dispersion of the Jews, Jeremiah suddenly alludes to Israel's miraculous gathering in a future age. So great will God's power be manifested for Israel's recovery that the miracle of Israel's Exodus from Egypt will be forgotten. The people of Israel who have been scattered throughout the earth will be gathered home by these "fishers" and "hunters" who will search them out. Latter-day Saints believe these "fishers" and "hunters" are none other than the Lord's missionaries, set apart to help recover the "remnant of His people." (See Isaiah 11:11.) Let us read Jeremiah's wonderful prediction:

Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said: 'As the Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt,' but: 'As the Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the countries whither He had driven them'; and I will bring them back into their land that I gave unto their fathers. Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and afterward I will send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the clefts of the rocks. (16:14-16)

Latter-day Saints decry the extreme views of critics who believe that this passage has reference to the inhabitants of Judah who have somehow escaped the wrath of the enemy. The fishers are not going to "net" the inhabitants, neither are the hunters to "track" down the escaped dwellers of Judah as common criminals would be apprehended. To the contrary. The prophet is using the term "fishers" in much the sense that our Lord used it when He told Simon and Andrew to come after Him and He would make them "fishers of men." (Mark 1:17) The term "hunters" is used in practically the same way.

The reader will notice the parallel passage in Jer. 23:7, 8, which is considered by critics to be the more nearly original of the two. In fact, verses 14 and 15 of Jer. 16 are often referred to as being out of place. With our knowledge of the fact that they have reference to the gathering of Israel as part of the Lord's program in this age, we can avoid misinterpreting verse 16 as do the critics.

In Chapter 17 Jeremiah continues to belabor Judah for her sins. We may notice verse 5, which strikes at the very heart of Judah's sins. Here it is:

Thus saith the Lord:

Cursed is the man that trusteth in man,

And maketh flesh his arm,

And whose heart departeth from the Lord.

The prophet was aware that unless the hearts of men are right, there can be no sincere worship of God. The Jews carried on a form of worship, but they had no deep-seated faith or trust in the Lord.

It is interesting to notice that Nephi of Book of Mormon fame seems to have had access to the above quotation on the Brass Plates from Jeremiah. In a psalm which he writes—e only one in the Book of Mormon—;he exclaims:

O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever.

I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh.

Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm. (2 Nephi 4:34)

Jeremiah Gives a Charge Concerning the Sabbath.—;The Book of Jeremiah seems to be the first of the prophetic books to give a specific charge to observe the Sabbath. (17:21-27) Living as we do in an age when the spirit of Sabbath observance is so flagrantly violated, it may be well for us to observe the remarkable importance attached by Jeremiah to keeping this day holy. Not only did the prophet command the people to hallow the day and not do any work therein, but he went so far as to promise that the city of Jerusalem would remain or be inhabited forever:

Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates; thus saith the Lord: Take heed for the sake of your souls, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem; neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work; but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers; but they hearkened not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction. And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto Me, saith the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but to hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein; then shall there enter in by the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city shall be inhabited forever. And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the places round about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the Lowland, and from the mountains, and from the South, bringing burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, and meal-offerings, and frankincense, and bringing sacrifices of thanksgiving, unto the house of the Lord. But if ye will not hearken unto Me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden and enter in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. (17:20-27)

This teaching of Jeremiah's—;I see no reason to deny it to him as some critics have done—;gives a strong indication of how important the Lord considers Sabbath observance to be. (Cf. D. & C. 59:9-24) Not only does one have a good opportunity on the Sabbath to meditate on God and His goodness, but also to worship Him and rest both mentally and physically. Moreover, the Sabbath gives men the opportunity of building up love in their own households and of kindling a good spirit in their neighbors. Probably Jeremiah thought that if his people would observe the spirit of the Sabbath they could eventually be turned from their wicked course and be worthy of the promises the Lord made.

The Doctrine of the Potter and the Clay.—;While living in Jerusalem I often used to visit a potter and watch him make vessels of clay. The skillful and adroit craftsman turned out vessels of many shapes and sizes. All usually went well with his labors until he got hold of a batch of clay that would not work as it should. The only recourse then was to take the clay off the wheel, possibly add other clay to it, and knead the whole until it assumed the proper consistency. Then it could be used again in fashioning the desired product.

The Lord had Jeremiah view a potter at work and turned the incident into a useful lesson. Even as a potter reworks his clay when it proves stubborn and hard to handle, so the Lord finds it necessary to deal with nations. When a nation remains in sin He may pluck it up and destroy it; but if it turns from its evil ways He will in turn veer from the course of action determined against it. Special mention is made of Judah in the Lord's charge to Jeremiah:

O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the clay in the potter's hand, so are ye in My hand,

O house of Israel. At one instant I may speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy it; but if that nation turn from their evil, because of which I have spoken against it, I repent of the evil that I thought to do unto it. And at one instant I may speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it; but if it do evil in My sight, that it hearken not to My voice, then I repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit it. Now therefore do thou speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying: Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I frame evil against you; and devise a device against you; return ye now every one from his evil way, and amend your ways and your doings. But they say: There is no hope; but we will walk after our own devices, and we will do every one after the stubbornness of his evil heart. (18:6-12)

The remainder of Chapter 18 deals with the Lord's complaints and judgments against His people and with a description of a plot against Jeremiah and his prayer inspired by it. Here is part of the prayer in which he now asks the Lord not to forgive the people for their iniquity:

Yet, Lord, Thou knowest

All their counsel against me to slay me;

Forgive not their iniquity,

Neither blot out their sin from Thy sight;

But let them be made to stumble before Thee;

Deal Thou with them in the time of Thine anger. (18:23.)

Chapter 19 is also inspired by the potter's art and is a devastating arraignment of Judah's wickedness. It is followed by a terrible prediction of judgment:

Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that this place shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter; and I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of them that seek their life; and their carcasses will I give to be food for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and I will make this city an astonishment, and a hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues thereof; and I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat everyone the flesh of his friend, in the siege and in the straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that seek their life, shall straiten them. (19:6-9)

Chapter 20 records the fact that Pashhur, a high officer, heard Jeremiah prophesying of the terrible judgments against Judah. This man smote the prophet and put him in the stocks. On the morrow Jeremiah was released, and he told his persecutor that the Lord had changed his name from Pashhur to Magormissabib (Terror on every side) because he would live to be a terror to his friends. Moreover, he would live to go with his house into Babylon and there die and be buried with friends to whom he had prophesied falsely. Following this incident, Jeremiah laments his fate and the fact that he was the object of mockery and derision. (20:7-18)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Third Edition, p. 339.
[^2] See L. E. Binns, The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah, p. 14.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Third Edition, p. 339. See pp. 177, 223 in this book where the subject is again referred to.
