Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Thirteen

JEREMIAH, PROPHET OF REBUKE AND JUDGMENT (Concluded)

The Lord's Punishment Upon the Kings, Nobles, and People of Judah—;Israel's Eventual Redemption.—;Chapters 21-29 of Jeremiah form a section in which (1) the prophet denounces the leaders of the nation as mainly responsible for its terrible plight, (2) predicts the seventy years of captivity and return, and (3) foresees Israel's eventual redemption.

In response to an inquiry by King Zedekiah, Jeremiah advises the king not to fight Babylon, because the Lord will deliver him and his people into the hands of their enemies with terrible slaughter. (21:1-7) Unless the people and the king enter the "way of life" and "execute justice," respectively, they must meet the divine fury that will go forth. (21:8-14) Many nations shall ask concerning the fate of Judah:

And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every man to his neighbor: 'Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this great city?' Then they shall answer: 'Because they forsook the covenant of the Lord their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them.' (22:8, 9)

Chapter 22 contains a number of denunciations of kings of Judah who succeeded Josiah and who were instrumental in bringing about their people's downfall. The one concerning Jehoahaz (Shallum) is especially noteworthy. It shows very definitely how concerned the prophet was with the ethics and morals of men in high places and particularly how these affected the poor and the needy:

Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness,

And his chambers by injustice;

That useth his neighbor's service without wages,

And giveth him not his hire;

That saith: 'I will build me a wide house

And spacious chambers',

And cutteth him out windows,

And it is ceiled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.

Shalt thou reign, because thou strivest to excel in cedar?

Did not thy father eat and drink, and do justice and righteousness?

Then it was well with him.

He judged the cause of the poor and needy;

Then it was well.

Is not this to know Me? saith the Lord.

But thine eyes and heart

Are not but for thy covetousness,

And for shedding innocent blood,

And for oppression, and for violence, to do it. (22:13-17)

In Chapter 23 of this section Jeremiah returns to the theme of Israel's gathering. The prophet first pronounces a woe upon the false shepherds who have destroyed and scattered the Lord's flock, the sheep of His pasture. He promises to inflict upon them the evil of their doings, because they have not taken care of the people properly; by improperly instructing them they have brought about their dispersion. But Jeremiah sees the coming of a day, far in the future, when the remnant of the Lord's people will be gathered home from the lands whence they have been driven and scattered. They will become a fruitful people, with good shepherds over them. Not only that, but the time will come when the Lord will raise up a righteous branch unto David, who should reign as a righteous and prosperous king over them. The Prophet Joseph Smith explains that David lost this great privilege because of the murder of Uriah, and that one of his descendants of the same name will be raised up in the last days to inherit his throne and kingdom:

A murderer, for instance, one that sheds innocent blood, cannot have forgiveness. David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah; but he could only get it through hell: he got a promise that his soul should not be left in hell.

Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood; and the Priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage. [^1]

Here are Jeremiah's words concerning the day of Israel's dispersion and glorious gathering:

Woe unto the shepherds that destroy and scatter

The sheep of My pasture! saith the Lord.

Therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, against the shepherds that feed My people: Ye have scattered My flock, and driven them away, and have not taken care of them; behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the Lord. And I will gather the remnant of My flock out of all the countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them back to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and multiply. And I will set up shepherds over them, who shall feed them; and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall any be lacking, saith the Lord.

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,

That I will raise unto David a righteous shoot,

And he shall reign as king and prosper,

And shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.

In his days Judah shall be saved,

And Israel shall dwell safely;

And this is his name whereby he shall be called,

The Lord is our righteousness. (23:1-6)

The reader will find other references to the David who is to be raised up to Israel in Jer. 30:9 and Ezek. 34:23, 24. All of Ezekiel 34 is a wonderful parallel to Jer. 23:1-6.

After Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, had carried off many of the best people of Palestine in a first deportation (601 B. C.?), Jeremiah compared these choice captives with the people who remained in Palestine. The two communities were compared to two baskets of figs. The first basket, representing the departed captives, had in it very choice figs indeed, but the other basket of figs, representing the people at home, was very bad— [^2] bad that the figs could not be eaten:

One basket had very good figs, like the figs that are first-ripe; and the other basket had very bad figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad. Then said the Lord unto me: 'What seest thou, Jeremiah?' And I said: 'Figs; the good figs, very good; and the bad, very bad, that cannot be eaten, they are so bad.' And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: 'Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: Like these good figs, so will I regard the captives of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans, for good. And I will set Mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them back to this land; and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up. And I will give them a heart to know Me, that I am the Lord; and they shall be My people, and I will be their God; for they shall return unto Me with their whole heart. And as the bad figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so bad; surely thus saith the Lord: So will I make Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt; I will even make them a horror among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil; a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them. And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers.' (24:2-10)

Critics have pointed out numerous technical problems in Chapter 25 of Jeremiah; we need not discuss them here, but it is well to notice the prophet's prediction of the seventy year Babylonian Captivity. Jeremiah's words are said to have come to the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, which was the first year of the reign of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon. After reminding the people that he had carried the Lord's word to them for twenty-three years, the prophet says:

Therefore, thus saith the Lord of hosts: Because ye have not heard My words, behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the Lord, and I will send unto Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon, My servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about; and I will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual desolations. Moreover, I will cause to cease from among them the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the lamp. And this whole land shall be a desolation, and a waste; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years. And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the Lord, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans; and I will make it perpetual desolations. And I will bring upon that land all My words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations. For many nations and great kings shall make bondmen of them also; and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the work of their own hands. (25:8-14)

It is interesting to notice that Lehi, Nephi and Jacob, Book of Mormon prophets, seem to have known of Jeremiah's prediction of the seventy-year Jewish Captivity, as well as to have received revelation concerning it in their own right. (1 Nephi 5:13; 7:13, 14; cf. 1:13; 2 Nephi 6:8-10.)

Jeremiah's predictions of evil very nearly brought about his death near the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, but thanks to the intervention of some princes and other influential people, his life was spared. (26:1-19) The text goes on to relate, however, that another prophet by the name of Uriah was put to death for saying essentially the same things as Jeremiah. Jehoiakim even went so far as to have Uriah brought back from Egypt, whither he had fled for safety. (26:20-24) These facts illustrate the difficulties which the Lord's servants were having at the time

After Zedekiah came on the throne, the prophet continued to urge him to bow to the yoke of the king of Babylon. (Ch. 27) The false prophet Hananiah is recorded as having died because he made predictions in opposition to those of Jeremiah. (Ch. 28)

Jeremiah wrote a most interesting letter to the Jews in Babylon who earlier had been taken captive. (Ch. 29) He advised his brethren in that distant place to settle down and not pay attention to the lies of false prophets, because they would be in Babylon seventy years before the Lord would remember them and bring them home. They were to seek the Lord during their captivity, and He would give them a "future and a hope." (29:11) The prophet then described the horror that should befall the Jews left in Palestine. (29:16-19)

Israel and Judah to be Restored in Latter Days—;The New or Everlasting Covenant.—;With the exception of an episode dealing with Jeremiah's buying a field (32:6-25), chapters 30-33 deal with the prophet's predictions concerning the restoration of Israel and Judah and the making of a New or Everlasting Covenant with them. These chapters should be carefully read by our people, because they concern matters of great interest to us. It will be sufficent here to call attention to some of the outstanding passages in the section.

After pointing out that the wounds of the house of Jacob were grievous and that her lovers had forgotten her, the Lord makes this promise:

For I will restore health unto thee,

And I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the Lord;

Because they have called thee an outcast:

'She is Zion [a dry land], there is none that careth for her.'

Thus saith the Lord:

Behold, I will turn the captivity of Jacob's tents,

And have compassion on his dwelling-places;

And the city shall be builded upon her own mound,

And the palace shall be inhabited upon its wonted place.

And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving

And the voice of them that make merry;

And I will multiply them, and they shall not be diminished,

I will also increase them, and they shall not dwindle away.

Their children also shall be as aforetime,

And their congregation shall be established before Me,

And I will punish all that oppress them.

And their prince shall be of themselves,

And their ruler shall proceed from the midst of them;

And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto Me;

For who is he that hath pledged his heart

To approach unto Me? saith the Lord.

And ye shall be My people,

And I will be your God. (30:17-22)

We are especially interested in Jeremiah's reference to the restoration of the house of Ephraim (31:1-9). Ephraim, as the senior tribe of Israel, is called the Lord's "first-born." The reference to the gathering from the "north country" also strikes the eye. Here is part of the prophecy:

For there shall be a day,

That the watchmen shall call upon the mount Ephraim:

'Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion,

Unto the Lord our God.

For thus saith the Lord:

Sing with gladness for Jacob,

And shout at the head of the nations;

Announce ye, praise ye, and say:

'O Lord, save Thy people,

The remnant of Israel.

Behold, I will bring them forth from the north country,

And gather them from the uttermost parts of the earth,

And with them the blind and the lame,

The woman with child and her that travaileth with child together;

A great company shall they return hither.

They shall come with weeping,

And with supplications will I lead them;

I will cause them to walk by rivers of waters,

In a straight way wherein they shall not stumble;

For I am become a father to Israel,

And Ephraim is My first-born. (31:6-9)

The Lord promises Israel and Judah that He will not only gather them, but make a New or Everlasting Covenant with them. This we believe to be a promise of the restoration of the Gospel in the latter days, a promise which John the Revelator foresaw when he predicted the coming of an angel with the everlasting gospel. (Rev. 14:6, 7) Though the world doesn't realize it, that angel has already come, and the Gospel has been restored to earth. Ephraim has been given the task of organizing the Church and is sending forth its "fishers" and "hunters" to gather the lost Israel. A remnant has been gathered, and the remaining tribes will in due time of the Lord come into the fold. Nor will the righteous Gentiles be forgotten. The first promise of the New Covenant is made in 31:31-34:

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; forasmuch as they broke My covenant, although I was a lord over them, saith the Lord. But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord, I will put My law in their inward parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people; and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying: 'Know the Lord'; for they shall all know Me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more.

The second promise is found in 32:37-40:

Behold, I will gather them out of all the countries, whither I have driven them in Mine anger, and in My fury, and in great wrath; and I will bring them back unto this place, and I will be their God; and I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear Me for ever; for the good of them, and of their children after them; and I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; and I will put My fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from Me.

A Shameful Breach of Vows—;The Rechabites.—;Of chapters 34-39 we need say little. They deal, excepting for a few matters, with subjects we have already considered somewhat lightly, such as predictions of the fate of the king, the burning of Jeremiah's roll (Ch. 36), his being thrown into prison, the capture of Jerusalem, the death of Zedekiah's sons and his removal to Babylon, and Jeremiah's kindly treatment by the Babylonians. It may be well, however, to discuss a breach of vows which occurred during the siege of Jerusalem and an incident involving the Rechabites, a branch of the Kenites, who had been connected with Israel from early times and who had settled in southern Judah. (Judges 1:16; 1 Sam. 16:6)

During the early period of the siege of Jerusalem, the men of the city released their Hebrew slaves. This may have been done partly because the old law required the release of slaves as provided for in Exo. 21:1 and Deut. 15:2, and partly because of the need of manpower to defend the besieged city. At any rate, the release was guaranteed by a solemn covenant. Then the advance of the Egyptians seems to have caused the Babylonians to lift the siege. In spite of their solemn oath, and by ignoring the claims of brotherly love and ordinary justice, the men of the city proceeded to re-enslave their unfortunate brethren. This unrighteous act immediately brought down the Lord's denunciation and terrible condemnation:

Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying: 'At the end of seven years ye shall let go every man his brother that is a Hebrew, that hath been sold unto thee, and hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee'; but your fathers hearkened not unto Me, neither inclined their ear. And ye were now turned, and had done that which is right in Mine eyes, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbor; and ye had made a covenant before Me in the house whereon My name is called; but ye turned and profaned My name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had let go free at their pleasure, to return; and ye brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids. Therefore, thus saith the Lord: Ye have not hearkened unto Me, to proclaim liberty, every man to his brother, and every man to his neighbor; behold, I proclaim for you a liberty, saith the Lord, unto the sword, unto the pestilence, and unto the famine; and I will make you a horror unto all the kingdoms of the earth. And I will give the men that have transgressed My covenant, that have not performed the words of the covenant which they made before Me, when they cut the calf in twain and passed between the parts thereof; the princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the officers, and the priests, and all the people of the land, that passed between the parts of the calf; I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life; and their dead bodies shall be for food unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. And Zedekiah king of Judah, and his princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, that are gone up from you. Behold, I will command, saith the Lord, and cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire; and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant. (34:13-22)

The Lord's use of the Rechabites to teach a lesson to the inhabitants of Jerusalem during King Jehoiachim's time is of considerable interest. Jeremiah was commanded to bring the Rechabites into the house of the Lord and give them wine to drink. (35:1-5) The prophet did as he was told, but the Rechabites refused to drink the wine:

But they said: 'We will drink no wine; for Jonadab, the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying: Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons, for ever; neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any; but all your days ye shall dwell in tents, that ye may live many days in the land wherein ye sojourn. And we have hearkened to the voice of Jonadab, the son of Rechab our father in all that he charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters; nor to build houses for us to dwell in, neither to have vineyard, or field, or seed; but we have dwelt in tents, and have hearkened, and done according to all that Jonadab, our father commanded us. But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, came up against the land, that we said: Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Arameans; so we dwell at Jerusalem.' (35:6-11)

The refusal of the Rechabites to drink wine in accordance with their instructions prompted the Lord to drive home a good lesson to the men of Jerusalem who refused time and again to hearken to the prophets:

Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying: 'Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Go, and say to the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to My words? saith the Lord. The words of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed, and unto this day they drink none, for they hearken to their father's commandment; but I have spoken unto you, speaking betimes and often, and ye have not hearkened unto Me. I have sent also unto you all My servants the prophets, sending them betimes and often, saying: Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers; but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto Me. Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded them, but his people hath not hearkened unto Me; therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them; because I have spoken unto them, but they have not heard, and I have called unto them, but they have not answered.' (35:12-19)

Jeremiah After the Fall of Jerusalem.—;Earlier, we mentioned the fact that after the fall of Jerusalem Jeremiah was liberated and permitted to stay in Palestine. As a matter of fact, he was first taken in chains with all the other captured Jews as far as Ramah, a town about five miles north of Jerusalem. Here the Babylonian "captain of the guard" loosed his bonds, "gave him an allowance and a present," and sent him back to Gedaliah, the new governor of Judah, with instructions permitting him to dwell among the people or to go wherever he chose. (40:1-6)

Following Gedaliah's appointment as governor of Judah, many Jews in the lands round about regained confidence and returned to their own country. But one of them, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, seems to have been sent by Baalis, the king of Ammon, for the express purpose of slaying Gedaliah. (40:14) The good governor was warned of this, but he would not believe those who had informed him of the plot. The result was that he and the Jews and Chaldeans with him at Mizpah were slain in cold blood by Ishmael and his fellow conspirators. (41:1-3) Other Jews met their death at the hands of Ishmael, but he escaped to Ammon before he could be apprehended. (41:4-15)

After this incident, Jeremiah was approached by the people of Judah, who asked him to pray to God in their behalf and ask His advice and counsel. The prophet did pray, and the Lord advised the people to stay in Judah and be blessed. They were told not to be afraid of the king of Babylon; the Lord would save them and deliver them from his hand and have compassion upon them. On the other hand, if they went to Egypt to escape war and hunger, they should be severely disappointed. They were told that famine, pestilence, and the sword would be their terrible lot. (42:1-22) But the stubborn Jews refused to heed the Lord's words through Jeremiah and proceeded into Egypt, taking the hapless prophet and his scribe Baruch with them. (43:1-7)

At Tahpanhes, the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah predicting the destruction of Egypt at the hands of the same Nebuchadrezzar who had destroyed Jerusalem:

Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying: 'Take great stones in thy hand, and hide them in the mortar in the framework, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah; and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon, My servant, and I will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his royal pavilion over them. And he shall come, and shall smite the land of Egypt; such as are for death to death, and such as are for captivity to captivity, and such as are for the sword to the sword. And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away captives; and he shall fold up the land of Egypt, as a shepherd foldeth up his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in peace. He shall also break the pillars of Bethshemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of Egypt shall he burn with fire.' (43:8-13)

Thus the disobedient Jews who had escaped from troubles in Judah would meet them head-on in Egypt. (See also 44:12-14.) Jeremiah continued to castigate them for their idolatrous worship of the "queen of heaven," but they refused to heed his words. (44:15-30)

The troubles of Jeremiah and Baruch in Egypt, coupled with those they had endured in Judah, must have depressed both of them greatly. We have already seen how Jeremiah cried out against his unhappy lot in Judah. (Pp. 166, 169, 170) Now Baruch seems to have protested against his continued pain and suffering, so much so that the Lord gave Jeremiah a revelation rebuking his scribe:

The word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke unto Baruch the son of Neriah, when he wrote these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying: 'Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning thee, O Baruch: Thou didst say:

Woe is me now!

For the Lord hath added sorrow to my pain;

I am weary with my groaning,

And I find no rest.

Thus shalt thou say unto him:

Thus saith the Lord:

Behold, that which I have built will I break down,

And that which I have planted I will pluck up;

And this in the whole land.

And seekest thou great things for thyself?

Seek them not;

for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the Lord; but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.' (45:1-5)

Prophecies of Jeremiah Against the Nations.—;In the last major division of his book (Chs. 46-51), Jeremiah deals with the fate and future prospects of the nations which were relatively close to Judah (Elam excepted) and which were, in many instances, her traditional enemies. These nations were Egypt, Philistia, Moab, Ammon, Edom, Damascus, Arabia, Elam, and Babylon. There is some doubt in the minds of scholars concerning Jeremiah's authorship of certain of these prophecies. In fact, some critics deny the entire section to Jeremiah. In my opinion, such a belief is unwarranted. However, there may be good reasons for being in doubt about certain parts. For example, one wonders about the prophecy against Damascus, which had long ceased to be an independent kingdom in Jeremiah's day. Moreover, Chapter 48, the prophecy against Moab, seems to have closer connections with Isaiah 15 and 16 than at first meets the eye; and Chapter 49:7-22, the prophecy against Edom seems to have been taken from the Book of Obadiah. But even in these instances judgment should be reserved. Until we know the full story of what happened to the various collections of Jeremiah's prophecies, we can never be sure that adverse criticism is entirely justified. We have already pointed out (pp. 156, 157) a few of the problems connected with the text of Jeremiah.

All of these prophecies deal with the future destruction and downfall of the nation concerned. There is no need to deal with each separate prophecy here; an illustration or two will suffice. Notice part of the pronouncement against Egypt:

Egypt is a very fair heifer;

But the gadfly out of the north is come, it is come.

Also her mercenaries in the midst of her

Are like calves of the stall,

For they also are turned back, they are fled away together,

They did not stand;

For the day of their calamity is come upon them,

The time of their visitation.

The sound thereof shall go like the serpent's;

For they march with an army,

And come against her with axes,

As hewers of wood.

They cut down her forest, saith the Lord,

Though it cannot be searched;

Because they are more than the locusts,

And are innumerable.

The daughter of Egypt is put to shame;

She is delivered into the hand of the people of the north.

The Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saith: Behold, I will punish Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with her gods, and her kings; even Pharaoh, and them that trust in him; and I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants; and afterwards it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the Lord. (46:20-26.)

But immediately following this prediction of evil against Egypt, Jeremiah looks again to the latter days and prophecies once more concerning the gathering of Israel and the fact that Jacob will be preserved— least not completely destroyed like the nations unto which the Israelites were driven:

But fear not thou, O Jacob, My servant,

Neither be dismayed, O Israel;

For, lo, I will save thee from afar,

And thy seed from the land of their captivity;

And Jacob shall again be quiet and at ease,

And none shall make him afraid.

Fear not thou, O Jacob My servant, saith the Lord,

For I am with thee;

For I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have driven thee,

But I will not make a full end of thee;

And I will correct thee in measure,

But will not utterly destroy thee. (46:27, 28)

The short prophecy against Damascus is presented here. The reader should observe that the last verse is closely related to Amos 1:4.

Of Damascus.

Hamath is ashamed, and Arpad;

For they have heard evil tidings, they are melted away;

There is trouble in the sea;

It cannot be quiet.

Damascus is waxed feeble, she turneth herself to flee,

And trembling hath seized on her;

Anguish and pangs have taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail.

'How is the city of praise left unrepaired,

The city of my joy?'

Therefore her young men shall fall in her broad places,

And all the men of war shall be brought to silence in that day,

Saith the Lord of hosts.

And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus,

And it shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.

(49:23-27)

The Historical Appendix.—;Chapter 52 seems clearly not to stem from the Prophet Jeremiah. Except for verses 26-30, together with some touches in the description of the temple pillars, the narrative was undoubtedly taken from 2 Kings 24:18-25:21, 27-30. Whoever added this chapter to Jeremiah may have done so for the express purpose of giving a clear and connected view of the fall of Jerusalem, which was the object or goal of Jeremiah's predictions.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See, e.g., Ecclus. 49:8.
[^2] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Third Edition, p. 181.
