Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Fifteen

EZEKIEL, THE PROPHET OF JUDAH'S CAPTIVITY (Continued)

The Prophet's Predictions of Doom Upon Judah and Jerusalem.—;We have already seen how the Prophet Jeremiah predicted the doom of Judah and Jerusalem. Jeremiah gave his message directly to the people concerned, because he was upon the scene where the tragedy was to take place. Ezekiel, on the other hand, was at a distance in Babylonia when delivering his prophecies upon the same subject. If his predictions of coming doom reached the people of Judah, as doubtless some of them did, they would have had to be carried by messengers and read in the hearing of Judah's inhabitants. Ezekiel returns time and time again to the approaching doom of his native land. The subject is dealt with in great detail in chapters 4-24. The people of Judah are reminded continually of their sins and are warned of the terrible punishment to come. He foretells with accuracy various events of the coming holocaust, ending with the destruction of Jerusalem and the captivity of her people. His vivid descriptions are often repelling to modern readers, but serve to emphasize the sincerity and zeal with which he attempted to save his morally bankrupt nation. In the following paragraphs we shall illustrate the prophet's methods of warning his people.

Prediction of Destruction Through Symbolical Actions and Prophecies.—;In chapters 4 to 7 Ezekiel predicts by symbolical actions and prophecies the siege of Jerusalem, the destruction incident thereto, and the Exile to follow. In the first of a series of four symbolical actions, the prophet portrays the siege of Jerusalem by drawing a plan of the city upon a tile or brick against which he directs the engines of war of a contemporary type. (4:1-3) In the second, he lies upon his left side (symbolizing Northern Israel) 390 days, and upon his right side (symbolizing Judah) 40 days, to indicate the time he must bear their iniquity. (4:4-8) These days, symbolizing years, are understood by many scholars to represent the years respectively that the Northern Kingdom and Judah were to be in exile. But nothing is said about exile in the text. The prophet simply speaks of the years of iniquity which the Lord attributes to the two divisions of his people. In the third symbolical action, the prophet eats "barley" cakes made from several different grains and baked with human dung. Cakes and water are to be consumed by weight and measure. All this is to be a sign of the privations and punishment that the people are to endure among the unclean nations to which they will be exiled for their iniquity. (4:9-17) In the fourth, their slaughter and dispersion is represented by the prophet as in this passage:

And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp sword, as a barber's razor shalt thou take it unto thee, and cause it to pass upon thy head and upon thy beard; then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair. A third part shalt thou burn in the fire in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled; and thou shalt take a third part, and smite it with the sword roundabout her; and a third part thou shalt scatter to the wind, and I will draw out a sword after them. Thou shalt also take thereof a few by number, and bind them in thy skirts. And of them again shalt thou take, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; therefrom shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel. (5:1-4)

Among the ancient Hebrews the shaving of the hair and beard was a sign of great mourning. The use here of a sword for a razor is an even more ominous sign.

In a series of three prophetic discourses Ezekiel then proceeds to condemn the Jews. First, Jerusalem is set apart and doomed. She is accused of having rebelled against the Lord's ordinances and statutes, by doing more wickedness than the nations and countries immediately around her. Therefore the Lord will execute judgment against her in the sight of those nations. Fathers will eat sons and sons their fathers in the trials to come. A third part of the people will die of pestilence, a third part will fall by the sword, and a third part will be scattered "unto all the winds" with a drawn sword among them. They will be an amazement, a reproach, a taunt, and an astonishment to the nations who see them. (5:5-17) Second, their land will be devastated, their altars desolated, their sun-images broken, their bones scattered, and their slain found upon every high hill, and under every thick terebinth. (6:1-14) Yet the Lord loved them sufficiently to make this promise:

Yet will I leave a remnant, in that ye shall have some that escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries. And they that escape of you shall remember Me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, how that I have been anguished with their straying heart, which hath departed from Me, and with their eyes, which are gone astray after their idols; and they shall loathe themselves in their own sight for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations. And they shall know that I am the Lord; I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them. (6:8-10)

In the third discourse (7:1-27) the Lord promises an end to the four corners of the land. Abominations and disasters will come by reason of the Babylonian triumph over Israel. Violence, horror, and calamities are to follow upon each other. Famine and pestilence will sweep the land.

The turn is come unto thee, O inhabitant of the land; the time is come, the day of tumult is near, and not of joyful shouting upon the mountains. Now will I shortly pour out My fury upon thee, and spend Mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways; and I will bring upon thee all thine abominations. And Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; I will bring upon thee according to thy ways, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I the Lord do smite. Behold the day; behold, it cometh; the turn is come forth; the rod hath blossomed, arrogancy hath budded. Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness; nought cometh from them, nor from their tumult, nor from their turmoil, neither is there eminency among them. The time is come, the day draweth near; let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they be yet alive; for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof, which shall not return; neither shall any stand possessed of the iniquity of his life. They have blown the horn, and have made all ready, but none goeth to the battle; for My wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within; he that is in the field shall die with the sword, and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him. (7:7-15)

The people's gold and silver will not deliver them in the day of disaster, for the "worst of the nations" shall possess their houses. Moreover,

All hands shall be slack, and all knees shall drip with water . . . rumor shall be upon rumor, and they shall seek a vision of the prophet, and instruction shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the elders. (7:17, 26)

Vision of the Wickedness and Punishment of Jerusalem.—;In a vision given to Ezekiel "in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month," as he sat in his house with the elders of Judah, "the hand of the Lord" fell upon him. (8:1) As far as we can determine, this manifestation was given the prophet in September, 595 B. C. He saw a glorious "likeness" as of the appearance of fire: "from the appearance of his loins and downward, fire; and from his loins and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the color of electrum." (8:2) Then the "form" of a hand was put forth, and Ezekiel was taken in vision by a lock of his head and brought to the "inner court that looketh toward the north" in the Temple at Jerusalem. The glory of Israel's God was there, and he was shown the abominations and idolatry committed within the precincts of the Temple

Then He said unto me: 'Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here in that they fill the land with violence, and provoke Me still more, and, lo, they put the branch to their nose? Therefore will I also deal in fury; Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in Mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.' (8:17, 18)

Then Ezekiel was shown the punishment of Jerusalem. In the vision, a man clothed in linen was commanded to go through the city and set a mark upon the foreheads of the "men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst thereof." (9:4) The six men who seem to have had the city in charge were then commanded by the Lord to go through the city, beginning at the Temple, with their destroying weapons and smite every person who did not have the mark upon his forehead. Ezekiel was aghast at the slaughter:

And it came to pass, while they were smiting, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said: 'Ah Lord God! Wilt Thou destroy all the residue of Israel in Thy pouring out of Thy fury upon Jerusalem?' Then said He unto me: 'The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of wresting of judgment; for they say: The Lord hath forsaken the land, and the Lord seeth not. And as for Me also, Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, but I will bring their way upon their head.' (9:8-10)

In still another part of the same vision, Ezekiel heard the Lord command the man clothed in linen to take coals of fire from between the cherubim on the right side of the Temple and dash them against the city of Jerusalem. (10:2) In the midst of the glory of the Lord, the prophet apparently saw the same cherubim he had witnessed in his first vision near the river Chebar. (10:20-22)

Ezekiel was then lifted by the Spirit to the east gate of the Temple, where he saw Jaazaniah and Pelatiah, princes of the people, among twenty-five men. The two princes were pointed out as "men that devise iniquity, and that give wicked counsel in this city." (11:2) The prophet was commanded to prophesy against them:

And the spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and He said unto me: 'Speak: Thus saith the Lord: Thus have ye said, O house of Israel; for I know the things that come into your mind. Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain. Therefore, thus saith the Lord God: Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron; but ye shall be brought forth out of the midst of it. Ye have feared the sword; and the sword will I bring upon you, saith the Lord God. And I will bring you forth out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you. Ye shall fall by the sword; I will judge you upon the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord; Though this city shall not be your caldron, ye shall be the flesh in the midst thereof; I will judge you upon the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord; for ye have not walked in My statutes, neither have ye executed Mine ordinances, but have done after the ordinances of the nations that are round about you.' And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said: 'Ah Lord God! Wilt Thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel?' (11:5-13)

In answer to Ezekiel's last question concerning the fate of the remnant of Israel, the Lord gave him this heartening news:

Son of man, as for thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel, all of them, concerning whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said: Get you far from the Lord! unto us is this land given for a possession; therefore say: Thus saith the Lord God: Although I have removed them far off among the nations, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet have I been to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they are come; therefore say: Thus saith the Lord God: I will even gather you from the peoples, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel. And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from thence. And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will remove the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh; that they may walk in My statutes, and keep Mine ordinances, and do them; and they shall be My people, and I will be their God. But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will bring their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord God. (11:15-21)

At the end of the vision, Ezekiel was again lifted up by the Spirit and brought back into Chaldea, where he made known unto his brethren all the things that the Lord had shown him. (11:22-25)

Judah Doomed Because of Universal Corruption.—;In Chapter 12 Ezekiel is portrayed in two acts which symbolically detail the impending doom of the Jews. Because of the fact that the exiles refused to understand the prophet, the Lord bade him to prepare "stuff" such as an exile might carry with him into captivity. This material he was to move about in easy sight of his brethren; moreover, he was bidden to dig through the wall of his house and move the "stuff" through the hole at night in their full view. The prophet did as he was told, and the word of the Lord came to him explaining that his actions were a symbol of the exile and scattering of the Jews. Also their prince (Zedekiah) would be brought to Babylon and there die, but should not see the land (he was blinded; cf. 2 Kings 25:6, 7). The Lord indicated that a few men would be spared from the horrors of destruction in order that the abominations of the Jews might be declared among the nations whither they come. (12:16)

The second act of Ezekiel represents famine, anxiety and desolation in a siege because of the violence of the land's inhabitants:

Moreover the word of the Lord came to me, saying: 'Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with anxiety; and say unto the people of the land: Thus saith the Lord God concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel: They shall eat their bread with anxiety, and drink their water with appalment, that her land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein. And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.' (12:17-20)

In verses 21-28, the Lord impresses Ezekiel with the fact that the skeptics who doubt the visions and prophecies of the true prophets concerning the impending fate of Judah and Jerusalem shall have their minds changed. It is the pseudoprophets and smooth talkers whose words shall fail. Here are some of the Lord's words:

Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying: The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth? Tell them therefore: Thus saith the Lord God: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them: The days are at hand, and the word of every vision. For there shall be no more any vain vision nor smooth divination within the house of Israel. For I am the Lord; I will speak, what word soever it be that I shall speak, and it shall be performed; it shall be no more delayed; for in your days, O rebellious house, will I speak the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord God. (12:22-25)

Ezekiel now denounces the false and lying prophets whose words to their people are self-inspired and without value. These men have failed to fill in the breaches and stand in battle. They are like foxes among the ruins. They only make a bad situation worse. (13:1-7)

The Lord's hand is to be upon them as a penalty. Their names shall not be written upon the register of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter Israel's land. They are like men who build a defective wall and camouflage the unsound structure with plaster. An overpowering storm will level it to the ground and it shall be said to the builders: Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it? (13:8-16)

The sorcerers among the people—;mostly women— also scathingly rebuked for their pagan practices:

Thus saith the Lord God: Woe to the women that sew cushions upon all elbows, and make pads for the head of persons of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of My people, and save souls alive for yourselves? And ye have profaned Me among My people for handfuls of barley and for crumbs of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to My people that hearken unto lies. Wherefore thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I am against your cushions, wherewith ye hunt the souls as birds, and I will tear them from your arms; and I will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt as birds. Your pads also will I tear, and deliver My people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Because with lies ye have cowed the heart of the righteous, when I have not grieved him; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, that he be saved alive; therefore ye shall no more see vanity, nor divine divinations; and I will deliver My people out of your hand; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. (13:18-23)

When certain of the elders of Israel came to Ezekiel—arently for the purpose of asking a revelation—e Lord revealed to His servant that they had really turned to idol worship. (14:1-5) The house of Israel is then urged to turn from its idolatry and abominations. Moreover, says the Lord, the prophet that panders to idolatrous inquirers is to be held equally sinful with them. (14:6-11) The Lord then made clear that the land would not be spared because of the few righteous who were left in it. The implication seems to be that this land, because it had had prophets to teach it continually, should have inflicted upon it the punishments threatened by Moses against apostate Israel (Lev. 26:22, 25, 26, etc.). It would not have the consideration which the Lord promised Abraham concerning Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. 18:23 ff.), because those two cities never had the continual presence of prophets to teach them. Any righteous men in Judah would save themselves alone:

Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord God. If I cause evil beasts to pass through the land, and they bereave it, and it be desolate, so that no man may pass through because of the beasts; though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate. Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say: Let the sword go through the land, so that I cut off from it man and beast; though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered themselves. (14:14-18)

Ezekiel now resorts to allegories which portray Jerusalem's ripeness for judgment. The first one is that of the useless vine. Israel is likened to a wild vine, which produces no marketable wood, nor does it furnish even a peg upon which men may hang a vessel. In short, Israel is useless, even as a half-burnt piece of wood from the fire:

Shall wood be taken thereof to make any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon? Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire hath devoured both the ends of it, and the midst of it is singed; is it profitable for any work? Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work; how much less, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is singed, shall it yet be meet for any work? (15:3-5)

As the vine-tree is given to the fire for fuel, so will the Lord give the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and set His face against them. (15:6)

In the second allegory, Jerusalem is compared to a foundling girl-child unwanted and left to die, thus not receiving the attention usually given to a normal child. The Lord takes it, causes it to live and flourish into ripe womanhood. He then enters into a covenant with her, and solemnly espouses her. He clothes her in the finest and feeds her the luxuries. Her fame and beauty spread among the nations. The point of the allegory is that Judah owes everything she had to the Lord. Then, to the Lord's chagrin, she plays the harlot among the nations. All of her attractiveness is used to decoy lovers from the passers-by. The Egyptians, Assyrians, and Chaldeans are especially mentioned. She is particularly guilty in that she sacrifices her children who are really the Lord's. The Lord also accuses her of soliciting harlotry; she was not originally solicited by her lovers. (16:1-24) Because of her long history of unfaithfulness and harlotry, the Lord at first refers indignantly to her ancestry in terms that would be considered an insult by the Jews:

Thine origin and nativity is of the land of the Canaanite; the Amorite was they father, and thy mother was a Hittite. (16:3)

Because of her filthiness, the Lord expresses His intention of uncovering her nakedness before all her lovers and of bringing about her death:

And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will bring upon thee the blood of fury and jealousy. I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and break down thy lofty places; and they shall strip thee of thy clothes, and take thy fair jewels; and they shall leave thee naked and bare. They shall also bring up an assembly against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords. And they shall burn they houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women; and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou shalt also give no hire any more. So will I satisfy My fury upon thee, and My jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry. Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted Me in all these things; lo, therefore I also will bring thy way upon thy head, saith the Lord God; or hast thou not committed this lewdness above all thine abominations? (16:38-43)

Israel's sin will be considered proverbial; her sin surpasses that of her sisters, Sodom and Samaria (16:44-52), but eventually all will be restored to their former estate. (16:53-58) In due time, the Lord promises, He will remember His covenant established with His erring spouse and make an everlasting or Gospel covenant with her:

Nevertheless I will remember My covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant. Then shalt thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder sisters and thy younger; and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not because of thy covenant. And I will establish My covenant with thee, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; that thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame; when I have forgiven thee all that thou hast done, saith the Lord God. (16:60-63)

In another allegory, Ezekiel sets forth the experiences of Judah and her princes with Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon. The first part of the allegory is this:

A great eagle with great wings

And long pinions

Full of feathers, which had divers colors,

Came unto Lebanon

And took the top of the cedar;

He cropped off the topmost of the young twigs thereof,

And carried it into a land of traffic;

He set it in a city of merchants.

He took also of the seed of the land,

And planted it in a fruitful soil;

He placed it beside many waters,

He set it as a slip.

And it grew, and became a spreading vine

Of low stature,

Whose tendrils might turn toward him,

And the roots thereof be under him;

So it became a vine, and brought forth branches,

And shot forth sprigs. (17:3-6)

The second part of the allegory is very similar, but necessary for our complete understanding:

There was also another great eagle with great wings

And many feathers;

And, behold, this vine did bend

Its roots toward him,

And shot forth its branches toward him, from the beds of its plantation,

That he might water it.

It was planted in a good soil

By many waters,

That it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit,

That it might be a stately vine.

Say thou: Thus saith the Lord God: Shall it prosper?

Shall he not pull up the roots thereof,

And cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither,

Yea, wither in all its sprouting leaves?

Neither shall great power or much people be at hand

When it is plucked up by the roots thereof.

Ye, behold, being planted, shall it prosper?

Shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it?

In the beds where it grew it shall wither. (17:7-10)

What is the meaning of the allegory? It is obvious from 17:11-21 that it was given in the first place because of the Lord's anger at King Zedekiah for breaking his oath of fealty to Babylon and for his plotting with Egypt to assist him in his attempts to overthrow the power of Nebuchadrezzar in Judah. (Cf. 1 Kings 10:28 f.) Zedekiah's action was, in effect, a breaking of the Lord's own oath (17:19) and therefore a treacherous act against Him. The eagle of the allegory is Nebuchadrezzar, the Babylonian king; the cedar is the Jewish people or Jerusalem; the top of the cedar represents Jehoiachin and the princes carried away by Nebuchadrezzar in 601 B. C. (Book of Mormon chronology). The seed must represent Jehoiachin's uncle Zedekiah, who took the oath of fealty to Babylon and was made king in his place. Because of his breaking his oath, the Lord promises vengeance upon Zedekiah:

And I will spread My net upon him, and he shall be taken in My snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for his treachery that he hath committed against Me. And all his mighty men in all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward every wind; and ye shall know that I the Lord have spoken it. (17:20,21)

The Lord now gave an extension of the allegory which is of great interest to the Latter-day Saints. Its interpretation involves Book of Mormon history; in fact, we believe that the passage in question can only be understood by one versed in that scripture. As far as I am aware, Elder Orson Pratt, one of our early apostles, was the first one to give the true explanation of 17:22, 23. He says: "When Zedekiah, king of Judah, was carried away captive into Babylon, the Lord took one of his sons, whose name was Mulek, with a company of those who would hearken to his words, and brought them over the ocean, and planted them in America. This was done in fulfillment of the 22nd and 23rd verses of the seventeenth chapter of Ezekiel, which read thus:

Thus saith the Lord God, I will also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it: I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a Tender One, and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent; in the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it; and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit and, be a goodly cedar; and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing, in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

"By reading this chapter (17), we will see that the Jews were the 'high cedar,' that Zedekiah the king was the 'highest branch,' that the 'tender one' cropped off from the top of his young twigs was one of his sons, whom the Lord brought out and planted him and his company upon the choice land of America, which He had given unto a remnant of the tribe of Joseph for an inheritance, in fulfillment of the blessing of Jacob and Moses upon the head of that tribe. (Gen. 48 and 49; also Deut. 33.)" [^1]

Ezekiel now condemns an old proverb which was current among the Jews. It seems that they felt they were made to suffer for the sins of their fathers and voiced their complaint in this way:

The fathers have eaten sour grapes,

And the children's teeth are set on edge. (18:2)

The prophet pointed out that the Lord wanted this proverb discontinued among the people of Israel. All souls stand in a personal relationship to God: no man dies except for his own sins:

Behold, all souls are Mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is Mine; the soul that sinneth, it shall die. (18:4)

As an example of this fact, Ezekiel points to three generations in the same family. If a grandfather (18:5-9) lives righteously, he escapes death. His son (18:10-13) is a wicked man and dies as a result of his own sins. The grandson (18:14-17) considers his father's actions, does righteously, and lives. Each, as we say, is "on his own" and reaps accordingly. The second Article of Faith of our Church states the principle succinctly:

We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression.

Ezekiel also states another important principle which we should consider. In its essence it is this: When a man is judged by God, his position is determined by what he is now, not by what he has been—is of course within just limits. Consider, for example, the wicked man who forsakes his sins:

But if the wicked turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all My statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. None of his transgressions that he hath committed shall be remembered against him; for his righteousness that he hath done he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God; and not rather that he should return from his ways, and live? (18:21-23)

Now let us look at the righteous man who turns to wickedness:

But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? None of his righteous deeds that he hath done shall be remembered; for his trespass that he trespassed, and for his sin that he hath sinned, for them shall he die. (18:24)

On the basis of the doctrine just explained, the Lord now reasons with the poeple of Israel that it is His way that is equal and just and not theirs. (18:25-29) They have every opportunity for a bright future, because their fate is not in the hands of their unrighteous ancestors. Nor will the Lord hold their own guilty past as a stumbling block against them if they truly repent and come to him with a new heart and a new spirit:

Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord God. Return ye, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so shall they not be a stumblingblock of iniquity unto you. Cast away from you all your transgressions, wherein ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God; wherefore turn yourselves, and live. (18:30-32)

This is a very important doctrine of Ezekiel's, and the world could well take it to heart. Even now, in this period of wickedness and chaos in the earth, the Lord would gladly lead us from the path of destruction if we truly repented of our sins. We have everything to gain and nothing to lose. The prophets have pointed out the path.

Ezekiel ends this section in which he predicts doom against Judah with two allegories directed toward her rulers. They are the allegory of the lioness and her whelps and the vine and its branch. These are dirges which fittingly lament the end of a nation and a dynasty. These dirges or laments are the most finished of Ezekiel's poems. The first one is this:

How was thy mother a lioness;

Among lions she couched

In the midst of the young lions

She reared her whelps!

And she brought up one of her whelps,

He became a young lion;

And he learned to catch the prey

He devoured men.

Then the nations assembled against him,

He was taken in their pit;

And they brought him with hooks

Unto the land of Egypt.

Now when she saw that she was disappointed,

And her hope was lost,

Then she took another of her whelps,

And made him a young lion.

And he went up and down among the lions,

He became a young lion;

And he learned to catch the prey

He devoured men.

And he knew their castles

And laid waste their cities;

And the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof,

Because of the noise of his roaring

Then the nations cried out against him

On every side from the provinces;

And they spread their net over him,

He was taken in their pit.

And they put him in a cage with hooks

And brought him to the king of Babylon;

That they might bring him into strongholds,

So that his voice should no more be heard

Upon the mountains of Israel. (19:2-9)

The interpretation of this allegory seems fairly clear. The lioness, if not the doomed country, is Hamutal, the mother of Zedekiah. (2 Kings 24:18) The first of her whelps would then be Jehoahaz, who after reigning for a short time was taken prisoner to Egypt by Pharaoh-necoh. (2 Kings 23:31-33) Jehoahaz was in turn succeeded by Jehoiakim, a son of Josiah by a wife other than Hamutal. Jehoiakim, a son of Josiah by a wife other than Hamutal. Jehoiachim was succeeded by his son Jehoiachin. When the last-named was taken captive by the Babylonians, Hamutal's second son, Zedekiah, was appointed king in his stead. He must, therefore, be the other "whelp" of the allegory. When taken captive by Nebuchadrezzar and carried to Babylon, Zedekiah fulfilled the requirements of the last two verses.

Here is the allegory of the vine and its branch:

Thy mother was like a vine, in thy likeness,

Planted by the waters;

She was fruitful and full of branches

By reason of many waters.

And she had strong rods

To be sceptres for them that bore rule;

And her stature was exalted Among the thick branches,

And she was seen in her height

With the multitude of her tendrils.

But she was plucked up in fury,

She was cast down to the ground,

And the east wind dried up her fruit;

Her strong rods were broken off and withered,

The fire consumed her.

And now she is planted in the wilderness,

In a dry and thirsty ground.

And fire is gone out of the rod of her branches,

It hath devoured her fruit,

So that there is in her no strong rod

To be a sceptre to rule. (19:10-14)

Here the vine is Hamutal, if not the country, and Zedekiah would possibly be the strong rod (the Bible versions have the singular, which seems to give better sense). If this interpretation is correct, Hamutal would necessarily have been involved in the great catastrophe brought about by Zedekiah's rebellion against Babylon.

Threatening Prophecies Before Destruction of Judah and Jerusalem.—;Chapters 20 to 24 of Ezekiel contain prophecies which continue to press the theme of Judah's and Jerusalem's coming doom. In August, 594 B. C., certain elders from among the Jews came to inquire of the Lord, and sat before Ezekiel. The word of the Lord came to the prophet telling him that he would not be inquired of by them. The Lord then cited Israel's past history of rebellion and abominations from the time they came up out of Egypt to the present. They rejected His ordinances and walked not in His statutes and profaned His sabbaths, for their hearts were set on idols. They blasphemed Him and offered their sacrifices on every hill and at every thick tree. They made their sons pass through the fire in heathen fashion and polluted themselves in diverse ways.

As I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be inquired of by you; and that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all; in that ye say: We will be as the nations, as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone. (20:31, 32)

Then the Lord shows His determination to gather His people in the latter days from among the nations and bring them under the bond of the covenant (gospel), and purge the rebellious element from among them:

As I live, saith the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with fury poured out, will I be king over you; and I will bring you out from the peoples, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with fury poured out; and I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples, and there will I plead with you face to face. Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord God. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant; and I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against Me; I will bring them forth out of the land where they sojourn, but they shall not enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord God: Go ye, serve every one his idols, even because ye will not hearken unto Me; but My holy name shall ye no more profane with your gifts, and with your idols. For in My holy name shall ye no more profane with your gifts, and with your idols. For in My holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord God, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them, serve Me in the land; there will I accept them, and there will I require our heave-offerings, and the first of your gifts, with all your holy things. (20:33-40; see also verses 41-44)

Ezekiel is now directed by the Lord to set his face against the "forest of the field in the South" and say that the Almighty will kindle a fire which will destroy not only every dry tree in it, but even the green trees. (20:45-49; Hebrew 21:1-5) This is a symbolic representation of Judah's overthrow and destruction, and "all flesh" shall see that the Lord has brought it about.

Ezekiel tells the Lord that the people call him a speaker of parables. As if taunting or mocking those who complain of the prophet's riddles, the Lord now interprets the prophecies plainly. The sword of God is the fire which will bring the destruction of both good and bad inhabitants (green trees and dry trees):

Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I am against three, and will draw forth My sword out of its sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked. Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall My sword go forth out of its sheath against all flesh from the south to the north; and all flesh shall know that I the Lord have drawn forth My sword out of its sheath; it shall not return any more. Sigh therefore, thou son of man; with the breaking of thy loins and with bitterness shalt thou sigh before their eyes. And it shall be, when they say unto thee: Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt say: Because of the tidings, for it cometh; and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be slack, and every spirit shall be faint, and all knees shall drip with water; behold, it cometh, and it shall be done, saith the Lord God. (21:3-7)

In what follows in verses 8-17, the text is somewhat corrupt and unintelligible. It would appear that a sharpened, furbished sword is placed in the hands of the slayer, whose victims are Jerusalem and the princes of Israel. Ezekiel symbolizes the imminence of destruction by smiting his hands and crying out. Word is given to the prophet to double and treble the sword—at is, its power is to be doubled or trebled. Even the Lord (vs. 17) will clap His hands over the destruction, in order to satisfy His fury.

Ezekiel is directed to trace two roads or "ways" by which the sword of the king of Babylon may come out of his land. One leads to Jerusalem, the other to Rabbah, the capital city of the Ammonites, who were partners with the Jews. At the parting or fork of these roads, the king of Babylon decides by divination the course to take. The arrows are shaken in a quiver and the one taken by the king influences the decision. The teraphim (household gods) are consulted and the liver of a sacrificial victim inspected. The divination indicates that Jerusalem is the object of their wrath. The battle cry is raised and the Babylonians set out to besiege the city with battering rams and other wrath. The battle cry is raised and the Babylonians set out to besiege the city with battering rams and other war equipment. The people of Jerusalem may view the divination as false, but their hopes are in vain: their wickedness and abominations seal their doom. (21:19-27) The chapter ends by promising the Ammonites a doom similar to that of Jerusalem:

Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire;

Thy blood shall be in the midst of the land

Thou shalt be no more remembered;

For I the Lord have spoken it. (21:32)

In Chapter 22 the utter depravity of Jerusalem and the inevitable retribution that should result is depicted by Ezekiel. He is to judge the "bloody city" and pronounce her final doom. She is guilty of idolatry; therefore the Lord has made her the object of reproach and derision among the nations. The princes of Israel have set the example of bad conduct. They have shed blood, made light of parents, wronged the father less and the widow, despised holy things, profaned the Sabbath, committed incest, made dishonest gains—;in short have set at naught all of the traditional virtues attributed to the Hebrew people. For that reason, says the Lord:

I will scatter thee among the nations, and disperse thee through the countries; and I will consume thy filthiness out of thee. And thou shalt be profaned in thyself, in the sight of the nations; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord. (22:15, 16)

Israel is next compared to dross in the melting pot. Gathered in Jerusalem they shall feel the hot fire of God's wrath:

As they gather silver and brass and iron and lead and tin into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in Mine anger and in My fury, and I will cast you in, and melt you. Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you with the fire of My wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof. As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the Lord have poured out My fury upon you. (22:20-22)

The chapter ends with an indictment of all classes of people. There is a conspiracy of false prophets, who are like roaring lions eager for the prey; they devour souls, take the treasure of the land, and make many widows. The priests have done violence to the law of the Lord, profaned holy things, failed to distinguish between sacred and common things, disregarded the Sabbath, and allowed the Lord to be profaned among themselves. Princes are like "wolves ravening the prey"; they shed blood and destroy souls in order to get dishonest gain. The people of the land have used oppression, exercised robbery, wronged the poor and needy, and oppressed the stranger unlawfully. There is no man in the land who is suitable to step into the breach and save the country from the destruction which the Lord shall bring upon it. (22:23-31)

Ezekiel now allegorically portrays the history of Israel and Judah in a fashion that is typically oriental. The two kingdoms are represented as two women, the daughters of one mother. The eldest, representing Samaria the capital of Israel, is Oholah (her tent) and the other, representing Jerusalem is Oholibah (my tent is in her). These two play the harlot in Egypt in their youth. They become the Lord's, and bear sons and daughters. Oholah continues her harlotry with the Assyrians, doting upon them. Finally the Lord delivers her into the hands of her lovers, who slay her sons and daughters and make her a byword among women. Oholibah is even more corrupt in her "doting" and adulteries than her sister. The Assyrians and Babylonians defile her; then the Lord brings all her alienated lovers against her, and judgment is delivered into their hands. They deal with her in fury, strip her of her jewels, and slay her sons and daughters. The Lord speaks of her punishment in these words:

Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup

Which is deep and large;

Thou shalt be for a scorn and a derision;

It is full to the uttermost.

Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow

With the cup of astonishment and appalment

With the cup of thy sister Samaria.

Thou shalt even drink it and drain it

And thou shalt craunch the sherbs thereof,

And shalt tear thy breasts;

For I have spoken it

Saith the Lord God.

Therefore, thus saith the Lord God: Because thou hast forgotten Me, and cast Me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy harlotries. (23:32-35)

Many scholars believe that the remainder of the chapter (23:36-49) is a mosaic of fragments of earlier passages and does not come from Ezekiel's hands. In any event, the passage does not add much to what we have already discussed concerning the allegory

In Chapter 24:1-4 we find another allegory portraying the investiture and capture of Jerusalem. It would seem that about January 10, 590 B. C., according to our method of reckoning time, the Lord told Ezekiel that the king of Babylon had invested the city. The prophet was commanded to utter a parable concerning the "rebellious house" in these words:

Set on the pot, set it on

And also pour water into it;

Gather into it the pieces belonging to it

Even every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder;

Fill it with the choice bones.

Take the choice of the flock,

And pile also the bones under it;

Make it boil well

That the bones thereof may also be seethed in the midst of it. (24:3-5)

The explanation of this "parable" or allegory is fairly clear. The pot is Jerusalem; the bones represent her inhabitants, against whom the fury of the Lord is directed. Only through heat (suffering) can the people be purged of their sins. The following verses add to our understanding:

Wherefore thus saith the Lord God: Woe to the bloody city, to the pot whose filth is therein, and whose filth is not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; no lot is fallen upon it. For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the bare rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; that it might cause fury to come up, that vengeance might be taken, I have set her blood upon the bare rock, that it should not be covered. Therefore, thus saith the Lord God: Woe to the bloody city! I also will make the pile great, heaping on the wood, kindling the fire, that the flesh may be consumed; and preparing the mixture, that the bones also may be burned; then will I set it empty upon the coals thereof, that it may be hot, and the bottom thereof may burn, and that the impurity of it may be molten in it, that the filth of it may be consumed. It hath wearied itself with toil; yet its great filth goeth not forth out of it, yea, its noisome filth. Because of thy filthy lewdness, because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from the filthiness any more, till I have satisfied My fury upon thee. I the Lord have spoken it; it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord God. (24:6-14)

The Lord also commanded Ezekiel not to mourn over the death of his wife which happened at this time. When the people demanded to know why he did not observe mourning rites for the "desire of his eyes," the Lord commanded him to answer:

Speak unto the house of Israel: Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will profane My sanctuary, the pride of your power, the desire of your eyes, and the longing of your soul; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left behind shall fall by the sword. And ye shall do as I have done; ye shall not cover your upper lips, nor eat the bread of men; and your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet; ye shall not make lamentation nor weep; but ye shall pine away in your iniquities, and moan one toward another. Thus shall Ezekiel be unto you a sign; according to all that he hath done shall ye do; when this cometh, then shall ye know that I am the Lord God. (24:21-24)

Thus even the death of the prophet's wife was used by the Lord to give a warning to His people.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Fourth Edition, p. 339.
