Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Sixteen

EZEKIEL, THE PROPHET OF JUDAH'S CAPTIVITY (Concluded)

Ezekiel's Prophecies Against Foreign Nations.—;Chapters 25-32 form a section devoted to prophecies against foreign nations that were close neighbors to Judah, but also for the most part her traditional enemies. Ezekiel's words were uttered against Ammon, Moab, Edom, Philistia, Tyre, Sidon, and Egypt. The first four named are disposed of in one short chapter. (25:1-17) As every Bible student knows, the Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites were closely related by blood and language ties to the people of Judah; the Philistines lived in southwest Palestine and had relatively little in common with the Jews. Dire judgments were pronounced against each of these nations for various reasons: Ammon, because of her glee and satisfaction at Judah's discomfiture; Moab, because she claimed that Judah was like all other nations, thus disproving Israel's claims as a "peculiar" people; Edom, because of her vengeance against the Jews; finally, Philistia, because of revenge and desire to destroy. Though Ezekiel doesn't mention it, other scriptures indicate reasons why these nations were in line for the judgments of the Lord, because of their treatment of Judah. (See e.g., 2 Kings 24:2; Jer. 41:10; 49:1 f.)

Tyre receives more attention from Ezekiel. (26:1-28:19) She was a powerful Phoenician stronghold located on a rocky island off the mainland. The city was noted for its commerce, manufacturing, money-making, sea voyages, and colonization. Purple dyes, glassware, and metal work were some of its outstanding products. Tyrians sailed to the remotest peoples known at the time. (See 1 Kings 9:28.)

Amos the prophet denounced Tyre over a century earlier for delivering Israelites to the Edomites. (Amos 1:9) And Joel denounced her for despoiling them of treasure, and selling the "children of Jerusalem" to the Greeks. (Joel 3:5, 6)

It appears from 26:1 that Jerusalem had just fallen to the Babylonians when Ezekiel uttered the prophecy against Tyre; the date was about February, 590 B. C. Apparently Tyre gloated over Jerusalem's fall because another trade rival had been thrust out of her way. The prophet therefore declared that many nations would come up against her, destroy her walls and towers, make her a bare rock, and destroy her daughters with the sword. (26:1-6) Nebuchadrezzar would invest the place, bringing with him all of the paraphernalia of war, terrifying at the time. The Babylonians would ransack the town and slay the people. (26:7-14) Seafaring peoples would tremble and be appalled. They would utter a lamentation:

How art thou destroyed, that wast peopled from the seas,

The renowned city,

That wast strong in the sea

Thou and thy inhabitants

That caused your terror to be

On all that inhabit the earth!

Now shall the isles tremble

In the day of thy fall;

Yea, the isles that are in the sea

Shall be affrighted at thy going out. (26:17, 18)

The Lord says that He will lead the personified city into Sheol (the place of departed spirits), the place of shades, and she shall never be found again. (26:20, 21) Chapter 27 is an interesting dirge over Tyre uttered by Ezekiel at the Lord's command. This is followed in the next chapter (verses 1-19) with a prophecy against the king of Tyre for his arrogance and because his heart is lifted up over his riches. He shall be brought down to the pit and "never be any more." There are those who believe that the charges against the king are not meant to be personal, but are symbolical of Tyre's national pride.

Sidon is next attacked by the prophet (28:20-24), who promises her judgments, pestilence, blood, and the sword. No more will she be a "pricking briar" unto the house of Israel.

Again Ezekiel reverts to one of his favorite themes, the eventual restoration of Israel:

Thus saith the Lord God: When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the nations, then shall they dwell in their own land which I gave to My servant Jacob. And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell safely; when I have executed judgments upon all those that have them in disdain round about them; and they shall know that I am the Lord their God. (28:25, 26)

Ezekiel devotes chapters 29-32 to prophecies against Egypt. These are all dated with the exception of 30:1-19. The following dates (our reckoning) are indicated: 29:1, January, 590 B. C.; 29:17, April, 574 B. C.; 31:1, June, 590 B. C.; 32:1, March, 588 B. C.; 32:17, March, 588 B. C. These dates show that the prophecies against Egypt were uttered either during the siege of Jerusalem, immediately after her fall, or long after her destruction. Moreover, they make one speculate as to methods used in bringing the prophecies of Ezekiel together. We need not spend much time, for our purposes here, on these Egyptian prophecies. Ezekiel compares Pharaoh to a crocodile which the Lord will catch with hooks and throw into the open field, there to perish. Egypt will be utterly wasted even unto the border of Ethiopia. The people will be scattered and dispersed forty years. No longer will the house of Israel turn to them in confidence. The prophet apparently thus indicates his wrath at Egypt's determined efforts to turn Judah from the path which the Lord deems best for her. (29:1-16) Egypt will be given over to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and be despoiled. (29:17-21) Her doom is close at hand and her cities shall feel the Lord's vengeance. (30:1-19) Much is said to Pharaoh by way of warning, judgments, his uplifted heart, punishment because of arrogance, his doom and descent into Sheol. (30:20-32:18)

Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even her, with the daughters of the mighty nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit. (32:18)

The Restoration of Israel's Dispersed—;The Responsibility of a Prophet.—;The remainder of the Book of Ezekiel deals almost entirely with the restoration of Israel. The Jewish historian, Josephus, speaks of Ezekiel having written two books about Jerusalem and the Exile. (Antiq. X, 5, 1) Unfortunately,

the passage is not entirely clear, but it is thought by many that the two books are Ezek. 1-32 and Ezek. 33-48. This could well be so, in which event we are now beginning to deal with the materials in Ezekiel's second book, which breaks down logically into chs. 33-39 and chs. 40-48. The prophet deals with some preliminary matters, the first of which concerns the responsibility of a prophet. (33:1-9) He first directs attention to the fact that a prophet is a watchman to his people. This is illustrated by the figure of a watchman over a city. If, when the enemy approaches the city, the watchman blows his horn, he has fulfilled his responsibility; if a person hears the signal and ignores it, he will pay the penalty for his slackness. If, on the other hand, the watchman sees the enemy coming and does not warn the people, any casualties will be upon his head:

So thou, son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore, when thou shalt hear the word at My mouth, warn them from Me. When I say unto the wicked: O wicked man, thou shalt surely die, and thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way; that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, and he turn not from his way; he shall die in his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul. (33:7-9)

The prophet now points out that men are responsible for their own actions and will be judged by them. (33:10-20) In so doing he simply repeats the teaching we have already discussed in connection with Chapter 18. But the prophet wants his people to realize that they are only paying the penalty of their own sins, and if they feel they are rotting or pining away—at life is not worth while—;let them realize that they are not just the helpless victims of their own past. They can repent and begin a new life. The wicked man who turns away from his sins will find "life" in the judgment day. He will be better off than the righteous man who turned in later life to wickedness.

In January, 588 B. C., a messenger who had escaped from Jerusalem came to Ezekiel with the news that the city had fallen to the Babylonians. But the Lord had manifested the truth to him before the messenger's arrival. Ezekiel was commanded to speak to those Jews who were left in Palestine about some illusions they had of themselves. They prided themselves that, since they were the only heirs of Abraham left in the land, all that the Lord promised to him and his posterity was now theirs. In a devastating answer, Ezekiel gives the Lord's views of the matter:

Wherefore say unto them: Thus saith the Lord God: Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes unto your idols, and shed blood; and shall ye possess the land? Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbor's wife; and shall ye possess the land? Thus shalt thou say unto them: Thus saith the Lord God: As I live, surely they that are in the waste places shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that are in the strongholds and in the caves shall die of the pestilence. And I will make the land most desolate, and the pride of her power shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, so that none shall pass through. Then shall they know that I am the Lord, when I have made the land most desolate, because of all their abominations which they have committed. (33:25-29)

Then the Lord, in a quiet aside, tells Ezekiel that whereas men talk about him and come to hear him, they are but hearers, not doers of the word. His hopeful predictions are pleasant to their ears, but, lo, when judgment comes upon them, they shall know "that a prophet hath been among them." (33:30-33)

The Work of Israel's Shepherds.—;Ezekiel is subsequently directed to prophesy against Israel's shepherds who have used the flock for their own selfish purposes but have done nothing to help the sheep which have been sick, broken, or scattered. By "shepherds" the prophet seems to mean Israel's rulers (cf. 34:4), but her religious leaders are probably also included. The sheep have been scattered not only "through all the mountains," but "upon all the face of the earth," with none to search or seek them out. (34:6) Because of the fact that the sheep have become a prey, and also because the shepherds have fed themselves and not their flock, they will be held accountable, and the Lord will deliver the sheep Himself. (34:7-10)

We now see how Ezekiel approaches the theme of Israel's restoration. The sheep, of course, represent the dispersed of Israel among the nations of the earth. The Lord expresses His intention of searching out His sheep and of delivering them out of the places whither they have been driven "in the day of clouds and thick darkness." (34:11, 12) He will bring them from the "countries" and settle them upon their own lands, where there are good folds and fat pastures. The broken will be bound up, and the sick strengthened. (34:13-16) But He will distinguish between worthy and unworthy in the flock:

And as for you, O My flock, thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, even the rams and the he-goats. Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have fed upon the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pasture? and to have drunk of the settled waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? And as for My sheep, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet. Therefore thus saith the Lord God unto them: Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat cattle and the lean cattle. Because ye thrust with side and with shoulder, and push all the weak with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad; therefore will I save My flock, and they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle. (34:17-22)

When the gathering of Israel is accomplished, the Lord will set up over His people a good shepherd by the name of David:

And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even My servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and My servant David prince among them; I the Lord have spoken. And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. (34:23-25)

Who is this David? The Prophet Joseph Smith explains that he will be a descendant of the ancient David, king of Israel, whose throne and kingdom will be taken from him and given to this prince raised up out of his own lineage. [^1] This point has already been discussed in connection with some of the teachings of Jeremiah, who also taught the same doctrine. (See p. 177) The prophet explains the great blessings that will come to scattered Israel: the earth will yield its produce, the tree its fruit; no longer will the people be a prey to their enemies or bear their shame, and the Lord will be their God. (34:26-31)

The Contrast Between Edom's Destiny and that of Israel.—;Chapters 35 and 36 are devoted by the prophet to contrasting the final destiny of Edom with that of Israel. It seems that most of the prophets looked upon Edom as a symbol of the wicked world. Isaiah, Jeremiah, Obadiah and Malachi are all other good examples of this fact. The reader is requested to examine my discussion of the traditional relations between Israel and Edom in the chapter on Obadiah, where he will find the reasons for Israel's hatred of Edom discussed at greater length. Ezekiel predicts the eventual desolation of Edom and death of her people for the following reasons: (1) As a blood relative of the Jews she has assisted the enemy (here the Babylonians; 35:5, 6); (2) she has apparently wanted to annex the conquered territory of Judah and Samaria, (35:10); and (3) she has shown unrighteous glee over Judah's calamities:

And ye have magnified yourselves against Me with your mouth, and have multiplied your words against Me; I have heard it. Thus saith the Lord God: When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate. As thou didst rejoice over the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee; thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Edom, even all of it; and they shall know that I am the Lord. (35:13-15)

The Lord, incensed at their conduct—pecially that of Edom, instructs Ezekiel to prophesy to Israel that because Edom and the nations have mocked her and swallowed her up on every side, they, too, shall become the objects of shame and derision. (36:1-7) Israel, on the other hand, will become a prolific and fruitful people; her cities shall be inhabited, and her waste places builded. The Lord will do better unto her than at the beginning, neither will she bear the reproach of peoples any more. (36:8-15)

Ezekiel points out that the people of the house of Israel, through bloodshed and idolatrous worship, have defiled their land; therefore the Lord has scattered them among the nations and judged them according to their deeds. Even among the nations, whither they came, they profaned the Lord's name; so much so that men were scandalized and pointed to them as examples of the "people of the Lord." (36:16-20)

Because the Lord's name has been sullied, He must for His own sake, not for His people's, bring the Israelites back from the lands of their dispersion, cleanse them from their wickedness, give them a new heart and put a new spirit within them. They must have their stony heart removed and a heart of flesh put in its stead: that is to say, they must be taught humility and learn to be tractable in the Lord's hands, not stubborn. Then they may dwell undisturbed in the land the Lord gave to their fathers. They shall be His people, and He will be their God. He will prosper their crops and they shall no more be a reproach in the nations. The waste cities will be filled with "flocks of men," and the people will recognize the Lord's power. (36:21-33)

Ezekiel's Vision of Israel's Restoration Using the Symbol of the Resurrection.—;Chapter 37 contains Ezekiel's famous vision of the valley of dry bones. This chapter is of great significance to Latter-day Saints, not only because of the doctrine it teaches concerning Israel's restoration, but also because of its mention of the "stick of Ephraim" and of the "stick of Judah," which phrases, we believe, refer to the Book of Mormon and the Bible respectively. Ezekiel says (37:1) that he was carried out "in the spirit of the Lord" (cf. 1 Nephi 11:1) and set down in the valley full of dry bones. The prophet perceived that the bones were very dry and numerous. The Lord commanded him to prophesy over the bones and command them to come together with sinew, flesh, and skin upon them. This was done, but the bodies had "no breath in them." (37:8) Ezekiel was bidden once again to prophesy and command breath to come in them that they might live. He did so and the bodies lived and stood upon their feet, "an exceeding great army." (37:10) The Lord then explained:

Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel; behold, they say: Our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost; we are clean cut off. Therefore prophesy, and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O My people; and I will bring you into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, and caused you to come up out of your graves, O My people. And I will put My spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I will place you in your own land; and ye shall know that I the Lord have spoken, and performed it, saith the Lord. (37:11-14)

It will be seen from this passage that the doctrine of the resurrection from the dead (cf. Isaiah 26:19) is invoked to symbolize the restoration of Israel's exiles to their own land. The exiles are represented— [^2] it seems to me— having lost hope (their bones are dried up) of ever living again as a nation. But the Lord shows them that they can be restored through His mighty power even as the dead will be raised in the resurrection. The doctrine of the resurrection of the body is assumed. Some writers contend that the idea of resurrection was not known among the Hebrews at this early time. But the fact that Ezekiel speaks as he did would seem to me an indication that the doctrine had long been understood in Israel. Any true prophet would understand the doctrine of the resurrection, so Latter-day Saints believe, and Israel had had many prophets long before Ezekiel's time.

While still in the spirit, Ezekiel was bidden to take two "sticks" (the Hebrew word for wood or tree is used) and write upon them, one for Judah and his companions, and one for Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and his companions. "Companions" in each instance has reference to the other tribes associated respectively with the kingdoms of Judah and Israel (with Ephraim at the head). These "sticks" were to be joined by Ezekiel "one to another into one stick, that they may become one in thy hand." (37:17) When the Israelites asked what was meant by this, the Lord replied:

Say unto them: Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions; and I will put them unto him together with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in My hand. (37:19)

Now, the question arises, What is the meaning of these "sticks" and what is their significance? Most commentators simply believe that each piece of wood represents one of the two kingdoms, either Judah or Israel (Ephraim), which are to be bound together or united under the Lord's direction. This act symbolizes the reunion of Ephraim and Judah into one kingdom. In view of the context, this interpretation seems, on the surface, quite easy and natural to follow. However, the Latter-day Saints insist that such an interpretation is by no means complete or accurate. They agree that the two "sticks" which become one in Ezekiel's hands, symbolize a union of some kind, but believe that they do not necessarily refer to the union of the two kingdoms concerned. What they do believe is that each of the sticks represents a scripture, a significant piece of writing. The Bible represents the scripture of Judah. To an average person not of our faith this conclusion may seem reasonable, but he will ask immediately what scripture represents the stick of Ephraim. To which we reply, the Book of Mormon. The Nephite scripture is the record of the descendants upon this continent of Joseph who was sold into Egypt. In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in August, 1830, the Lord specifically refers to the Book of Mormon as the "stick of Ephraim." (D. & C. 27:5) We have the Lord's own word for it, not man's. If there is any doubt about the reasonableness of such an interpretation, the reader should carefully examine Ezekiel 37:15-20. Just as Judah and Ephraim are to become one nation "upon the mountains of Israel" (37:22), so will the scriptures of these nations "be one" in the Lord's hand "before their eyes." (37:19, 20; italics mine.) Therefore the Bible and Book of Mormon will become spiritual instruments in the instruction of the united kingdoms—t to mention other scriptures that have already come forth or that will yet come forth for that purpose. Such an interpretation fits the text of Ezekiel perfectly. The only reason the commentators seem not to have thought of it is that their minds are generally conditioned against the idea that God gives His scriptures to more nations than one. Their minds are too exclusively centered on the Bible. The Book of Mormon itself describes how in the latter days the scriptures shall come together in one:

Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also. And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and that I speak forth my words according to mine own pleasure. And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man, neither from that time henceforth and forever. Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written. For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written. For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it;

and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it. And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews. And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever. (2 Nephi 29:8-14)

Not only does Ezekiel teach that Judah and Ephraim will be one and their scriptures one, but also that the Lord will make an everlasting covenant of peace with them, multiply them, and set His sanctuary in the midst of them. They will be cleansed from their iniquities and the Lord will set His servant David over them. (37:23-28) The doctrine concerning David we have observed before. (See pp. 177, 223)

The Lord's Triumph Over Gog, Israel's Enemy.—;In chapters 38 and 39 Ezekiel gives a description of the fate of the great army of Gog that shall come against Israel after their gathering in the latter days. The army which will be enticed from the North by the Lord to invade Israel's territory will be overtaken in a terrible disaster— disaster so overwhelming that God's power will be universally acknowledged. Much speculation has arisen concerning the identity of Gog and the interpretation of these two chapters. In 38:2 Gog is spoken of as being of "the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal." Some scholars think that Ezekiel coined the name from Magog, the name of a people mentioned in Gen. 10:2 as descended from Japheth. Personally, I am inclined to think that Gog symbolizes the prince of the wicked forces, or the wicked forces themselves, that come up to battle God's people. In the description of the great battle of Gog and Magog which, unlike this, is to be fought after the Millennium, (cf D. & C. 29:22) the Book of Revelation (20:8) seems to describe Gog and Magog as "the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth," that is, those deceived by Satan. We are, therefore, not far astray if, like the writers of the ancient rabbinical books, we regard Gog and Magog as the nations, particularly the northern ones, which should in the latter days come up to Jerusalem against the Messiah and His people.

The twenty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants would also seem to throw some light upon part, if not all, of the wicked forces described in these chapters of Ezekiel:

And the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth of Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come to pass, but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign. (D. & C. 29:21; cf. vss. 16, 20, 21 with Ezek. 38:22; 39:17-20.)

There is much food for thought in this verse from our modern scripture.

In 38:1-16, Ezekiel describes the coming of the armies of Gog, but the Lord says He is against them:

Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal; and I will turn thee about, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed most gorgeously, a great company with buckler and shield, all of them handling swords. (38:3, 4)

The enemy thinks he will have an easy time of it plundering peaceful, unwalled villages (38:10-12), but though they (the enemy) come as a cloud, the Lord has different ideas. In times past He allowed His people to be taken captive in order to purify them; now, He intends to be sanctified in the eyes of the nations by slaughtering Gog. (39:23-27)

Chapters 38:17-39:20 contain a description of Gog's actual destruction. [^3] God will rise in His fury and strike him with great seismic disturbances, pestilence, hailstones, fire, and brimstone. So great will be the power manifested in the struggle that the Israelites will be seven years disposing of the war materials of their enemies. (39:9) Moreover, seven months will be required to bury the dead. (39:12) The birds of the air and the beasts of the field will feast upon the flesh of Israel's enemies and drink their blood. (39:17-20) Thus will God be magnified before the nations and show His love and compassion upon the whole of restored Israel.

Neither will I hide My face any more from them; for I have poured out My spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord God. (39:29)

The Architecture and Dedication of A Great Latter-day Temple.—;Chapters 40-48 of Ezekiel are an account of a marvelous vision which was given the prophet concerning the latter-day temple which is yet to be built in Jerusalem, and the division of Palestine among the tribes of Israel, which will have been gathered from the nations of the earth. Ezekiel was first shown details of the temple. Apparently the vision was shown him in or about the year 576 B. C. (40:1) The prophet was taken in the vision and set upon a very high mountain, "whereon was as it were the frame of a city on the south." (40:2) A man whose appearance was like that of brass came forward with a line in his hand, and a measuring rod. This man told Ezekiel to see and hear well and then declare all that he had seen to the house of Israel. (40:3, 4) The prophet was conducted through the temple precincts and was shown the specifications of the holy structure. The outer court, with boundary wall, gate-buildings, and chambers is first described. (40:5-27) Then follows a description of the inner court, with its gates, chambers, and slaughtering tables. (40:28-47) This is followed in turn by the temple-porch, the side-storeys, the back-building, holy chambers in the court, and the extent of the domain about the temple. (40:48-42:20) These descriptions make heavy and monotonous reading; the text in places is very corrupt, especially Chapter 41 where the translation is often uncertain. The prophet now sees what for us may be considered the dedication or consecration of the temple. Following the temple's completion, the Lord's glory fills the house, and the Almighty announces that it will be the place of His throne and the place where He will dwell in the midst of Israel forever. Here is the account of the dedication:

Afterward he [the divine messenger] brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh toward the east; and, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east; and His voice was like the sound of many waters; and the earth did shine with His glory. And the appearance of the vision which I saw was like the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city; and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face. And the glory of the Lord came into the house by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east. And a spirit took me up and brought me into the inner court; and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house. And I heard one speaking unto me out of the house; and a man stood by me. And he said unto me: 'Son of man, this is the place of My throne, and the place of the soles of My feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel forever; and the house of Israel shall no more defile My holy name, neither they, nor their kings, by their harlotry, and by the carcasses of their kings in their high places; in their setting of their threshold by My threshold, and their door-post beside My door-post, and there was but the wall between Me and them; and they have defiled My holy name by their abominations which they have committed; wherefore I have consumed them in Mine anger. Now let them put away their harlotry, and the carcasses of their kings, far from Me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever. Thou, son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities; and let them measure accurately. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, make known unto them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof, and write it in their sight; that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them. This is the law of the house: upon the top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house. (43:1-12)

Immediately following this description of the Lord's acceptance of the temple, Ezekiel tells about the altar of the temple and the manner in which the Levites (of the seed of Zadok) are to offer burnt-offerings upon it. Seven days shall be consumed in making these offerings for the purpose of making "atonement for the altar" (43:26) and cleansing it and consecrating it. Afterwards the Lord will accept the priests. (43:13-27)

Some very interesting doctrinal questions arise in connection with the building of this great latter-day temple and the offering of burnt offerings upon its altar by the Levites. We may ask, What is the main function of this temple? Are endowments of a nature similar to those given in modern Latter-day Saint temples to be offered in this sacred house? It would appear to me after studying all of the chapters which in any way give clues to the use of the sacred structure, that no provision is made in it for any but the most simple rites, and these are not those of the sacred endowments as we know them. No provision is made for work for the dead—;in fact, there is no baptismal fount provided for such. Everything considered, it would appear to me that the temple will be built as a symbol to Israel in Palestine that God is with His people (48:35), and also as a place where the sons of Levi may offer a proper sacrificial offering. (Cf. D. & C. 84:31; 124:39.) Is this sacrifice of animals—;Ezekiel makes it plain that such it is— be made under the Law of Moses, or is it to be under the law of the gospel such as were the sacrifices in Adam's day or Abraham's? The Prophet Joseph Smith would seem to have the answer for us in an article published in the History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

. . . it is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice [i.e., the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus] was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in future: but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, priviliges and authority of the priesthood, or with the Prophets.

The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings. . . .

These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the holy Prophets be brought to pass? It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the Prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what necessity for them ever since that time? (Vol. IV, pp. 211, 212; see chapter on Malachi under caption, "Who are the Sons of Levi?")

The prophet's article seems perfectly clear, and we may appear justified in assuming that the sacrifices which Ezekiel saw will be offered up under the law of the gospel as explained. However, even a cursory examination of Ezekiel's vision of the temple and its workings would seem clearly to indicate that the priests and the Levites who officiate in the structure will be performing ordinances similar to those which were performed under the law of Moses. Let us be specific. First of all, the fact that the priests and Levites do the officiating (cf. 40:45, 46; 43:19; 44:10, 15) is in itself significant, and would seem to indicate that the temple will be operating under laws pertaining to the Aaronic or Lesser Priesthood. Secondly, the burnt offerings made by the priests as described in 43:18-27 are almost exactly paralleled by the accounts in Exodus and Leviticus, as one may easily check with a good reference Bible. And thirdly, the priests and people are commanded as under the Mosaic law:

The meal-offering, and the sin-offering, and the guilt-offering, they, even they, shall eat; and every devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs. And the first of all the first-fruits of every thing, and every heave-offering of every thing, of all your offerings, shall be for the priests; ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough, to cause a blessing to rest on thy house. The priests shall not eat of any thing that dieth of itself, or is torn, whether it be fowl or beast. (44:29-31; cf. Lev. 6:14, 17, 18, 25, 29; 7:1, 6; 22:8; 27:21, 28. Exo. 13:2; 22:29; Num. 15:20, 21.)

In short, it appears that the temple will operate very much as it would if under the law of Moses. (Cf. 1 Kings 8:62-66 for Solomon's temple.) This fact, in the light of our present knowledge, raises very important questions. It is enough to observe here that the temple which Ezekiel saw in his great vision will probably have very specific and restricted uses. May not the ordinances performed in it symbolize for this dispensation the work of the lesser priesthood as it functioned in the temples of the Mosaic dispensation? All priesthood is Melchizedek (priesthood). [^4]

Regulations Governing the Temple.—;Chapters 44-47 are devoted to a discussion of regulations which are to govern the administration of the temple precincts, personnel, and holy days. The east gate of the temple through which the Lord will have entered (43:4) is nevermore to be opened; but the prince—;is this to be the David spoken of before?—;is given permission to "eat bread before the Lord" in the porch of this gate. (44:1-3)

There was a time in Israel when aliens were apparently given subordinate positions in the temple (44:4-8), but in this latter-day temple Ezekiel saw that aliens were to be rigidly excluded:

Thus saith the Lord God: No alien, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into My sanctuary, even any alien that is among the children of Israel. (44:9)

The Levites who are not descendants of Zadok are to have but very limited duties in the temple. This will be because in former times they went astray and worshipped idols:

But the Levites, that went far from Me, when Israel went astray, that went astray from Me after their idols, they shall bear their iniquity; and they shall be ministers in My sanctuary, having charge at the gates of the house, and ministering in the house: they shall slay the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister unto them. Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and became a stumbling block of iniquity unto the house of Israel; therefore have I lifted up My hand against them, saith the Lord God, and they shall bear their iniquity. And they shall not come near unto Me, to minister unto Me in the priest's office, nor to come near to any of My holy things, unto the things that are most holy; but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed. And I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein. (44:10-14)

The priestly functions in the temple are to be restricted to the Levites who are descendants of Zadok. (44:15, 16; see 1 Kings 2:35; 4:4.) Ezekiel gives details of the clothing they are to wear, the regulations concerning their conduct, and the rewards of their office. (44:17-31) These all are reminiscent of their life under Mosaic regulations.

The priests, Levites, and the "Prince" are to have an allotment of territory set aside for them when the land of Israel is divided by lot for an inheritance among the Lord's people. The priests are to receive a portion 25,000 by 10,000 cubits, with the Temple in the midst. This is regarded as a holy portion. The Levites are provided with an inheritance of the same dimensions north of that assigned to the priests. A plot 25,000 by 5,000 cubits is reserved on the south for the city, with all of these together making a square. The share going to the prince is that included by extending the north and south sides of the square to the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea. (45:1-8)

Israel's rulers (princes) are given special instructions to see to it that violence and spoil are removed, that justice and righteousness shall prevail, and that exactions shall be removed from the people. The currency or means of exchange is not to be depreciated. (44:9-12)

Provision is made in 45:13-46:24 for sacrifices and holy days. Contributions are to be paid the prince so that he may be enabled to provide for the sacrifices and offerings:

All the people of the land shall give this offering for the prince in Israel. And it shall be the prince's part to give the burnt-offerings, and the meal-offerings, and the drink-offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, in all the appointed seasons of the house of Israel; he shall prepare the sin-offering, and the meal-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel. (45:16, 17)

Days of atonement are to be celebrated on the first day of the first and seventh months according to the reckoning of the time. The Mosaic nature of the rites is seen in the fact that Ezekiel describes feasts corresponding to those of the Passover and the Feast of Tabernacles:

And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin-offering, and put it upon the door-posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court. And so thou shalt do on the seventh day of the month for every one that erreth, and for him that is simple; so shall ye make atonement for the house. In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover; a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten. And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin-offering. And the seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt-offering to the Lord, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days; and a he-goat daily for a sin-offering. And he shall prepare a meal-offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and a hin of oil to an ephah. In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, in the feast, shall he do the like the seven days; to the sin-offering as well as the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering as well as the oil. (45:19-25)

In the light of these facts, it may be necessary for us to revise or extend our conceptions of the Restoration in the latter days.

Regulations respecting the Sabbaths and New Moons, the offerings, and the land reserved for the prince are found in Chapter 46, not to mention a description of the temple kitchens.

Disposition of the Tribes of Israel in Palestine.—;The last two chapters of the Book of Ezekiel are mostly devoted to the regulations governing the division of the land for an inheritance among the tribes of Israel. But in 47:1-12 the prophet mentions the great life-giving river which is to issue from the Temple. Ezekiel is led into the waters, which finally reach an unfordable depth. The river will go towards the Arabah or Jordan valley where it will enter the Dead Sea. This hitherto unproductive body of water shall be healed and fish be caught there:

Then said he unto me: These waters issue forth toward the eastern region, and shall go down into the Arabah; and when they shall enter into the sea, into the sea of the putrid waters, the waters shall be healed. And it shall come to pass, that every living creature wherewith it swarmeth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live; and there shall be a very great multitude of fish; for these waters are come thither, that all things be healed and may live whithersoever the river cometh.

And it shall come to pass, that fishers shall stand by it from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim; there shall be a place for the spreading of nets; their fish shall be after their kinds, as the fish of the Great Sea, exceeding many. (47:8-10)

The banks of the river which the prophet saw will be productive and useful:

And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow every tree for food, whose leaf shall not wither, neither shall the fruit thereof fail; it shall bring forth new fruit every month, because the waters thereof issue out of the sanctuary; and the fruit thereof shall be for food, and the leaf thereof for healing. (47:12)

On one occasion while preaching on the subject of Christ's Second Coming, the Prophet Joseph Smith had occasion to refer to Ezekiel's vision concerning the issuing of the water from the Temple and the healing of the waters of the Dead Sea. Here are his words:

Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, etc.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance. [^5]

These words of the Prophet Joseph Smith seem to make it certain that he, too, regarded the temple which Ezekiel saw as one which was to be built in the latter days, as we have assumed in our discussion of it.

In Ezekiel's discussion of Israel's inheritance, it is not always easy to trace the boundaries given (47:13-23), particularly the northern one, since some of the place names are unknown to us. Apparently the northern boundary is somewhere north of Damascus and the southern boundary south of the Dead Sea. The Mediterranean will, of course, provide the western boundary; the eastern boundary seems to be the Jordan, for no territory east of it is included. Seven of the tribes of Israel—;Dan, Asher, Naphtali, Manasseh, Ephraim, Reuben, and Judah— allotted inheritances north of the land devoted to the temple, Levites, priests, city, and the prince. (48:1-7) These tribes will dwell in parallel sections of the land, reckoning from the north down in the order given. Of interest to the Latter-day Saints is the fact that provision is made for the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh. It is quite evident from Ezekiel's vision that not all of Joseph's descendants are to have their inheritance on the American continent, as some of our people have supposed. We may be justified in believing, however, that most of Joseph's seed will be provided for on this land (see Ether 13:5-12), but Ezekiel very obviously implies that some of Joseph's descendants will dwell in Palestine.

South of the central section the other five tribes will find their inheritance. They will be in order Benjamin, Simeon, Issachar, Zebulon, and Gad. (48:23-29) It is clear from the text that the population of the city in the reserved section is composed of representatives from all the tribes. (48:15, 19)

In the remaining verses of Ezekiel (48:30-35), the prophet describes the twelve gates of the Holy City. There are to be three gates on each side, which are to be named after the twelve tribes of Israel. The gates on the north side are named after Reuben, Judah, and Levi; those on the east for Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh are united under Joseph, since Levi appears among the twelve), Benjamin, and Dan; on the south for Simeon, Issachar, and Zebulon; and on the west side for Gad, Asher, and Naphtali. Ezekiel tells us that the city from that day shall be named The Lord is There.

The Book of Ezekiel is a great scripture. Unfortunately our people have not read it as widely as it deserves, particularly chapters 33-48, which deal so specifically with the drama of the Restoration in the latter days.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See R. H. Pfeiffer, Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 755.
[^2] An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament (New Ed., Rev. 1913), pp. 510 f. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1923.
[^3] See E. J. Young, The Prophecy of Daniel, p. 23. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1949.
[^4] See J. E. Steinmueller, A Companion to Scripture Studies, Vol. II, Special Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 274.
[^5] C. Lattey, The Book of Daniel, Intro., XXXIX, says, "The argument to a late date from the place of Daniel in the Hebrew canon is a weak one. . . . If, then, it has found a place among the "Hagiographa," the third part of the Hebrew Bible, rather than among the prophets, may this not be because the Jews had a finer sense of the character and literary form of the book than certain other ancients or moderns?"
