Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Seventeen

DANIEL, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF THE BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY

Some Facts Concerning Daniel.—;Not much is known about Daniel (God has judged) or his family. It appears from Daniel 1:3, 4 that he was descended from a Jewish family of the "seed royal" and had unusual opportunities in education and culture. Judging from the passage cited and from the remainder of the book, he must have been a handsome man and one possessed of unusual intelligence and wisdom. He was carried away from Jerusalem, while yet a youth, during the thrid year of Jehoiakim's reign. (1:1) According to our reckoning, as influenced by the Book of Mormon, Daniel must have been taken to Babylon about 609/608 B.C. He became the captive of Nebuchadnezzar (better, Nebuchadrezzar) who changed his name to the Babylonian Belteshazzar (protect his life). (1:7) Daniel seems to have been kindly treated. Through his wonderful prophetic powers he won the favor of the kings with whom he associated during his lifetime. He was elevated to high political favor and influence. His prophetic powers were apparently exercised more at court than among his fellow Jewish captives. Ezekiel, his contemporary, on the other hand, was a prophet whose activities were carried on among his captive countrymen. Many scholars are therefore in the habit of saying that Daniel had the donum propheticum, the prophetic gift, but not the munus propheticum, the prophetic office or vocation. Most Latter-day Saints would reject this statement, not only on the grounds that we do not know much about the extent of Daniel's activities, but also on the grounds that a man may be a prophet even if he does not work actively among his people. Actually a prophet like Daniel may have done more for his people in the role of a statesman at the king's court than he would have done if he had lived and ministered among his fellow Jewish captives.

Daniel perhaps reminds us more of Joseph who was sold into Egypt than does any other person in later Hebrew history. In fact, it would not be out of place for us to refer to him as the Joseph of the Babylonian captivity.

Even after the fall of Babylon, Daniel was continued in high office as one of the three presidents of the satraps under Darius the Mede. (6:3) He seems to have kept his high position until the reign of Cyrus, and as far as we can ascertain never returned to Palestine but spent the remainder of his days in Babylon.

Although we know relatively little about the facts of Daniel's life, he is nevertheless revealed to us as a man of strong character, spirituality, and personal courage. Like Joseph of old his great trust was in God, and come what may, he refused to be swayed by a course of action contrary to his high ideals. He lives in the hearts of men because of that fact.

Important Facts About the Book of Daniel.—;In the Hebrew Old Testament the Book of Daniel is not classed among the "Prophets" but is placed in the "Writings" or Hagiographa. Various explanations have been offered for this fact, but none of them is convincing to the writer. The Greek Old Testament (the Septuagint) placed Daniel between the Major and Minor Prophets, and this fact determined its position in our modern Bible translations.

The Book of Daniel as we now have it consists of twelve chapters and is written in two languages, Hebrew and Aramaic. The Hebrew portion consists of chapters 1:1-2:4a; 8:1-12:13; the remainder is Aramaic. It is, in effect, a kind of linguistic sandwich, the Hebrew of the first and last portions being the bread. The Catholics would add another section written in Greek. This is what they call the "deuterocanonical" or once-contested parts consisting of the "Story of Susanna" and "Bel and the Dragon," which occur at the end, and a long passage entitled "The Son of the Three Children," found between verses 3:23 and 3:24 of the present Aramaic text.

Many explanations have been offered for the appearance in Daniel of two languages, but none seems completely satisfactory.

One plausible theory is that the book was at first written in Hebrew, and, when part of its original text was lost, the Aramaic counterpart was substituted.

Most authorities hold that Daniel was not the author of the book by his name—;in fact, it is usually dated by them about 165 B.C., several centuries after the prophet's time. The Talmud (Baba Bathra, 15a) holds that the "Men of the Great Synagogue" wrote (edited) the book in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah. (c. 440 B.C.) Generally speaking, modern scholars, following the lead of the well-known enemy of Christianity, Porphyry, the pagan Neo-Platonic philosopher, (270 A. D.) hold that the Book of Daniel is a pseudepigraphical work which was written during the Maccabean period by a pious Jew, whose purpose was to encourage his people when Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175-164 B. C.) was persecuting them.

Their arguments in favor of this view of the book are in essence these: (1) The linguistic data, particularly the usage of the Aramaic and of Persian and Greek words, point to a late date— date after the conquest of Palestine by Alexander the Great. (332 B. C.) (2) The miracles and prophecies are outside the pale of historical and authenticated facts; they belong to the realm of subjective rather than objective knowledge. [^1] (3) The book was not given a place among the prophetic books in the Jewish Canon, but rather among the Writings or Hagiographa. (4) A number of important errors and improbabilities occur in the historical narratives of the book. (5) There is powerful evidence that the historical background of the book is not that of the sixth but of the second century B. C. (6) The theology of the book is of late date. (7) The book is mentioned neither in the "Praise of the Fathers" of the book of Jesus Sirach or Ecclesiasticus (44 ff.) nor in the post-exilic prophets Haggai and Malachi, and particularly Zechariah. (Chs. 1-8)

As against the views of the "higher" critics it should be observed that a goodly array of scholars, though a minority, still stoutly adhere to the traditional belief of Christianity and Judaism that Daniel composed his book in the sixth century B. C. Even the great S. R. Driver, who was classed with the other school, is willing to admit the improbability of the narrative in Daniel being "throughout a pure work of the imagination."

Daniel, it cannot be doubted, was a historical person, one of the Jewish exiles in Babylon . . . who . . . foretold, as a seer, something of the future fate of the Chaldean and Persian empires. [^2]

Many, if not most, of the scholars who adhere to the traditional view that Daniel composed the book in the sixth century B. C. do so for the following reasons, among others: (1) In view of modern knowledge, there is nothing in the book's language which would in itself preclude Daniel's authorship of it in the sixth century B. C. [^3] Even if it could be demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that the Aramaic of Daniel was late (3rd cent. B. C.), this would not disprove Daniel's authorship. All it could prove at the most would be that Daniel's Aramaic was edited in later times and later orthography introduced.

(2) Daniel's revelations, miracles, and prophecies are such as might be expected of a true prophet of God. To say that they are outside the pale of historical and authenticated facts and belong to subjective rather than objective knowledge is to deny their possibility, and thus begs the question. [^4]

(3) The Book of Daniel was, to be sure, not included among the prophetic books of the Old Testament, but this fact by no means proves that Daniel was not a prophet or that his book was not of genuine prophetic character, for the very good reason that the canon of the Jewish prophetic books had probably been concluded before the actual redaction of the Book of Daniel. [^5] That Daniel was a prophet is attested by no other than the Savior Himself (Matt. 24:15), not to mention others including Josephus (Antiq., X, 11, 7).

(4) True history is found in the Book of Daniel. Some slight errors may have crept in through the work of editors following Daniel's time, but the book is substantially correct. [^6]

(5) The Book of Daniel reflects the background of the Babylonian and Persian empires, [^7] not that of the second century B. C.

(6) The theology of the book is in essential harmony with what we should expect from a prophet in the sixth century B. C. Arguments based on Daniel's theology cannot prove that the book is of late post-exilic date. [^8]

(7) Though it is true that the Book of Ecclesiasticus (175 B. C.) mentions Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, but not Daniel, that fact does not prove that the Book of Daniel had not yet been written. The argument from silence is very weak. Ecclesiasticus may not have mentioned Daniel, but on the other hand neither does it mention Ezra, Jehoshaphat, Mordecai, Asa, and other well known characters. The same is true of the books of Haggai, Malachi and Zechariah. However, the Book of Ezekiel does mention Daniel. (Ezek. 14:14, 20; 28:3) Despite the recent discovery of an ancient Danel in the Ras Shamra tablets, it is more than probable that Ezekiel is referring to the Daniel of the sixth century B. C.

(8) The fact that Christ and others mentioned in the New Testament give tacit approval [^9] to Daniel and the traditional claims made concerning his book must make a great appeal to most Christian people. (See Matt. 10:23; 16:27 ff.; 19:28; 24:15, 30; 25:31; 26:64; Mark 13:14; Luke 21:20; 2 Thess. 2:3, 8; Heb. 11:33, 34. All of these references give at least indirect approval of the genuineness of the Book of Daniel.

That the Book of Daniel is a literary unity is still championed by numbers of scholars, liberal and conservative alike. [^10]

It should be kept in mind that conservative scholars do not by any means claim that there are no difficulties in the traditional views concerning Daniel and his book. They have surely not solved all of them. But they do claim that greater difficulties are found in the negative views championed by the higher critics.

The author has presented the arguments concerning the Book of Daniel in greater detail than he had at first expected to do, but in view of the book's importance to the Latterday Saints this will probably be found a virtue rather than a defect. It should also be pointed out that irrespective of the points of view held by those not of our faith, we have the independent assurance from our own modern scriptures and from statements of the Prophet Joseph Smith that the traditional views concerning the authorship and prophetic inspiration of the Book of Daniel are substantially correct. In the Doctrine and Covenants (65:2; 116:1) important aÃ¬lusions are made to doctrines taught in Dan. 2:44 and 7:9-14 respectively. The last reference in the Doctrine and Covenants specifically refers to Daniel as "the prophet." We shall have occasion presently to make more extended use of these passages in the Doctrine and Covenants.

In an article on the Priesthood Joseph Smith refers to Adam as the "Ancient of Days" spoken of by Daniel. (D.H.C., IV, 206) And in a conference held April 8, 1843, the prophet speaks with evident approval of Daniel 7:16. (D.H.C., V, 341-343) Moreover, he included the Book of Daniel in his revision of the Bible as an inspired book. This is an important point when it is remembered that he cast out the Song of Songs as uninspired.

The Book of Daniel falls quite naturally into two divisions. chapters 1 to 6 narrate the history of Daniel and chapters 7 to 12 relate the visions vouchsafed to him.

The Aramaic portions of the book (2:4b-7:28) are finer literature than the parts written in Hebrew. The narratives of Daniel in chapters 2 to 6 are not to be classed with the Hebrew short stories in Ruth, Jonah, Esther, and the accounts of Joseph in Genesis 37 to 50. Critics seem generally agreed that the literary art of Daniel is somewhat crude, elementary, and mechanical. There is, however, in the stories a certain vividness and impressiveness that has made them live. Through their inherent reality, these stories have passed into universal literature, and we meet allusions to them on every hand. The Book of Daniel better represents the hand of the religious artist than that of the literary artist. The style of the book tends to be unconnected, abrupt, and condensed, except when dealing with protracted speeches and royal decrees. The author tends in comparisons to be obvious, and in many other respects to be unadorned, and factual. Most observers will notice a certain monotony in his narratives because of the recurrence of somewhat similar themes.

The Book of Daniel may be conveniently studied according to the following outline:

I. Chapters 1:1-6:28. The Historical Section Containing Six Anecdotes of Daniel's Life in Company With Three Compatriots.

A. The preparation of Daniel and his friends at the king's court. (1:1-21)

B. Nebuchadrezzar's dream and Daniel's interpretation of it. (2:1-49)

C. The deliverance of Daniel's three companions from the fiery furnace. (3:1-30)

D. Daniel interprets Nebuchadrezzar's dream of the tree hewn down; the king loses his reason. (4:1-37)

E. The writing on the wall at Belshazzar's feast; Daniel's interpretation; Belshazzar is slain. (5:1-31)

F. The plot against Daniel; he is rescued from the lion's den. (6:1-28)

II. Chapters 7:1-12:13. Daniel's Four Visions.

A. The vision of the four great beasts; the coming of the Son of Man to the Ancient of Days. (7:1-28)

B. The vision of the ram and the he-goat in the third year of Belshazzar's reign. (8:1-27)

C. The vision of the seventy weeks in the first year of Darius the Mede. (9:1-27)

D. The vision of future history including the latter days. (10:1-12:13)

THE HISTORICAL SECTION

The Preparation of Daniel and His Friends at the King's Court.—;The accounts concerning Daniel and his compatriots in chapters 1 to 6 seem to have been written for the purpose of promoting faith among the readers of them. In general they illustrate how the prophet and his associates remained firm in their faith despite trials and persecutions. The first of these narratives (Ch. 1) relates how Daniel and his three friends, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, were chosen to be taught Chaldean learning and to receive the board of the court for three years. But Daniel demurred at the thought of defiling himself with the king's food and wine. It should be remembered that the Jews had a code of dietary laws to which our own "Word of Wisdom" would be comparable. To break this code of laws was quite as much a breach in the eyes of Daniel and his friends as the drinking of tea and coffee or the smoking of tobacco is to us. He therefore proposed to the king's officer that they be permitted to experiment a little:

Try thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink. Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the youths that eat of the king's food; and as thou seest, deal with thy servants. (1:12, 13)

The experiment is one of the first dietary experiments known to history. The "pulse" which Daniel proposed to eat was nothing more or less than vegetable products, very probably peas and beans. The consumption of vegetables and water, instead of the king's food and wine, agreed so well with Daniel and his companions during a ten-day trial that their steward changed the diet of the other young men at the court to "pulse" and water. (1:15-16) Here we have taught in concrete form the value of a good example. Daniel and his friends, by their courage and determination to live their religion, influenced others to do good. The book gives us to understand that in all these matters the four companions were exceedingly blessed, for at the end of three years, when all the young men stood before the king, "none among them was found to be like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah." (1:19; cf. 1:7.)

And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king inquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and enchanters that were in all his realm. (1:20)

In this last statement the zeal and faith of the writer is frankly exhibited

Nebuchadrezzar's Dream and Daniel's Interpretation of it.—;The second chapter of Daniel contains a remarkable prophecy of events which were destined to take place in the dispensation in which we live. It seems that Nebuchadrezzar had a dream which, it has been asserted, he could not remember. He was troubled in spirit, and demanded that his wise men tell him the dream and give its interpretation. Having failed in this, the king gave an order for the wise men, including Daniel and his companions, to be slain. (2:12, 13) Apparently Daniel had not been present when Nebuchadrezzar made his demands. He requested the king to give him an opportunity to consider the matter with the view of declaring the dream and its meaning. The prophet and his friends prayed to God, and the secret was revealed to Daniel in a vision of the night; he therefore uttered words of blessing and thanksgiving. (2:19-23) When Daniel appeared before Nebuchadrezzar he informed him that the God of heaven had revealed to the king secrets concerning what should take place in the latter days. (2:28) In his dream and visions the king had seen a mighty image whose brightness was surpassing and the appearance thereof terrible. The head of the image was of fine gold, the breast and arms of silver, its belly and thighs of brass, its legs of iron, and its feet part of iron and part of clay. The king saw a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which smote the image into pieces. The pieces became like chaff and disappeared in the wind, but the stone became a great mountain and filled the whole earth. (2:31-35) Daniel then gave the interpretation of the dream. Nebuchadrezzar represented the head of gold, and the other parts of the body in succession represented kingdoms that should arise after him. (2:37-43) Although theologians have differed somewhat in their identifications of the kingdoms represented by the lower parts of the image, our people have generally adopted the following scheme: (1) the head of gold—e Babylonian Empire; (2) the chest and arms—e Medo-Persian Empire; (3) the belly and thighs—e Graeco-Macedonian Empire; (4) the legs of iron—e Roman Empire; (5) the feet and toes of mixed clay and iron—e modern states and kingdoms coming out of the Roman Empire. [^11]

As a people we are not so much concerned about differences of opinion that may exist among exegetes concerning the identity of the second and third kingdoms, but we would insist on our interpretation of the fifth point and argue strongly for the fourth

Daniel explained to Nebuchadrezzar that in the days of the last kings the God of heaven would set up a kingdom which should never be destroyed or left to another people:

And in the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; nor shall the kingdom be left to another people; it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, but it shall stand for ever. (2:44)

We say that the kingdom never to be destroyed is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which was restored in the "latter days" (2:28) and is never to be taken from the people to whom it came, or left to another people. It shall indeed, in God's hands, break in pieces and consume all other kingdoms, and stand forever. The stone that was "cut out without hands," which Nebuchadrezzar saw, is none other than the gospel of Jesus Christ restored under the leadership of the modern Prophet Joseph Smith. As the gospel spreads in the world under our missionary efforts, the remnants of worldly kingdoms will be swept away as chaff, and the "stone" will fill the whole earth. (2:35, 45) That the stone is the gospel is made clear in a revelation given to Joseph Smith in October, 1831:

The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth. (D. & C. 65:2)

By these words the Lord gives his approval to Daniel's explanations and helps us better to understand them.

Nebuchadrezzar approved Daniel's words and elevated the prophet and his companions to some of the highest offices in his kingdom:

The king spoke unto Daniel, and said: 'Of a truth it is, that your God is the God of gods, and the Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou hast been able to reveal this secret.' Then the king made Daniel great, and gave him many great gifts, and made him to rule over the whole province of Babylon, and to be chief prefect over all the wise men of Babylon. And Daniel requested of the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon; but Daniel was in the gate of the king. (2:47-49)

Again Daniel demonstrated the power of faith and prayer in the affairs of men

The Deliverance of Daniel's Three Companions From the Fiery Furnace.—;Chapter 3 relates how Nebuchadrezzar erected a great image of gold and required all of his subjects, upon penalty of death, to bow down and worship it. All of the people, certain Jews excepted, did bow down to the image. A number of Chaldeans brought accusation against these Jews, who happened to be Daniel's three friends, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. For some reason unknown to us, Daniel's name is not included. Various answers have been given to the problem which thus arises. These need not detain us. It is entirely possible that Daniel was nowhere about—;he may have been out of the country on a problem of state. In any event, Nebuchadrezzar commanded the accused to be brought before him, but they refused to worship his image despite the threats of being thrown into a burning fiery furnace:

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, answered and said to the king: 'O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter. If our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, He will deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and out of thy hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image thou hast set up.' (3:16-18)

The fury of the king knew no bounds, and he commanded that the furnaces be heated seven times more than usual. The three men bound in their cloaks, tunics, robes, and other garments, were then cast into the roaring flames. So hot was the furnace that the men who threw the recalcitrant Jews into it were slain by the heat thereof. Suddenly Nebuchadrezzar rose up alarmed:

Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was alarmed, and rose up in haste; he spoke and said unto his ministers: 'Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire?' They answered and said unto the king: 'True, O king.' He answered and said: 'Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods.' Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace; he spoke and said: 'Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants of God Most High, come forth, and come hither.' Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, came forth out of the midst of the fire. And the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, and the king's ministers, being gathered together, saw these men, that the fire had no power upon their bodies, nor was the hair of their head singed, neither were there cloaks changed, nor had the smell of fire passed on them. (3:24-27)

The king then blessed the God of the three companions, and issued a decree that nothing should be said amiss against Him in the whole kingdom on pain of death. (3:29) Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were then promoted in the province of Babylon.

This faith-promoting narrative is one of the most famous in the Book of Daniel. It is celebrated throughout the Christian world, because it tells of the faith, courage, and valor of men whose trust was in the God of Israel.

Daniel Interprets Nebuchadrezzar's Dream of the Tree Hewn Down.—;In Chapter 4 the prophetic insight and wisdom of Daniel is again set forth. Nebuchadrezzar had another dream which affrightened him. His regular staff of magicians, enchanters, and astrologers listened to him relate the dream, but were unable to make known its interpretation. But the king turned confidently to Daniel. In his dream, Nebuchadrezzar beheld a strong tree, the height of which reached unto heaven. Its leaves were fair and its fruit abundant; the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air found refuge under it or in its branches, and all flesh was fed of it. A heavenly being came and commanded that the tree be hewn down and its fruit scattered. Beasts and birds were to get away from it, but "the stump of its roots" was to be left in the ground:

Nevertheless leave the stump of its roots in the earth,

Even in a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field;

And let it be wet with the dew of heaven,

And let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth;

Let his heart be changed from man's,

And let a beast's heart be given unto him;

And let seven times pass over him.

The matter is by the decree of the watchers,

And the sentence by the word of the holy ones;

To the intent that the living may know

That the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men,

And giveth it to whomsoever He will,

And setteth up over it the lowest of men. (4:15-17)

Having told the dream to Daniel, the king assured him that he, Daniel, would make known the interpretation, "for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee." (4:18) The dream disturbed Daniel greatly, but Nebuchadrezzar told him not to let the dream or its interpretation affright him. Doubtless the reason why the prophet was shaken in spirit was that the dream concerned the king personally, and he hesitated to give him bad news. Nevertheless, here is the interpretation which he gave: The tree in all its strength and greatness represented the king and the extent of his dominion in the earth. The stump of the tree, and his portion with the beasts of the field till seven times should pass over him, represented the fact that the king should be driven out from men, become insane, and dwell with the beasts, and eat grass like oxen for seven years, until he acquired sufficient humility to realize that the Most High rules among men. The stump left in the earth meant that the dominion of the king should be made sure to him after he had learned his lesson that the heavens, not men, rule. Daniel then counselled the king to repent of his sins and make amends for them:

Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by almsgiving, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if there may be a lengthening of thy prosperity. (4:27)

After a year's time the doom pronounced upon Nebuchadrezzar literally came to pass:

All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar. At the end of twelve months he was walking upon the royal palace of Babylon. The king spoke and said: 'Is not this great Babylon, which I have built for a royal dwelling-place, by the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?' While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a voice from heaven: 'O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; the kingdom is departed from thee. And thou shall be driven from men, and thy dwelling shall be with beasts of the field; thou shalt be made to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee; until thou know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will.' The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar; and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hair was grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws. (4:28-33)

This strange narrative is regarded as one of the historical perplexities of the Book of Daniel. The disease with which the king was afflicted is known technically as lycanthropy. The patient believes that he has been changed into an animal and, to a limited extent, acts like it. We may reasonably assume that Daniel advised the king to make suitable arrangements beforehand for the government of his dominion, in preparation for the day when his affliction should come upon him. What part the prophet played in those preparations or in the actual government of Babylon during the time that Nebuchadrezzar's reason was gone, we are unable to say. Suffice it to say that the king's faculties were restored, and he gave praise to the Most High:

And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the Most High, and I praised and honored Him that liveth for ever;

For His dominion is an everlasting dominion,

And His kingdom from generation to generation;

And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing;

And He doeth according to His will in the host of heaven,

And among the inhabitants of the earth;

And none can stay His hand

Or say unto Him: What doest Thou?

At the same time mine understanding returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and my splendor returned unto me; and my ministers and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and surpassing greatness was added unto me. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honor the King of heaven; for all His works are truth, and His ways justice; and those that walk in pride He is able to abase. (4:34-37)

Belshazzar's Feast.—;The account of Daniel at Belshazzar's feast in Chapter 5 is another of the most popular narratives concerning him. It has been also one of the most criticized in the book for its alleged historical inconsistencies. Some critics have denied Belshazzar's historicity, and in fact his identity long puzzled commentators. It will be noticed (5:1) that Belshazzar is called "the king." This is called a "grave" error by certain critics. Now we know from the cuneiform inscriptions that Belshazzar was a historical character. According to the contemporary Babylonian records, he was the first-born son and coregent of Nabonidus, the last king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire. How is this statement to be reconciled with the account in 5:11, 13 where Belshazzar is referred to as Nebuchadrezzar's son? In the light of Semitic thought, a reasonable answer would seem to be this: Belshazzar would be the "son" of Nebuchadrezzar in the sense that his mother was the daughter of that ruler. That is to say he was a descendant of Nebuchadrezzar. He may possibly have been the Belshazzar who acted as a chief officer in the king's court about the year 560 B. C. Babylonian records seem to indicate that he became the coregent of Nabonidus in the third year of his reign (553 B. C.) and so continued until the year 539 B. C. In spite of the fact that the cuneiform records always call Belshazzar the "son of the king," rather than "king," the burden of proof rests upon the critics who declare that the Book of Daniel is in error.

Belshazzar's feast was truly a regal affair. To it the king had called a thousand of his lords, not to mention his own wives and concubines, and he drank wine before them. Possibly the spirit of mockery, and also as an evidence of the power of his kingdom, he commanded that the gold and silver vessels of the temple in Jerusalem, carried away by Nebuchadrezzar, be brought forth. From them he and his lords, and his wives and concubines, drank wine to their pagan gods. In the midst of this blasphemy, Belshazzar suddenly beheld a hand writing upon the plaster of the wall in the palace:

In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace; and the king saw the palm of the hand that wrote. Then the king's countenance was changed in him, and his thoughts affrighted him; and the joints of the loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. The king cried aloud to bring in the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the astrologers. The king spoke and said to the wise men of Babylon: 'Whosoever shall read this writing, and declare unto me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with purple, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall rule as one of the three in the kingdom.' (5:5-7)

The wise men of the king could neither read the writing nor interpret it. In the midst of the fear and confusion, the queen came into the hall:

Now the queen by reason of the words of the king and his lords came into the banquet house; the queen spoke and said: 'O king, live for ever! let not thy thoughts affright thee, nor let thy countenance be changed; there is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; and the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made him master of the magicians, enchanters, Chaldeans, and astrologers; forasmuch as a surpassing spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and declaring of riddles, and loosing of knots, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will declare the interpretation. (5:10-12)

Daniel was brought before the king and given promises of great rewards if he would read the writing and interpret it. (5:13-16) The prophet told the king not to bother with the gifts. He then recounted the untoward experiences of Nebuchadrezzar because of his lack of humility. And to his words he added:

And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thy heart, though thou knewest all this; but hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of His house before thee, and thou and thy lords, thy consorts and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know; and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified; then was the palm of the hand sent from before Him, and this writing was inscribed. And this is the writing that was inscribed: MENE MENE, TEKEL UPHARSIN. This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE, God hath numbered thy kingdom, and brought it to an end. TEKEL, thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. PERES, thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and the Persians. Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with purple, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made proclamation concerning him, that he should rule as one of three in the kingdom. In that night Belshazzar the Chaldean king was slain. (5:22-30)

Such was the fate of the king who blasphemed and mocked the true and living God, the God of the Prophet Daniel.

Daniel and the Lion's Den.—;Perhaps the most famous narrative in the book is that of Daniel in the lion's den. Renowned in song and story, it is part of the spiritual inheritance of every Christian household.

We are told that during the early part of the short reign of Darius the Mede, he set up one hundred and twenty satraps throughout the kingdom, and over them three presidents, of whom Daniel was one. (6:1, 2) Little is known about Darius; in fact, secular sources are silent concerning the man. He seems to have been the son of Ahasuerus (9:1) and was 62 years old (5:31) when made king over the realm of Chaldeans following the capture of Babylon by the army of Cyrus. He apparently had an ad interim appointment; that is, he ruled until such a time as Cyrus, who was making conquests elsewhere, was ready to take over active duty as king of Babylon. According to Josephus, he was the son of Astyages, but the Greeks seem to have known him by another name. (Antiq., X, 11, 4)

Daniel so distinguished himself in his administrative duties, because of the "surpassing spirit" which was in him (6:3), that the king thought to set him over the whole realm. The other presidents and the satraps were so jealous of the prophet that they sought occasion against him, but no fault could they find. But envious men usually find it possible to trump up false charges against a successful rival, and this time was no exception. Since no other course seemed feasible, the rival officials conspired to get at Daniel through the "matter of the law of his God." (6:5) King Darius foolishly signed an interdict prepared by them to the effect that whosoever should ask a petition (a religious request) of any god or man for thirty days, save the king only, should be cast into the den of lions. (6:6-9)

After the interdict was signed, the officials found Daniel praying, as was his custom, and so found the occasion against him which they were seeking. Although Darius was obviously prejudiced in Daniel's favor, (6:14) he was caught in his own interdict and felt it necessary to cast the prophet into the den of lions:

Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spoke and said unto Daniel: 'Thy God whom thou servest continually, He will deliver thee.' And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel. (6:16, 17)

All night the king fasted— [^12]eep fled— in the early morning he hasted to the den.

And when he came near unto the den to Daniel, he cried with a pained voice; the king spoke and said to Daniel: 'O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?' Then said Daniel unto the king: 'O king, live for ever! My God hath sent His angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, and they have not hurt me; forasmuch as before Him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.' Then was the king exceeding glad, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he had trusted in his God. (6:20-23)

The king then turned the tables on Daniel's accusers; they and their families came to a dreadful end in the lion's den. (6:24) The incident involving the prophet impelled Darius to issue a decree:

Then king Darius wrote unto all the peoples, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth: 'Peace be multiplied unto you. I make a decree, that in all the dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel:

For He is the living God,

And steadfast for ever,

And His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,

And His dominion shall be even unto the end;

He delivereth and rescueth,

And He worketh signs and wonders

In heaven and in earth;

Who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.'

(6:25-27)

Again the God of Daniel rescued His servant who had trusted in Him.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Third Edition, p. 157.
[^2] See Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Third Edition, p. 157.
[^3] C. F. Keil, Biblical Commentary on the Book of Daniel, (tr. by Rev. M. G. Easton). p. 400. Wm. B. Eerdman's Publishing Co., Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1949.
[^4] See, for example, R. H. Pfeiffer, Introduction to the Old Testament, pp. 751-753. Harpers, 1941.
[^5] C. Lattey, The Book of Daniel, Intro., XXXIX, says, "The argument to a late date from the place of Daniel in the Hebrew canon is a weak one. . . . If, then, it has found a place among the "Hagiographa," the third part of the Hebrew Bible, rather than among the prophets, may this not be because the Jews had a finer sense of the character and literary form of the book than certain other ancients or moderns?"
[^6] Lattey, Ibid., p. XXIX, says, "History in fact is presented to us in the Book of Daniel not merely in the simple narrative, but also in the visions." C. F. Keil, Biblical Commentary on the Book of Daniel, (tr. by M. G. Easton), p. 19, remarks, "The Book of Daniel, in its historical and prophetical contents, corresponds to the circumstances of the times under which, according to its statements, it sprang up,. . ." See also the extensive list of authorities cited by Pfeiffer, op. cit., p. 755, footnote.
[^7] See E. J. Young, op. cit., p. 20
[^8] E. J. Young, An Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 363. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1949.
[^9] J. R. Donehoo, The New Testament View of the Old Testament, p. 72, says, "From the evidence produced . . . it appears that our Lord and the writers of the New Testament held . . . that the Book of Daniel was written by the prophet Daniel,. . ."
[^10] See Pfeiffer, op. cit., p. 761
[^11] See D. H. C., I, Intro., XXXVI-XLII.
[^12] The tendency to break suddenly into song. This feature is common to all the portions of the book and altogether peculiar to Isaiah. See Isaiah 5:1-7; 12:1-6; 26:1-4; 35:1-10; 36:10-20; 44:23; 48:20; 51:11; 54:1.
