Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Eighteen

DANIEL, PROPHET-STATESMAN OF THE BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY—;(Concluded)

DANIEL'S VISIONS

Daniel's Vision of the Four Beasts and the Ancient of Days.—;Chapters 7 to 12 deal with a series of four visions given to Daniel. The one in Chapter 7, we believe has reference in part to events of this dispensation—;in fact, to important events even yet future. Much of the imagery of the vision seems fantastic, and yet it seems possible in the light of modern revelation to interpret it in its general outline. In the first year of Belshazzar, king of Babylon, Daniel saw four great beasts coming out of the sea, which in Babylonian mythology is the element opposed to the divine. The first beast was like a lion with eagle's wings; the wings were plucked off, and the beast was lifted up from the earth and made to stand upon two feet as a man, and a man's heart was given to it. The second beast was like a bear, and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth; it was told to arise and devour much flesh. The third beast was like a leopard, which had upon the sides of it the four wings of a fowl; it also had four heads and dominion was given to it. The fourth and last beast was dreadful and terrible. It was very strong and had great iron teeth; it devoured and broke in pieces, and stamped the residue with its feet. It had ten horns, and among them there came up another small horn before which three of the first horns were uprooted. In this horn were the eyes of a man and a mouth speaking great things. Then Daniel saw a glorious personage, the "Ancient of Days," sitting upon a throne and myriads of persons ministered to him. Judgment was set and the books were opened. The great beast with the horns was destroyed and burned with fire. The dominion of the other beasts was taken away from them, but their lives were prolonged for a time. Then one "like unto the Son of Man" came with the clouds of heaven to the Ancient of Days, and there was given unto Him dominion, glory, and a kingdom that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve Him. His dominion was to be an everlasting dominion, and His kingdom should never be destroyed. The vision disturbed Daniel greatly, and he asked concerning its meaning. It will be well to give here the explanation he received:

I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth concerning all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things: 'These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, that shall arise out of the earth. But the saints of the Most High shall receive the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.' Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which was diverse from all of them, exceeding terrible, whose teeth were of iron, and its nails of brass; which devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped the residue with its feet; and concerning the ten horns that were on its head, and the other horn which came up, and before which three fell; even that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spoke great things, whose appearance was greater than that of its fellows. I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them; until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given for the saints of the Most High; and the time came, and the saints possessed the kingdom. Thus he said: 'The fourth beast shall be a fourth kingdom upon the earth, which shall be diverse from all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces. And as for the ten horns, out of this kingdom shall ten kings arise; and another shall arise after them; and he shall be diverse from the former, and he shall put down three kings. And he shall speak words against the Most High, and shall wear out the saints of the Most High; and he shall think to change the seasons and the law; and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and half a time. But the judgment shall sit, and his dominion shall be taken away, to be consumed and to be destroyed unto the end. And the kingdom and the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High; their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey them.' Here is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my thoughts much affrighted me, and my countenance was changed in me; but I kept the matter in my heart. (7:16-28)

Now, what is the interpretation of this vision in terms that would be readily understood today? First of all, it should be noticed that in the interpretation given to Daniel, he was told that the four beasts represented four kings that should arise out of the earth. (7:17) Most interpreters seem to conclude that there is a correspondence between the beasts which Daniel saw and the kingdoms represented by the image in Nebuchadrezzar's dream (ch. 2). Thus the lion corresponds to the head of gold and stands for Babylon with Nebuchadrezzar at her head; the bear corresponds to the breast and arms of silver and stands either for Media or the Medo-Persian empire; the leopard corresponds to the belly and thighs of brass and represents either the Persian kingdom or that of Alexander's Macedonian empire; the fourth and last beast with ten horns is held to correspond with the iron and clay of the image, and is said to represent the Greek kingdom of Alexander or the Roman Empire.

There may be some merit in these conclusions, but as Latter-day Saints we have the advantage of modern revelation to help us in the interpretation. This we have already pointed out. In the History of the Church, (V, 341) the Prophet Joseph makes an interesting comment:

When God made use of the figure of a beast in visions to the prophets He did it to represent those kingdoms which had degenerated and become corrupt, savage and beast-like in their dispositions, even the degenerate kingdoms of the wicked world; but He never made use of the figure of a beast nor any of the brute kind to represent His kingdom.

Daniel says (ch. 7, v. 16) when he saw the vision of the four beasts, "I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this," the angel interpreted the vision to Daniel; but we find, by the interpretation that the figures of beasts had no allusion to the kingdom of God. You there see that the beasts are spoken of to represent the kingdoms of the world, the inhabitants whereof were beastly and abominable characters; they were murderers, corrupt, carnivorous, and brutal in their dispositions. . . .

In this statement the contribution of the prophet concerns the moral nature of the kingdoms concerned, not their political identity, if they have any. It is to be noticed that in the Old Testament the gentile nations are sometimes symbolized by beasts. (Cf. Ezek. 29:3 ff.; Isa. 27:1; 51:9) Another help which the prophet contributes to the interpretation of the vision lies in his identification of the Ancient of Days who seems to preside at the judgment scene. (7:9, 10) This great individual is none other than the oldest member and patriarch of the race, Father Adam. In the Doctrine and Covenants he is spoken of as "Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days." (27:11) The prophet also refers to him in an article on the Priesthood in the History of the Church (IV, 207) as follows:

Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as being the "Ancient of Days," or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. . . .

Many exegetes profess either not to know who the "Ancient of Days" is, or connect him with heathen gods. Still others identify him with God in the judgment scene of 7:10. How far they are from the truth may be judged from the words of our modern prophet.

It appears, then, that the beasts, the images of which Daniel saw, represent the wicked forces or kingdoms of the world. Are they to be identified with specific kingdoms such as the Babylonian, Median, Persian, Macedonian or Roman? I think not, in the light of modern revelation. My line of reasoning for such a conclusion is this: The judgment scene at which the "Ancient of Days" (Michael or Adam) will preside is yet in the future. In a revelation received by Joseph Smith in Spring Hill, Daviess County, Missouri, May 19, 1838, Spring Hill is named by the Lord:

Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said he, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet. (D. & C. 116:1)

Of interest also in this connection is an explanation by the prophet:

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. [^1]

Now that we recognize this event as yet future, let us turn to Daniel's own narrative for a moment. In his account of the judgment scene, he makes the following observation:

I beheld at that time because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke, I beheld even till the beast was slain, and its body destroyed, and it was given to be burned with fire. And as for the rest of the beasts, their dominion was taken away; yet their lives were prolonged for a season and a time. (7:11, 12)

Inasmuch as the destruction of the beasts is an event of the future, it stands to reason that they may represent evil forces or kingdoms whose nature may not be entirely clear to us at the present time. At any rate they cannot represent nations of the past except in a sense presently to be explained. Babylon, Media, Persia, Macedonia and Rome disappeared long ago as nations; obviously they cannot be destroyed in the future! May I suggest that the last beast which Daniel saw, which was so terrible and which had a mouth speaking great things, (7:7, 8) is none other than the "great and abominable church" of our modern scriptures. Let me make my point clear. Keep in mind that Daniel saw that "the beast was slain, and its body destroyed, and it was given to be burned with fire." (7:11) In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the destructive forces to be unleashed prior to the Second Advent, the Lord explains:

And another angel shall sound his trump, saying: That great church, the mother of abominations, that made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, that persecuteth the saints of God, that shed their blood— [^2]e who sitteth upon many waters, and upon the islands of the sea—hold, she is the tares of the earth; she is bound in bundles; her bands are made strong, no man can loose them; therefore, she is ready to be burned. And he shall sound his trump both long and loud, and all nations shall hear it. (D. & C. 88:94)

This evil power is doubtless the same one spoken of in the twenty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants and testified to by Ezekiel the prophet:

And the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth of Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come to pass but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign. (D. & C. 29:21; cf. Ezek. 38:14-23)

The Book of Mormon also speaks at length concerning this evil force in the world that shall meet destruction. Notice a few of the words of Nephi:

And the blood of that great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall turn upon their own heads; for they shall war among themselves, and the sword of their own hands shall fall upon their own heads, and they shall be drunken with their own blood. And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord. And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and that great whore, who hath perverted the right ways of the Lord, yea, that great and abominable church, shall tumble to the dust and great shall be the fall of it. For behold, saith the prophet, the time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must be burned. For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous. Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire. Behold, my brethren, I say unto you, that these things must shortly come; yea, even blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke must come; and it must needs be upon the face of this earth; and it cometh unto men according to the flesh if it so be that they will harden their hearts against the Holy One of Israel. (1 Nephi 22:13-18)

May I emphasize that even if the "great and abominable church" is correctly identified as the power which is represented by Daniel's great beast, we do not at present fully comprehend the ramifications of it or the range of dominion it will have prior to its destruction. But Daniel gives us another hint as to the nature, past history, and accomplishments of this great beast whose final end is yet future. It will be noticed that he says:

I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them; until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given for the saints of the Most High; and the time came, and the saints possessed the kingdom. (7:21, 22)

Now, when in past history did the "horn" make war with the saints and prevail against them? As Latter-day Saints we say this event took place roughly during the last quarter of the first century A. D. and the first quarter of the second century, when a great apostasy took place in the Christian Church. The great dissensions and evil forces that brought about an apostasy from within are easily discernible in the New Testament. (See Matt. 24:4, 5, 9, 11, 12, 13, 23, 24; John 16:1-4; Acts 20:29, 30; 2 Thess. 2:1-12; 1 Tim. 4:1-3; 2 Tim. 4:3, 4; 2 Pet. 2:1-3; 1 John 2:18, 19; Jude 17, 18, 19; Rev. 3:14-17; 13:4-8.) Add to these inner difficulties the persecutions of the Roman Empire, and it is easily seen how every vestige of power and authority to act in the ordinances of the Church passed from men. To be sure, the outward shell still continued on and was called the Christian Church, but the true spirit and power of Christ was gone. To quote Daniel at greater length:

Thus he said: 'The fourth beast shall be a fourth kingdom upon the earth, which shall be diverse from all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces. And as for the ten horns, out of this kingdom shall ten kings arise; and another shall arise after them; and he shall be diverse from the former, and he shall put down three kings. And he shall speak words against the Most High, and shall wear out the saints of the Most High; and he shall think to change the seasons and the law; and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and half a time. (7:23-25)

The "horn" (7:21) seen by Daniel indeed prevailed against the saints of the early Church. Only the restoration of the Church in the latter days under the leadership of the Prophet Joseph Smith can account for the saints who will be present at the time the Ancient of Days comes, as mentioned by Daniel.

Latter-day Saints may thus understand that the great beast seen by Daniel does not necessarily have a particular political identity at a special time in history. It rather represents the great forces of evil that have operated for centuries in the world against the work of God and that will continue to operate until the judgment spoken of by Daniel takes place. The evils present in the decadent empires of Babylon, Media, Persia, Macedon, and Rome may indeed have once been part of the "dreadful and terrible beast," but their immediate effects are gone; new evils have arisen in the world and constitute the present power of the beast.

Curiosity naturally arises concerning the identity of the evil forces in the world represented by the first three beasts which Daniel saw. The fact that their dominion was to be taken away in the judgment and their lives "prolonged for a season and a time" (7:12) suggests that they will be forces much less potent than those represented by the great beast which we have considered at length. I have no suggestions to give respecting their specific identity other than to point out the possibility of their being forces or institutions which have the potentiality of being changed or reformed to the world's blessing. Otherwise why should they be spared "for a season and a time"? Those which can be changed and prove of value may be retained, the others will doubtless be destroyed in due time.

After Daniel had seen the power of the beasts broken, he beheld another glorious event as we have already mentioned. He saw the "Son of Man" coming with the clouds of heaven, coming even to the "Ancient of Days." The great patriarch of the human race was brought before Him. Latter-day Saints accept Daniel's description as one of the scenes in the great drama of Christ's Second Advent:

I saw in the night visions,

And, behold, there came with the clouds of heaven

One like unto a son of man,

And he came even to the Ancient of days,

And he was brought near before Him.

And there was given him dominion,

And glory, and a kingdom,

That all the peoples, nations, and languages

Should serve him;

His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away,

And his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

(7:13, 14)

Our Lord's power is indeed to be worldwide, and His kingdom will never be destroyed. (Cf. 2:44) His people will be recognized as the true citizens of the kingdom, and all dominions shall give way before them in accordance with Daniel's words:

And the kingdom and the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High; their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey them. (7:27)

Daniel's vision was of tremendous significance, and the world will yet see its complete fulfillment. It is not just a Jewish apocalypse which lacks a message for the Christian world as many critics believe. Daniel recorded his thoughts when the vision ended:

Here is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my thoughts much affrighted me, and my countenance was changed in me; but I kept the matter in my heart. (7:28)

The Vision of the Ram And the He-Goat.—;Daniel's second vision (Ch. 8) is dated Shushan (Susa) in the third year of Belshazzar, approximately 553 B. C. He saw a great ram with two horns overthrown and trampled down in great fury by an even more powerful goat with a conspicuous horn:

And I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood before the stream a ram which had two horns; and the two horns were high, but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last. I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; and no beasts could stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will, and magnified himself. And as I was considering, behold, a he-goat came from the west over the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground; and the goat had a conspicuous horn between his eyes. And he came to the ram that had the two horns, which I saw standing before the stream, and ran at him in the fury of his power. And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the ram, and broke his two horns; and there was no power in the ram to stand before him; but he cast him down to the ground, and trampled upon him; and there was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand. And the he-goat magnified himself exceedingly; and when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and instead of it there came up the appearance of four horns toward the four winds of heaven. (8:3-8)

Out of one of the four horns that came up there came forth in turn a little horn:

And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the beauteous land. And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven; and some of the host and of the stars it cast down to the ground, and trampled upon them. Yea, it magnified itself, even to the prince of the host; and from him the continual burnt-offering was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down. And the host was given over to it, together with the continual burnt-offering through transgression; and it cast down truth to the ground, and it wrought, and prospered. Then I heard a holy one speaking; and another holy one said unto that certain one who spoke: 'How long shall be the vision concerning the continual burnt-offering, and the transgression that causeth appalment, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trampled under foot?' And he said unto me: 'Unto two thousand and three hundred evenings and mornings; then shall the sanctuary be victorious.' (8:9-14)

Daniel was subsequently given the interpretation of the vision. The angel Gabriel (Noah) [^3] explained to him that the ram represented the kings of Media and Persia, and the he-goat the king of Greece. The four horns that arose later from the broken horn of the goat represented kingdoms of lesser power than that of the king of Greece. From one of these kingdoms was destined to arise an impudent, cunning, and powerful king who would desecrate the Lord's sanctuary and interrupt the daily sacrifice for over three years. By a miraculous visitation, however, he would be broken "without hand." (8:25)

This vision clearly seems to do with events between Daniel's day and approximately 165 B. C. Most commentators interpret the horn of the goat as having reference to Alexander the Great, and the four lesser horns or kingdoms that arose from it are often assigned to Cassander in Macedonia, Lysimachus in Thrace, Seleucus I in Syria, and Ptolemy in Egypt. The little horn that desecrated the Lord's sanctuary is identified with Antiochus IV Epiphanes who prohibited Jewish worship from 168 B. C. to 165 B. C. It was at this period of trouble for the Jews that Judas Maccabaeus led them in an uprising against their enemies. A victory resulted in their comparative independence for a long time.

Perhaps this interpretation is satisfactory, though one must confess that certain troublesome expressions leave one wondering if all is well. However, one may glean a little satisfaction from Josephus, the Jewish general and historian who lived shortly after the time of Christ. After emphasizing the fact that Daniel was one of the greatest of the prophets, he points to the vision in Chapter 8, and says expressly that the Jews suffered under Antiochus Epiphanes the things predicted so many years before they came to pass. (X, 11, 7)

The Vision of the Seventy Weeks.—;It appears that sometime during the first year of Darius the Mede, Daniel was meditating over the Scriptures, more particularly those writings of Jeremiah having to do with the period of the Babylonian Captivity. He was especially concerned with the time of completion of the seventy years of exile predicted by Jeremiah, (Jer. 25:11, 12; 29:10) and the restoration of his people to their own land. A careful study of 2 Chronicles 36:21-23; Ezra 1:1 ff., the passages in Jeremiah, and Daniel 9:1, 2 would seem to lead inevitably to the conclusion that Daniel felt that the seventy years of his people's captivity was over and that they should be restored. The prophet probably reasoned as follows: Babylon, the power that had brought about the captivity is now fallen, and Persia is in the first year of its rule. (539 B. C.) It is now seventy years or nearly so since I and my family, not to mention many other Jews, were taken into captivity. (609-608 B. C.) What did Jeremiah mean by seventy years of desolation and the punishment of the king of Babylon? (Jer. 25:11, 12) In view of the fact that my people have not yet been restored, I shall inquire of the Lord and confess my people's sins.

The prophet then earnestly besought the Lord "by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes." (9:3) He confessed the sins of his people and the justice of God in punishing them, but called upon Him to set His face toward Jerusalem and remember His people. Here is part of the prayer:

O Lord, according to all Thy righteousness, let Thine anger and Thy fury, I pray Thee, be turned away from Thy city Jerusalem, Thy holy mountain; because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy people are become a reproach to all that are round about us. Now therefore, O our God, hearken unto the prayer of Thy servant, and to his supplications, and cause Thy face to shine upon Thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake. O my God, incline Thine ear, and hear; open Thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city upon which Thy name is called; for we do not present our supplications before Thee because of our righteousness, but because of Thy great compassions. O Lord, hear, O Lord, forgive, O Lord, attend and do, defer not; for Thine own sake, O my God, because Thy name is called upon Thy city and Thy people. (9:16-19)

While he was yet praying, Gabriel (cf. 8:16) appeared to him. The prophet relates that "he made me to understand, and talked with me." (9:22) Gabriel proceeded to make an explanation to Daniel that forms one of the most difficult passages in all of the Old Testament:

O Daniel, I am now come forth to make thee skillful of understanding. At the beginning of thy supplications a word went forth, and I am come to declare it; for thou art greatly beloved; therefore look into the word, and understand the vision. Seventy weeks are decreed upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to forgive iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal vision and prophet, and to anoint the most holy place. Know therefore and discern, that from the going forth of the word to restore and to build Jerusalem unto one anointed, a prince, shall be seven weeks; and for three-score and two weeks, it shall be built again, with broad place and moat, but in troublous times. And after the threescore and two weeks shall an anointed one be cut off, and be no more; and the people of a prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; but his end shall be with a flood; and unto the end of the war desolations are determined. And he shall make a firm covenant with many for one week; and for half of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the offering to cease; and upon the wing of detestable things shall be that which causeth appalment; and that until the extermination wholly determined be poured out upon that which causeth appalment. (9:22-27)

What is the meaning of this Scripture? The attempts made to elucidate it have been legion, and some of them have been characterized by sensational conclusions. The "seventy weeks" is especially difficult to interpret. If it represents weeks of years (490 years), how are they to be applied, that is to say, from what important event or year does the reckoning begin and where does it end? Does it begin with 609/608 B. C. when Daniel was taken captive, with 590 B. C. when Jerusalem fell, or with 539 B. C. when the exile seems to have ended? And so on. One school of thought thinks that the passage in question is a prophecy having to do with Christ's coming in the flesh, and especially His death, and also with the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Another view is that the passage has to do with the troublous times of Antiochus Epiphanes (circa 165 B. C.). A third view holds that the numbers are to be taken symbolically. In accordance with this view, "week" simply denotes a space of time measured by sevens, but does not indicate the duration of them; the prophecy thus indicates the "times of the development of the future consummation of the kingdom of God and of this world according to a measure that is symbolical and not chronological, . . ." [^4] And so the various points of view go. The author personally believes that Gabriel, among other things, assured Daniel concerning the time that the Babylonian Captivity ended. It is not probable that the prophet reviewed in detail all that the heavenly messenger said to him. In my opinion no interpretation yet given of 9:24-27 completely satisfies. I personally lean toward the interpretation that Gabriel's words do involve Christ's coming in the flesh, His death, and the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman armies in 70 A. D. Apparently no great religious principle or doctrine is at stake, and we therefore pass Gabriel's words by until future revelation makes them entirely clear.

The Vision of Future History Including the Latter Days.—;The fourth vision of Daniel is dated in the third year of Cyrus king of Persia. (Circa 536 B. C.) When Daniel had fasted three whole weeks, a vision was given him while he was standing beside the Hiddekel (Tigris) river. The description of the manifestations given to the prophet is contained in chapters 10 to 12. Some aspects of the vision seemed to overcome Daniel, but he was strengthened, and the divine messenger with him said:

Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision is for many days. (10:14)

But the contents of chapters 11 and 12 would seem to indicate that the heavenly being showed Daniel events that were to concern his people from his own time until the latter days rather than just in the latter days as the above scripture implies. The reader should notice the reference to Persia and Greece in 11:2 ff. As the chapter unfolds, a panorama of history is opened to view which certain scholars feel they can follow step by step down to the days of the Romans. [^5] Latter-day Saints should consult the Prophet Joseph Smith's revision of the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, verse 12, as contained in the Pearl of Great Price. There the Savior speaks to His apostles of "the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem." The Savior was of course speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem in the then near future under the hands of the Romans. This scripture should be compared with Daniel 11:31, where the abomination of desolation is mentioned. We may therefore draw the obvious conclusion that Daniel's vision did enable him to see the downfall of his people under the Romans. From verse 31 of Chapter 11 to verse 45 we have an account of matters of which this writer feels unable to give any sane connected account, except to say that it seems to deal obscurely with events leading up to the latter days when Michael (Adam) shall stand up to deliver his people. (See 12:1.) The reader should notice carefully the transition between Chapter 11 and Chapter 12. Our people are warned against making of Chapter 11 a phantasmagoria of fanciful allusions, among which appear pell-mell Ishmael, Rome, Kaiser Wilhelm, Hitler, and the Antichrist. For aught we know,

some of these or all of them may have been seen by Daniel, but we cannot prove it. The Lord has not as yet seen fit to reveal the exact details of what His ancient servant saw.

Although certain events and times spoken of in Chapter 12 are decidedly obscure, certainly the reference to Michael standing up to deliver his people in a time of trouble, and the reference to the resurrection (verse 2), will seem to our people to have yet future fulfillment. Again, the reference to another "abomination of desolation" in 12:11 may be the second one referred to in verse 32 of the Prophet Joseph Smith's revision of Matthew 20 as given in the current editions of the Pearl of Great Price. If it is, there can be no question that Joseph Smith regarded it as certain that Daniel saw the great desolations of the latter days preceding Christ's coming.

In conclusion we may point out that the Book of Daniel clearly teaches that no matter how desperate men's sufferings may be or how gloomy the outlook, the Lord is mindful of His own and will in due time deliver them. One of the most inspiring features of the book is its absolute confidence in God, and its counsel to patience. All of us should be mindful of its noble conception of world history which, despite chaos, confusion, and terrible cruelties, finds its consummation in the triumph of God's Kingdom over the forces of evil in the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ecclus. 49:10.
[^2] The Greek translation of the Old Testament.
[^3] E. Henderson, The Book of the Twelve Minor Prophets, 2nd Ed., General Preface. vii, viii.
[^4] See, for example, R. H. Pfeiffer, Introduction to the Old Testament, pp. 751-753. Harpers, 1941.
[^5] C. Lattey, The Book of Daniel, Intro., XXXIX, says, "The argument to a late date from the place of Daniel in the Hebrew canon is a weak one. . . . If, then, it has found a place among the "Hagiographa," the third part of the Hebrew Bible, rather than among the prophets, may this not be because the Jews had a finer sense of the character and literary form of the book than certain other ancients or moderns?"
