Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Nineteen

THE TWELVE

Some Facts Concerning the Book of the Twelve.—;Perhaps many of our readers have never heard of the Book of the Twelve. May we hasten to explain that it is the book which contains the prophecies of the twelve men whom we shall now consider. If one were fortunate enough to be able to examine a copy of the scriptures used by the ancient Jews in the time of Christ, it is very probable that one would find it divided into three groups of books, somewhat as follows: (1) The Law, containing the Pentateuch or five books of Moses; (2) the Prophets, beginning with Joshua and ending with Malachi; (3) the Writings, beginning with Psalms and ending with Chronicles. The prophets would be found subdivided into two groups of books. The first group would consist of four books: Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings, called by the Jews the Former Prophets, or the First Volume of Prophets; the second: the Books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the Twelve, called the Latter Prophets, or the Second Volume of Prophets. The Twelve are better known to us today as the twelve Minor Prophets, as distinct from the books known as the Major Prophets. The prophets Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi have had the epithet "Minor" applied to them, simply because of the limited scope of their written words when compared with those of the prophets which precede them, and not with the view of representing them as in any respect inferior in quality or authority. It is much better practice to call the Minor Prophets by their original, canonical, and easily understood title of "The Twelve."

How "The Twelve" were originally collected and arranged is for us at the present time a matter of obscurity. We do know that, whatever their order, the Twelve have always stood together, even from ancient times. The first mention of the Minor Prophets as "The Twelve" is by Jesus the son of Sirach about the year 180 B. C. Of them he says:

And may the bones of the Twelve Prophets revive out of their place,

For they comforted Jacob, and redeemed them by assurance of hope. [^1]

Stephen the martyr, when quoting Amos 5:25-27, makes a reference to them:

But God turned and gave them [the Israelites] over to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the Book of the Prophets. . . . (Acts 7:42)

Later Jewish tradition attributed the collection of the sacred books to the men of the Great Synagogue, a body of learned Jewish Scribes, said to have been organized by Ezra, and continuing until early in the third century B. C. Nehemiah, in the opinion of many, completed the collection, by adding the inspired writings written in or near his own times. If the tradition be true—;which few if any competent authorities admit—;it is not unlikely that he was aided by the Prophet Malachi, who was a contemporary (circa 450 B. C.) of his.

The order of the Minor Prophets in the Authorized Version is the same as that in the Hebrew Bible. But in the Septuagint [^2] the order of the first six prophets differs somewhat. Their order is as follows: Hosea, Amos, Micah, Joel, Obadiah, and Jonah.

The Twelve as Prophets.—;The Minor Prophets are generally considered to be the most obscure and difficult to interpret of all the prophets.

Besides the avoidance of a minute and particular style of description, and the exhibition of the more general aspects of events only, which are justly regarded as essentially characteristic of prophecy, and the exuberance of imagery, which was so admirably calculated to give effect to the oracles delivered by the inspired Seers, but which to us does not possess the vividness and perspicuity which it did to those to whom it was originally exhibited, there are peculiarities attaching more or less to each of the writers, arising either from his matter, or from the manner of its treatment, which present difficulties of no ordinary magnitude to common readers, and many that are calculated to exercise the ingenuity, and, in no small degree, to perplex the mind of the more experienced interpreter. We are frequently left to guess historical circumstances from what we otherwise know of the features of the times, and sometimes we have no other means of ascertaining their character than what are furnished by the descriptive terms employed in the predictions themselves. Though in such cases general ideas may be collected respecting the persons or things which are presented to view in the text, yet we want the historical commentary which would elucidate and give point to its various particulars. The accounts contained in the books of Kings and Chronicles are frequently too brief to furunish us with a key to many of the prophecies which were fulfilled during the period which they embrace; while the pages of profane history only slightly touch, if they touch at all, upon events which the scope and bearing of the predictions determine to periods within the range of subjects professedly treated of by its authors. [^3]

The difficulties of the general reader are often increased by a lack of knowledge of Hebrew. Even the expert Bible scholar is often at a loss to explain a given word, idiom, or allusion that was perfectly clear to the ancients. Ofttimes we are faced with a corrupt text, of the difficulties of which the general reader has no adequate conception. On the whole the Hebrew text of the Minor Prophets is good, but when, as with Hosea, we meet with some of the most corrupt texts in the Old Testament, the reader must be very tolerant, even with the most experienced interpreter. Some of the prophets use compressed or condensed language, interspersed with metaphors, many of which are derived from sources that accord little with the dictates of occidental taste. The visions of a prophet like Zechariah are difficult, not because of the language, which is simple in character, but because of our lack of knowledge of the meaning of given symbols which represent certain historical scenes and events. Some of the prophets are in the habit of suddenly changing their viewpoints, such as from their own day to the latter days and vice versa. This usage may puzzle the average reader very much. Only practice in reading the prophets or good instruction can solve the problem. Even the most experienced person will find himself making an occasional split-hair decision when attempting to solve a problem respecting the period of which a prophet is speaking. Other difficulties will be made apparent to the reader as he studies the Minor Prophets. But he should not be at all discouraged, for, with the exception of a few very difficult matters, they can be understood. Especially is this true for the sincere Latter-day Saint, who has a great advantage in knowing the principles of the Gospel. Modern revelation helps us in solving many of the hitherto difficult problems respecting the Minor Prophets.

Some of the Minor Prophets are among the greatest prophets of all time. It is significant that when the resurrected Savior appeared to the ancient Nephites upon this continent, he made extensive quotations from the books of Micah and Malachi. When Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he quoted and explained passages from Malachi and Joel. Allusions to Zechariah in the Doctrine and Covenants show how great and important his prophecies were to the latter day. Add to these Hosea, Amos, and Jonah, so much admired by the Christian world, and there is a very respectable group of great and wonderful prophets among the Twelve. The Minor Prophets are not minor.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The story is an allegory or parable symbolizing the relation existing between Jehovah and his people, Israel. These dates follow the chronology given in T. H. Robinson, A History of Israel, I, 463 f. Dates of the reigns of the kings of Israel and Judah are often only approximate or conjectural.
[^2] The story is assumed to be a literal account of actual facts. Many ancient interpreters took this position, and several modern critics have presented the view with considerable force and ingenuity. Many authorities believe that his ministry did not extend beyond 735 B.C. A consideration of this point is beyond the purview of this book.
[^3] The modified literal theory assumes that Gomer, Hosea's wife, was not a common harlot, but rather a Baal worshiper who was, therefore, guilty of spiritual harlotry. She may have even been a priestess of the cult, who had sacrificed her physical as well as her spiritual chastity by reason of her fanatic devotion to it. Hosea could not, therefore, bring charges against her or have her put to death, because her position was considered honorable or sacred at the time. By ingenious interpretation or emendation of the text of Hosea 3:2, those who hold to this theory claim that what Hosea did was to pay Gomer's vow or debt to the shrine to which she resorted, and then bring her home and isolate her. G. L. Robinson, The Twelve Minor Prophets, pp. 15 f.
