Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty

HOSEA, PROPHET OF LOVE

Facts and Supposition Concerning the Prophet.—;The superscription of this book informs us that Hosea was the son of Beeri. Unfortunately we know nothing about the father. The Hebrew name of the prophet, Hoshea, signifies "help," "deliverance," and "salvation," and is derived from the same root as the names of Joshua and Jesus. By reason of numerous allusions in the prophecy to the Northern Kingdom, it is commonly supposed by commentators that Hosea was a native of that commonwealth. The superscription further informs us that Hosea was a prophet "in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel." Jeroboam II, the king of Israel, reigned from 788 B. C. until 747 B. C. and Hezekiah, the last-named of the kings of Judah, began to reign in 725 B. C. [^1] We may not be far from the truth if we date Hosea's ministry, therefore, from about 755 B. C. to 725 B. C. [^2] He was, then, a contemporary of three other great prophets, Isaiah, Amos, and Micah.

Under what conditions did Hosea live as a youth? How was he reared? What were the circumstances under which God called him to the ministry? When did he receive the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood? All these questions and a host of others that we should like answered must be passed by for lack of specific information. All we know about Hosea and his ministry is contained in the fourteen short chapters of the book that goes under his name. But it is perfectly apparent to anyone that a prophet of God does not function in a social vacuum. Hosea had much work to do and many sermons to preach, and he found it necessary to provide leadership for a group of disciples who were true followers of the

Hebrew Jehovah. Prophets of the Lord are much concerned about people. It is not at all unlikely that the disciples presided over by Hosea fellowshiped with other folk having similar ideals in various centers of population in Israel and Judah. These other folk were in turn under the leadership of prophets like Isaiah, Amos, Micah or other God-fearing men, at present unknown to us. Let us call the united little bands of disciples the Hebrew Church of God. It is not unreasonable to suppose that leaders like Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Amos, and others conferred with one another respecting the common problems found in each of their branches of the Church. Not unlike the situation in our own day, the Church had to contend with problems that arose because of the beliefs and practices of other churches or cults among the Hebrews. Witness the action of Amaziah, the hireling or professional priest of Bethel, in attempting to prevent the Prophet Amos from giving his message to Israel. (Amos 7:10-17) Amaziah, in this instance, seems to have acted as a professional agent of a state religion that was anything but compatible with the prophetic spirit of men like Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, and Micah.

We are justified in believing that the prophets were social beings who, more especially after their calls to the ministry, moved about and influenced many people. It is not reasonable to believe that a prophet like Hosea simply served as a messenger of warning and admonition at given intervals over a period of years and had no further duties other than to make a living. And we can take it for granted that only a very few of Hosea's prophecies have been preserved in the book that has come down to us.

All answers to questions concerning Hosea's domestic life hinge on the interpretation given to Chapters 1-3. These chapters have been very diversely interpreted by able commentators, and for the moment we shall pass by the problem of the prophet's domestic status.

Of Hosea's personal characteristics we know little; students of his prophecy may differ more or less in their estimate of him. The following characterization by Professor G. L. Robinson is submitted for its interest:

He was gentle, pensive, and inclined to melancholy, but frank, affectionate, and full of domestic feeling. He was the Jeremiah of the northern kingdom, and, like him, was little less than a martyr, prefiguring Christ. Both were ardent patriots, possessed of finely sensitive religious natures. Jeremiah was the more studied and self-conscious in his grief; Hosea, the more artless and passionate. Jeremiah was more of a theologian; Hosea, more of a poet. [^3]

The Prophet's Times.—;In the days of Hosea, the Northern Kingdom had been lifted by Jeroboam II to a commanding position of power and wealth. Israel's ancient boundaries had been restored, and her leaders and chief men were haughty and proud. The Southern Kingdom of Judah, too, had been revived under King Uzziah in a really marvelous way, according to the account in II Chron. 26:6-15. Both kingdoms prospered greatly, especially from the booty taken in conquest and the revival of trade. The rich built "summer houses" and "winter houses," "houses of ivory" and "houses of ebony." [^4] Their houses were furnished with costly articles of furniture, and for their own personal adornment they insisted on gorgeous robes and quantities of jewelry. They indulged in the luxuries of the table, taking for themselves the best of the veal and lamb that the country afforded. The wives of men in high places set high standards of comfort and social life and insisted on drinking wine, regardless of the cost. The Prophet Amos called them "cows." (Amos 4:1) These debauched women oppressed the poor, crushed the needy, and in numerous ways seriously weakened the moral fiber of their people.

Social and economic changes were widespread. The small landowner disappeared. He was supplanted by the wealthy landlord, who created large estates out of little farms. Widows and orphans had little or no protection. Sons were often mortgaged and finally lost as slaves when the mortgage could not be cleared. Such practices were known as early as the days of Elisha. (II Kings 4:1-7) Tenants on large estates paid rents which were ruinous and which subsequently made slaves out of them. Exactions of grain were made upon the poor by the upper crust of society. Seething want and corruption were everywhere evident. There was cheating in the market places and perjury in the law courts; politicians looked to their own interests rather than to those of the nation they were supposed to serve. On the one hand we find selfish and arrogant luxury facing ragged and loathsome squalor on the other. These conditions meant that Israel was rotten to the core and ripe for destruction.

The religion of the time had little hope and direction to offer the great masses of the people. So far as the official cults were concerned, religion in the larger centers such as Jerusalem, Gilgal, Bethel, and Beersheba had made little change for the better in over a hundred years—om the days of Ahab to Jeroboam II. Jehovah to be sure, was worshipped, but as an old Canaanite Baal. Notice these words used by Hosea:

And I will visit upon her the days of the Baals

* * *

And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord,

That thou shalt call Me 'My husband';

And shalt call Me no more 'My Baal.'

For I will take away the names of the Baals out of her

mouth. (2:13, 16, 17)

Most of the people of the time thought that they were engaged in the true worship of Jehovah, but Hosea makes plain that their worship was in reality no more than a revival of an old Baal cult. To be sure, men were outwardly more devout and more scrupulous in religious observances than ever before. The courts of the temple and other religious shrines were filled with crowds; altars smoked with sacrifices; tithes were paid exactly when due; the Sabbath and other impressive occasions were observed with meticulous care. But all of this ceremonial swank failed to touch Israel's real evils. The religion of her leaders had little or no concern with social morality—;in fact, religion not merely condoned many of the evils of which we have spoken, but actually enjoined them. Such is true of immorality, and ritual fornication was by no means unknown. Says Professor Theodore H. Robinson:

So far from giving help and guidance to the people in the great moral and social crisis of her history, the established religion was much more likely to have thrown all its weight into the other scale, and to have fostered those very tendencies which threatened the life of the nation. [^5]

But with the moral decay of Israel, the thing that seems to have impressed and saddened Hosea most was the state of family life. It had become dissolute, and accordingly the prophet lays upon it his heaviest indictment. The Hebrew root zanah, translated variously as "whoredom," "harlotry," and "adultery" (words so distasteful to us), is used by the prophet over twenty times to express his opinion of the situation.

Such were the times in which Hosea prophesied. A knowledge of them will help us substantially in understanding the prophet's problem and message.

Some Observations Regarding the Book.—;The text of Hosea is more corrupt than that of any other Old Testament book. It has suffered seriously in the process of transmission, and certain parts of it defy successful translation. Some students think that there is scarcely a verse which one can be certain is in the form in which it left the pen of the original writer. The style of the book is broken, and to a remarkable degree the text is incapable of logical division. This is especially true in chapters 4-14.

Hosea may be divided into two sections of very unequal length. The first section, chapters 1-3, is a fairly compact unit, containing much narrative which purports to tell the domestic life of the prophet. Whether it is to be regarded as symbolic action or otherwise in the narrative, God commands the prophet to "take a wife of harlotry" for the purpose of begetting children, whose significant names were to set forth to Israel the disastrous fruits of her spiritual whoredom.

In the second section, chapters 4-14, we find, as Sir George Adam Smith has said, "a stream of addresses and reflections, appeals, upbraidings, sarcasms, recollections of earlier history, denunciations and promises, which, with little logical connection and almost no pauses or periods, start impulsively from each other, and for a large part are expressed in elliptic and ejaculatory phrases." [^6]

Israel's spiritual adultery, which the prophet has described in the first section, is more elaborately dealt with here. He tells of God's controversy with His people, of their moral decay, and of the punishment that must inevitably follow. Judah is also referred to occasionally. Finally, he appends a solemn appeal to return to Jehovah, and promises that the Lord will show compassion to the penitent and heal their apostasy.

We may now turn to the teachings of the book.

The Story of Hosea's Strange Marriage.—;In the first section of the prophecy, chapters 1-3, we find the strange story of Hosea's marriage to a profligate woman. A person reading the text for the first time may be considerably agitated when he finds that the marriage is not only condoned but is actually commanded by the Lord:

Go, take unto thee a wife of harlotry and children of harlotry; for the land doth commit great harlotry, departing from the Lord. (1:2)

Accordingly, Hosea took to wife a woman by the name of Gomer, who bore to him two sons and a daughter. These children were given names that symbolized the Lord's intention of taking recourse against Israel because of her evil and apostate condition. The first son was called Jezreel, "Whom God Sows."

For yet a little while, and I will visit the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel. (1:4)

The first daughter was named Lo-ruhamah, "That hath not obtained compassion."

For I will no more have compassion upon the house of Israel, that I should in any wise pardon them. (1:6)

The third and last child, a son, was given the name of Lo-ammi, "Not my people."

For ye are not My people, and I will not be yours. (1:9)

What a strange situation for a prophet to find himself in; married to such a wife and having children with such ominous and undesirable names! Is there any wonder that the story of Hosea's marriage has had so many different interpretations placed upon it? How are we to construe the story? Is it to be interpreted literally? Or is it to be taken as an allegory or parable? Views of capable commentators have been very diverse, but for convenience we may classify them under four heads:

Which of the above views is the correct one is, of course, difficult at the present time to say. [^7] Very probably the truth is that none of them is completely correct as expounded to date. Nor ought we to be surprised at this. Long ago, Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, who came from Jerusalem about 600 B. C., said:

I know that the Jews do understand the things of the prophets, and there is none other people that understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews. (2 Nephi 25:5)

And we are forced to admit that many allusions and figures of speech in the prophets are not yet completely understood.

The writer takes the following view of Hosea's marriage or marriages [^8] in the first three chapters of the prophecy: The Lord's call to Hosea to take a harlotrous woman to wife represents the prophet's call to the ministry— ministry to an apostate and covenant-breaking people. The evil children of this apparent union represent the coming of the judgments of the Lord upon Israel, warning of which was to be carried to the people by the prophet. The figure of the harlotrous wife and children would, I believe, be readily understood at the time by the Hebrew people without reflecting on Hosea's own wife, or, if he was unmarried, on himself.

For there is an essential difference between a merely symbolical representation, and the actual performance of anything. The instruction given to a prophet to set forth a sin in a symbolical form, for the purpose of impressing upon the hearts of the people its abominable character, and the punishment it deserved, is not at variance with the holiness of God; whereas the command to commit a sin would be. God, as the Holy One, cannot abolish the laws of morality, or command anything actually immoral, without contradicting Himself, or denying His own nature. [^9]

This symbolic representation of God's call to Hosea would be a most forceful and effective means of calling Israel's attention to her carnal state. I cannot believe the marriage to be a literal one, for, as those who have taken it as an allegory or parable have always pointed out, to do so would be imputing to God a command inconsistent with His holy character. Furthermore, for Hosea to marry a woman with a questionable past would make it impossible for him to preach to his people and expose their sexual immoralities. They could point the finger of scorn at him and say, "You are as guilty as we are; don't preach to us." Two other considerations lead me to believe that the marriage was symbolical. Seven years at least would have passed after Hosea's marriage before the birth of the third child occurred; most Oriental women let at least two years pass before weaning a child. Seven years is a long time to set forth relatively simple warnings represented by the names of the children. Even some years would have to pass before any great number of people in the nation would pay attention to the three offspring. Finally, in Chapter 3:1-3, we have another account of a marriage which Hosea contracts with an unchaste woman. There are those who hold that this is not in reality another woman but that the Scripture has reference to the final redemption of Gomer, the original wife mentioned in Chapter 1. To this explanation I cannot accede. The language seems plain and unequivocal. It refers to a woman, whereas had it referred to Gomer more specific language could have been expected.

And the Lord said unto me: 'Go yet, love a woman beloved of her friends and an adulteress, even as the Lord loveth the children of Israel, though they turn unto other gods, and love cakes of raisins.' So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver and a homer of barley, and half a homer of barley; and I said unto her: 'Thou shalt sit solitary for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be any man's wife; nor will I be thine.'

Surely no one could reasonably expect the Lord to command two such literal marriages on a prophet. I take it that the very literal portrayal of these marriages was a representation to the prophet of the real and very grim nature of the call he had to warn Israel of her misdeeds.

The fourth view given above, which is held by many modern expositors, claims too much. It avoids imputing to God a command requiring Hosea to marry a profligate woman by assuming that Gomer was a pure woman until after the birth of her first child. The text, however, gives no inkling of this; it simply says, "Go, take unto thee a wife of harlotry and children of harlotry." Neither can I see any good reason for denying to Hosea the last two children mentioned in Chapter 1. The text implicitly assumes that all are his. Anything beyond this puts a strain on the story that it will not bear.

But whether the writer's interpretation of Hosea's marriages or some other be accepted, the religious significance of chapters 1-3 is quite clear. Hosea's wives represent Israel, the disloyal and harlotrous consort of Jehovah, who stipulates that unless Israel puts aside her harlotries and reforms she will meet with stern action. For her gross sins she will be checked and punished and thus learn in the crucible of bitter experience that her husband means more to her than she at first supposed:

Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns,

And I will make a wall against her,

That she shall not find her paths.

And she shall run after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them,

And she shall seek them, but shall not find them;

Then shall she say: 'I will go and return to my first husband;

For then was it better with me than now.' (2:6, 7)

Jehovah's steadfast affection for Israel despite her waywardness through the years is shown in His attempts to woo her again:

Therefore, behold, I will allure her,

And bring her into the wilderness,

And speak tenderly unto her. (2:14)

His tender and compassionate wooing will result in Israel's eventual return to the fold. No longer will she indulge in the vicious Canaanite immoralities mentioned so frequently in Chapter 2.

And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord,

That thou shalt call me Ishi, [^10]

And shall call Me no more Baali. [^11]

For I will take away the names of the Baalim out of her mouth,

And they shall no more be mentioned by their name. (2:16, 17)

The attention of the reader is called to the wonderful promises made by the Lord to Israel at the end of chapters 1-3. [^12] He affirms that in the latter days—e dispensation in which we now live—;Israel shall be highly blessed and the covenant renewed between them that existed at the first. Following are the promises at the end of Chapter 2:

And I will betroth thee unto Me for ever;

Yea, I will betroth thee unto Me in righteousness, and in justice,

And in loving kindness, and in compassion.

And I will betroth thee unto Me in faithfulness;

And thou shalt know the Lord.

And it shall come to pass in that day,

I will respond, saith the Lord, I will respond to the heavens,

And they shall respond to the earth;

And the earth shall respond to the grain, and the wine, and the oil;

And they shall respond to Jezreel.

And I will sow her unto Me in the land;

And I will have compassion upon her that had not obtained compassion;

And I will say to them that were not My people: 'Thou art My people';

And they shall say: 'Thou art my God.'

(2:19-23)

It is perhaps no wonder that Hosea has been called the prophet of love. Some writers have called him the St. John of the Old Testament. He portrays God's love and kindness as constantly reaching out for His people, especially when their deeds and actions betoken a change of heart.

The Lord's Controversy With Israel.—;In the second section of Hosea's prophecy, chapters 4-14, we shall take notice of a number of teachings that are worthy of special attention. One of the finest of these is that the Lord objects to the lack of knowledge—ligious knowledge—ng His people. This lack of knowledge is destroying them.

Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel!

For the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,

Because there is no truth, nor mercy,

Nor knowledge of God in the land.

Swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery!

They break all bounds, and blood toucheth blood.

(4:1, 2)

Notice truth, mercy, knowledge. What a trilogy!

Truth and love are mutually conditions, the one of the other. "Truth cannot be sustained without mercy; and mercy without truth makes men negligent; so that the one ought to be mingled with the other" (Jerome). They both have their roots in the knowledge of God, of which they are the fruit (Jer. 22:16; Isa. 11:9); for the knowledge of God is not merely "an acquaintance with His nature and will" (Hitzing), but knowledge of the love, faithfulness, and compassion of God, resting upon the experience of the heart. Such knowledge not only produces fear of God, but also love and truthfulness towards brethren. Where this is wanting, injustice gains the upper hand. [^13]

The prophet continues in similar vein, but accuses the priests and professional prophets in particular:

Yet let no man strive, neither let any man reprove;

For thy people are as they that strive with the priest.

Therefore shalt thou stumble in the day,

And the prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night;

And I will destroy thy mother.

My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge;

Because thou hast rejected knowledge,

I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to Me;

Seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God,

I also will forget thy children. [^14]

The common people, guilty as they are, are not so guilty or responsible as their religious counselors who live upon the people's fines and sin-offerings. Priests and prophets alike have given themselves over to formal ritual and have forgotten that they have an intellectual and moral responsibility to the nation. Let us never forget that Hosea and the other true prophets of Israel always kept their eyes open to the fact that priesthood is an intellectual as well as a moral trust. Hosea adds another statement that is well worth quoting:

Harlotry, wine, and new wine take away the heart.

(4:11)

The word "heart" in Hebrew is often equivalent to our English words "brains" or "understanding." So again Hosea is administering an intellectual rebuke. He means here that sexual immorality and strong drink (anciently they went hand in hand as they do now) weaken the mental power and produce "a people stupid and falling to ruin." (4:14)

A Warning Against Entangling Alliances.—;We live at a time when the drums of war cause many people in our country to debate whether or not we ought to make alliances with other countries in self-defense. During Hosea's ministry there occurred conspiracies and other internal disturbances that seriously weakened Israel (2 Kings 15). In desperation the people alternately sought aid from Assyria and Egypt, paying tribute to both, with the result that they lost their independence and national autonomy, being forced to accept vassalage to Assyria. Hosea warned the nation of its folly in seeking alliances with foreign nations. Political alliances would not remedy the real cause of their trouble—;moral disease and rebellion against God. Hosea doubtless believed that God would protect His own if they but trusted Him.

And Ephraim is become like a silly dove, without

understanding;

They call unto Egypt, they go to Assyria. (7:11)

Hosea wanted his people to avoid making covenants with nations whose sole reliance was on force. Let the big nations fight their own wars; little nations that elected to mix up with them were sure to be worsted. The big nations, furthermore, had religious practices that were utterly opposite to prophetic ideals. Their immoralities, added to those already prevalent in Israel would, in time, wreck the nation. So Israel would spread the net of destruction over herself. Instead of courting God's love and protection, her courting of the nations would only put her in a trap— it did.

Even as they go, I will spread My net upon them;

I will bring them down as the fowls of the heaven;

I will chastise them, as their congregation hath been

made to hear.

Woe unto them! for they have strayed from Me.

Destruction unto them! For they have transgressed

against Me. (7:12, 13)

God's Love for His People.—;We have noted some of the transgressions that Hosea believed would bring about the fall of Israel. Professor George L. Robinson traces in Hosea the successive steps in Israel's national downfall, as follows: 1. Lack of knowledge, 2. Pride, 3. Instability, 4. Worldliness, 5. Corruption, 6. Backsliding, 7. Idolatry. [^15] It is perfectly apparent that inward corruption of a nation is more dangerous to its existence than external enemies. France in our own time has learned this bitter lesson taught so long ago by the prophets. In presenting God's grim message to His people Hosea's heart must have been heavy. But despite the corruption of that generation, God gives Hosea a ray of hope for a future time. His love for His people is such that He cannot give them up completely.

How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?

How shall I surrender thee, Israel?

How shall I make thee as Admah?

How shall I set thee as Zeboim?

My heart is turned within Me,

My compassions are kindled together.

I will not execute the fierceness of Mine anger,

I will not return to destroy Ephraim;

For I am God, and not man,

The Holy One in the midst of thee,

And I will not come in fury. (11:8, 9)

This passage is a great Scripture, perhaps the greatest in Hosea. It breathes the spirit of the Man of Galilee whose mercy and love for His brethren transcend all understanding. The passage does not mean that Israel shall escape the due consequences for all her sins. But it does foreshadow the long arm of Jehovah's love reaching for her in the day of redemption, the latter days, and rescuing the little righteous remnant of which Isaiah and other prophets also speak.

Finally, Hosea is shown, as it were, Israel's redemption, and in a beautiful passage the Lord says:

I will be as the dew unto Israel;

He shall blossom as the lily,

And cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

His branches shall spread,

And his beauty shall be as the olive tree,

And his fragrance as Lebanon.

They that dwell under his shadow shall again

Make grain to grow,

And shall blossom as the vine;

The scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

Ephraim shall say:

'What have I to do any more with idols?'

As for Me, I respond and look on him;

I am like a leafy cypress-tree;

From Me is thy fruit found. (14:5-8)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] E. Henderson, The Book of the Twelve Minor Prophets (2nd Ed.), pp. 90 f.
[^2] C. von Orelli, The Twelve Minor Prophets, p. 77.
[^3] George Adam Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Revised Ed.), II, 382.
[^4] That is, in the nature of a revelation
[^5] Referring to the doctrine of the last or final things, as death, judgment, heaven, and hell.
[^6] D. H. C., I, 13.
[^7] In D. & C. 84:2 the Lord speaks of "Mount Zion, which shall be the city of New Jerusalem." See also 45:65-70 and 133:8-13, 18-24. These passages are helpful in interpreting Joel and others of the prophets.
[^8] The Hebrew word 'eretz is translated land in this line, but it has also the meaning earth which would fit our interpretation of the prophecy as given in the text.
[^9] See note 8.
[^10] The allusion to the northern one is somewhat obscure. The Authorized Version translators rendered the Hebrew equivalent as northern army. "Army" does not, however, appear in the original. The Hebrew represents the instruments of the Lord's wrath in the day of His judgment.
[^11] That is, the latter days
[^12] C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament (The Twelve Minor Prophets), I, 225-227.
[^13] There is some question as to the meaning of this line. Some think that it has reference to the nations of the world—at the desolation coming upon them will atone for the wrong they have done to God's people. Others think it has reference to the Jews.
[^14] 14. Hosea 4:4-6. The word mother in this passage has reference to the whole nation and kingdom as in Chapter 2:2.
[^15] 15. Robinson, op. cit., pp. 23-26.
