Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty One

JOEL, PROPHET OF THE GREAT AND TERRIBLE DAY OF THE LORD

Little Known of the Prophet.—;Little is known of Joel beyond the scanty information that may be gathered from the prophecy that goes under his name. The superscription tells us simply that he was the son of Pethuel. The Hebrew, Yo'el, would seem to mean "Jehovah is God," and we may be justified in assuming that the prophet's parents were devotees of the true Hebrew religion. The name must have been a rather common one among the ancient Hebrews, for at least a dozen other men in the Old Testament bore it. The name of Joel's father, Pethuel, is thought to mean "persuaded of God." It is commonly supposed that Joel was a native of Judah. This is inferred from references which he makes to Zion, to Judah and Jerusalem, the children of Zion, and to certain religious practices. Such evidence is by no means decisive, but it is the only guide scholars find at hand. As to the circumstances surrounding Joel's call to the ministry, unfortunately nothing has been recorded.

The Date of the Book.—;Few books in the Old Testament have been assigned to as many different dates as has the Book of Joel. It has been dated from before 900 B. C. to 400 B. C., and some parts of it later still. Most writers are agreed that the prophecy should be dated either very early or very late. To the average reader it will probably not be found very profitable or stimulating to enter upon the pros and cons of the arguments for any dating. Most scholars at the present time lean toward a late date of about 400 B. C. The author, however, is inclined to favor a date of 800 B. C. or a little earlier. He feels that the reasons of those favoring a late date are quite as indecisive as they say the premises are for an early date. And so it goes. But be it said that the date of Joel will have little or no bearing upon our exposition of the prophecy. The message of Joel is important for Latter-day Saints irrespective of the date.

The Contents and Style of the Prophecy.—;On the surface, at least, Joel appears to deal with the following: 1. A lamentation over the devastation of the land by locusts, fire and drought. 2. The destruction of the army of locusts, and a renewal of spiritual and material blessings. 3. The outpouring of God's spirit upon all flesh. 4. Judgment upon the nations, and the eternal deliverance and glorification of God's people.

We shall interpret this material in some detail presently. Something should be said first, however, about the style of the prophecy. The Hebrew text of Joel, unlike that of Hosea, is quite sound and free from extraneous influences. The prophet is fluent and clear, uses peculiar constructions, and gives uncommon meanings to common words. Most of the prophecy is in poetry, the superscription and a few verses in Chapter 3 being the only exceptions. Many years ago a noted scholar wrote concerning the style of Joel in these words:

In point of style Joel stands pre-eminent among the Hebrew prophets. He not only possesses a singular degree of purity, but is distinguished by his smoothness and fluency; the animated and rapid character of his rhythmus; the perfect regularity of his parallelisms; and the degree of roundness which he gives to his sentences. He has no abrupt transitions, is everywhere connected, and finishes whatever he takes up. In description he is graphic and perspicuous; in arrangement lucid; in imagery original, copious, and varied. In the judgment of Knobel, he most resembles Amos in regularity, Nahum in animation, and in both respects Habakkuk; but is surpassed by none of them. That what we now possess is all he ever wrote, is in the highest degree improbable: on the contrary, we should conclude from the cultivated character of his language, that he had been accustomed to composition long before he penned these discourses. Whatever degree of obscurity attaches to his book, is attributable to our ignorance of the subjects of which it treats, not to the language which he employs. [^1]

In certain respects Dr. Henderson is seconded by Professor Orelli, who says:

Also the simple, lofty, and classically finished language testifies to high antiquity. In point of form the book is one of the most perfect pieces of the Old Testament; and this perfection rests, not on technical diligence, but on genuine poetic elevation, which spontaneously communicates itself to the style. Prophecy and poetry are here inseparably blended. [^2]

These warm tributes to Joel's style give evidence of the respect in which the prophet's writings have been held. We may now deal profitably with the vital questions relative to the interpretation of the prophecy.

Past Interpretations of the Prophecy.—;As indicated above, Joel speaks of three great calamities— plague of locusts, fire, and drought—at foreshadow the Day of the Lord. Chapter 1:2-20 gives a really terrifying and vivid description of the woes upon mankind and beasts. Then follows in Chapter 2:1-17 another vivid description of the calamity and an urgent exhortation to repentance. A beautiful picture of the blessings which God will eventually give to His people is then given in verses 18-27.

Now the question naturally arises, when we begin to interpret the book, Does Joel describe an actual plague of locusts in his own day, or were they to come in the future? Are the locusts real, or do they represent in symbolic form future disasters upon mankind? Interpreters of the book have generally classified it under one of the three following categories: 1. Description, 2. Allegory, 3. Apocalypse (Revelation). Let us consider each of these briefly. We may well quote Sir George Adam Smith, who gives a brief statement in favor of the first of these:

A large majority of critics hold that Joel starts, like other prophets, from the facts of experience. His locusts, though described with poetic hyperbole—r are they not the vanguard of the Day of God's judgment?— real locusts; their plague has just been felt by his contemporaries, whom he summons to repent, and to whom, when they have repented, he promises the restoration of their ruined harvests, the outpouring of the Spirit, and judgment on their foes. Prediction is thus found only in the second half of the book (2:18 onwards): it rests on a basis of narrative and exhortation which fills the first half. [^3]

Those who hold to the allegorical interpretation argue that Joel's language about the locust plague is entirely too aggravated and ominous to represent a natural plague. Such plagues occur at intervals in Palestine, and it is not to be expected that Joel would connect such a common adversity with the crisis of the Day of the Lord. Using the figure of the locusts, he surely must be describing a more awful agency of God's wrath. In fact, from his description, one might be justified in saying that it seems to imply a human army, which represents part or all of the heathen nations that have been hostile to Israel in different periods of her long history.

Those who uphold this theory are divided, however, as to whether the heathen nations symbolized by the locusts have already attacked Israel or whether the attacks are yet in the future.

Certain persons who hold to the third view, while admitting certain features of the allegorical interpretation to be untenable, are still not readily disposed to believe, with the first group, that the fore part of Joel is narrative and hence historical. They agree that the prophet has in mind a locust plague but hold that it is still in the future. They think it is as much in the future as the pouring out of the spirit upon all flesh (2:28) or of the judgment of God upon the nations. (3:5) All these features are alike signs of the Day of the Lord, and that Day is yet to come. "The prophet's scenery is apocalyptic [^4]he locusts are 'eschatological [^5] locusts', not historical.'

So much for the usual interpretations of Joel. Again, one may ask, as we did in regard to Hosea's marriage: Which of the interpretations given above is correct—uming any is correct? But regarding the prophecy of Joel we have every reason to believe that a modern American prophet, Joseph Smith, received a clue to its interpretation from the lips of a resurrected American prophet whose name was Moroni. Let us, therefore, consider the divine messenger's words.

Moroni's Clue to the Interpretation of Joel.—;When the glorified, resurrected being known to us as Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith on the evening of September 21, 1823, he quoted and explained several Old Testament prophecies, including part of Joel. In writing of this event, Joseph Smith says:

He [Moroni] also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. [^6]

The careful student will at once recognize that these are important words and should certainly prove useful in the interpretation of the first part of Joel. It will be appropriate for us to look in some detail at the passage quoted by Moroni. Of interest is the fact that it forms a separate chapter by itself in the Hebrew Bible:

And it shall come to pass afterward,

That I will pour out My spirit upon all flesh;

And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,

Your old men shall dream dreams,

Your young men shall see visions;

And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids

In those days will I pour out My spirit.

And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth,

Blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.

The sun shall be turned into darkness,

And the moon into blood,

Before the great and terrible day of the Lord come.

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered;

For in mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be those that escape,

As the Lord hath said,

And among the remnant those whom the Lord shall call.

(2:28-32, see also D.H.C., I, 101.)

This part of Joel's prophecy, let us keep in mind, was in Joseph Smith's time "not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be." So had said the divine messenger. This revelation gives us solid ground upon which to stand in interpreting the prophecy. I take it that the above scripture means substantially this: There is a time coming in the near future when the Spirit of God, now withdrawn in great measure from the world because of wickedness, shall be poured out upon all flesh. This great pentecostal era can, of course, come only after the wicked have had the judgments of God heaped upon them without measure. The Spirit does not abide in the midst of wickedness. In the period just preceding "the great and terrible day of the Lord"—rrible because it is a climax of judgment—rtain cosmic signs shall be vouchsafed men as warnings that God's judgments are at hand. Let us inquire as to the exact meaning of the phrase, "the great and terrible day of the Lord," used by Joel and in modified form by others of the prophets. Once established, it will be of great help in interpreting not only Joel but others as well. In several revelations given by the Lord to Joseph Smith the matter is made clear. In September, 1830, the prophet was commanded to bring about the gathering of the Lord's elect, "for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts." (D. & C. 29:7) The Lord continues:

Wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked. For the hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall not be upon the earth; for the hour is nigh, and that which was spoken by mine apostles must be fulfilled; for as they spoke so shall it come to pass; for I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand. . . . But, behold, I say unto you that before this great day shall come the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall be turned into blood, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and there shall be greater signs in heaven above and in the earth beneath; and there shall be weeping and wailing among the hosts of men; . . . (D. & C. 29:8-11, 14, 15; italics ours.)

A careful study of this scripture must convince one that the Second Advent of the Christ is equivalent to the "great and terrible day of the Lord." The reader should carefully note the italicized passages, which must be direct allusions to the passage in Joel that we are now expounding. Attention is also called to two other revelations. The first, D. & C. 43:17-30, is very explicit and commands all nations to repent and "prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord." The Lord goes on to explain that "in mine own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth." The other revelation, D. & C. 45:15-59, contains the instructions given by the Savior to His ancient disciples concerning His advent in Glory. Notice especially these words:

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man. And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath. And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke. And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven. And the remnant shall be gathered unto this place; . . . (D. & C. 45:39-43; italics ours.)

Here once more is a view that the Day of the Lord is the Second Advent. And the reader will observe again the unmistakable allusions (in italics) to the passage under consideration in Joel. The Lord seems not to have forgotten His ancient servant who foresaw the great events of our generation.

Having now established the meaning of the expression under consideration, we may continue to study the rest of the scripture we began with. Joel points out that those who call on the Lord's name in the day of His judgment "shall be delivered." I do not feel, as many scholars do, that Joel meant this in a narrow sense—at only Israelites should be saved. Such a view is too narrow to impute to the great prophet who saw so far down the centuries of time to the Lord's Coming. If no Gentiles are saved, it will only be because they have stubbornly refused to heed God's call to repentance.

When the prophet says that "in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be those that escape," he may be making special reference to Israelites on the American continent [^7]—;Joseph Smith said it was the land of Zion— well as to Jews and others of Israel in Palestine. Finally Joel makes reference to "the remnant" (2:32) that should be saved. This evidently refers to the remnant of Israel spoken of by Isaiah and others of Jacob's descendants who should be saved. It may be the "remnant" spoken of in D. & C. 45:43 and quoted above.

Such in brief is my interpretation of the passage from Joel quoted by Moroni to Joseph Smith. It may be summed up as follows: 1. The pouring out of the Lord's spirit in the latter days, 2. Signs to be given in heaven and on earth of coming judgments, 3. The Second Advent of the Lord in judgment, 4. The righteous, especially the "remnant" or "elect" of Israel, to be delivered.

My belief is that this passage is practically an epitome— summary or condensation of the whole Book of Joel.

The first part of Joel, Chapter 1:2-27, now claims our attention.

The Harbinger of the Day of the Lord.—;As we pointed out above, Joel, in ominous and aggravated figures of a locust plague, drought, and fire, pictures the events preceding the "great and terrible day of the Lord." Notice the opening lines, in which the fear of something more than an ordinary scourge of locusts is played up:

Hear this, ye old man,

And give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. [^8]

Hath this been in your days,

Or in the days of your fathers?

Tell ye your children of it,

And let your children tell their children,

And their children another generation.

That which the palmer-worm hath left hath the locust eaten;

And that which the locust hath left hath the canker-worm eaten;

And that which the canker-worm hath left hath the caterpillar eaten.

Awake, ye drunkards, and weep,

And wail, all ye drinkers of wine,

Because of the sweet wine,

For it is cut off from your mouth.

For a people is come up upon my land,

Mighty, and without number;

His teeth are the teeth of a lion,

And he hath the jaw-teeth of a lioness.

He hath laid my vine waste,

And blasted my fig-tree;

He hath made it clean bare, and cast it down,

The branches thereof are made white. (1:2-7)

The terribly destructive effects of locust plagues in Palestine are well known to every student of the subject. The reader will find it profitable to study Mr. John D. Whiting's description of the great locust plague of 1915 in the National Geographic Magazine for December of that year. Other plagues are known to have occurred in the years 1845, 1865, 1892, 1899, and 1904. Joel does not exaggerate when he describes the destructive effects of locusts on vines, fig-trees, and other vegetation. But though the prophet uses the very real imagery of a plague whose effects are well known to him, he makes a much broader application of it than just to his own land and people. To him the locusts represent general devastation and destruction upon the whole earth. If he means an ordinary locust plague upon his own land, why does he ask the question:

Hath this been in your days,

Or in the days of your fathers?

The expected answer is no, whereas to an ordinary plague the answer must have been yes, because such locust scourges were well known in Joel's day. But let us not forget the key left us by Moroni. Our point that the scourge of locusts represents a general judgment upon the whole earth is borne out when Joel uses certain key expressions in a further description of destruction by means of drought and fire:

Alas for the day!

For the day of the Lord is at hand,

And as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.

Is not the food cut off

Before your eyes,

Yea, joy and gladness

From the house of our God?

The grains shrivel under their hoes;

The garners are laid desolate,

The barns are broken down;

For the grain is withered.

Unto Thee, O Lord, do I cry;

For the fire hath devoured

The pastures of the wilderness,

And the flame hath set ablaze

All the trees of the field.

Yea, the beasts of the field pant unto Thee;

For the water brooks are dried up,

And the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness. (1:15-17, 19, 20)

Notice the lines which have a familiar ring:

Alas for the day!

For the day of the Lord is at hand. . .

We have already learned that the Day of the Lord, as explained by Moroni to Joseph Smith, meant the Second Advent of the Savior in the latter days to judgment. Can there be any doubt, then, that Joel is here speaking of the judgments of God upon the earth prior to that event? Also the strong and unusual language used by the prophet in describing the drought must strike one with wonder.

Then again in Chapter 2:1-11 another description of the destruction is given in somewhat different but vivid word pictures. Let us call attention to two passages from this section:

Blow ye the horn in Zion,

And sound an alarm in My holy mountain;

Let all the inhabitants of the land [^9] tremble;

For the day of the Lord cometh,

For it is at hand;

A day of darkness and gloominess,

A day of clouds and thick darkness,

As blackness spread upon the mountains. (2:1, 2)

Here again we have the Day of the Lord mentioned as before. And in the second passage the same thing is spoken of in foreboding language:

And the Lord uttereth His voice before His army;

For His camp is very great,

For he is mighty that executeth His word;

For great is the day of the Lord and very terrible;

And who can abide it? (2:11; cf. Mal. 3:2)

In the mind of the writer no doubt remains that Joel foresaw the dispensation in which we live and God's judgments upon the world. This he expressed in figures that would be easily understood by his people. So acutely and painfully were the judgments that Joel saw impressed upon his mind that he cried out in anguish— if he were present—; to the people of our day to repent and escape God's wrath. Thus his prophecy is an everpresent warning to us:

Yet even now, saith the Lord,

Turn ye unto Me with all your heart,

And with fasting, and with weeping, and with lamentation;

And rend your heart, and not your garments,

And turn unto the Lord your God;

For He is gracious and compassionate,

Long-suffering, and abundant in mercy,

And repenteth Him of the evil.

Who knoweth whether He will not turn and repent,

And leave a blessing behind him? (2:12-14)

Joel's Plea for Israel.— [^10] concerned is the prophet over God's judgments upon the world that he makes a special plea for Israel. In language containing allusions to religious customs of his own day he says:

Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord,

Weep between the porch and the altar,

And let them say: 'Spare Thy people, O Lord,

And give not Thy heritage to reproach,

That the nations should make them a byword:

Wherefore should they say among the peoples:

Where is their God?' (2:17)

The Lord's Answer.—;The scene changes and Joel foresees that God will answer the petition and bless His people.

Prosperity shall eventually attend them, their enemies shall be removed, the desolation and destruction typified by the locust plague shall be made up to them, the Lord shall be in their midst and they shall never be ashamed.

Then was the Lord jealous for His land,

And had pity on His people.

And the Lord answered and said unto His people:

'Behold, I will send you grain, and wine, and oil,

And ye shall be satisfied therewith;

And I will no more make you a reproach among the nations;

But I will remove far off from you the northern one, [^11]

And will drive him into a land barren and desolate.

* * *

Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice;

For the Lord hath done great things.

Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field;

For the pastures of the wilderness do spring,

For the tree beareth its fruit,

The fig-tree and the vine do yield their strength.

Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice

In the Lord your God.

* * *

And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten,

The canker-worm, and the caterpillar, and the palmer-worm,

My great army which I sent among you.

And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied,

And shall praise the name of the Lord your God,

That hath dealt wondrously with you;

And My people shall never be ashamed.

And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel,

And that I am the Lord your God, and there is none else;

And My people shall never be ashamed.

(2:18-23, 25-27)

This passage is an idealized picture of Israel's future. And by Israel I have reference to all her branches, whether the Jew in Palestine, the Ten Tribes, or Ephraim on this continent. The events of our day are constantly clarifying to us the picture drawn by Joel of old.

Judgment in the Valley of Jehoshaphat.—;We have seen in our study of the first two chapters of Joel how the prophet, using allusions and figures well understood by his people, describes the great signs and judgments to take place in the latter days before the Advent of our Lord. We also learn that the prophet foresees the blessings of God upon Israel during that trying time. In Chapter 3, Joel gives another picture of God's judgment upon the nations. Israel, whom he foresees will be scattered among the nations, is to receive a change in her fortunes, and retribution will come upon her adversaries in the valley of Jehoshaphat. The inspired writer, in telling of the judgments, recalls injustices done to Israel presumably in his own lifetime or before. Boys and girls have been sold into captivity in exchange for harlots or a drink of wine

For, behold, in those days, and in that time, [^12]

When I shall bring back the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,

I will gather all nations,

And will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat;

And I will enter into judgment with them there

For My people and for My heritage Israel,

Whom they have scattered among the nations,

And divided My land.

And they have cast lots for My people;

And have given a boy for a harlot,

And sold a girl for wine, and have drunk. (3:1-3)

It is possible that in Joel's day many Israelites had been scattered to distant countries; but it was not until Roman times that lots were cast upon the nation as a whole, to sell the people as slaves. After the conquest and destruction of Jerusalem, the Roman leader Titus disposed of the prisoners under seventeen years of age by publicly selling them. Others were executed. Some were sent to work in Egyptian mines, others fought wild beasts in Roman shows; only the tallest and most handsome ones were reserved for the triumphal procession in Rome.

The retribution that is to be wrought by God upon the nations in the valley of Jehoshaphat deserves a word of comment. Many authorities have supposed that Joel actually meant the narrow valley of the Kidron, between Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives, to be the place of judgment. Jews for centuries have made a burying-place of parts of the valley and have maintained that the final world judgment will be held there. Other authorities have held that the very magnitude of the subject precludes the possibility that Jehoshaphat is a place name. They point out that the valley of Jehoshaphat means literally, the valley where Jehovah judgeth, and is probably symbolical in import. It should be observed also that in 3:14 the valley is spoken of as the valley of decision. Which of these views is the correct one may not be so important to us as the fact that judgment is to come. But the attention of the reader should be called to two passages in the Doctrine and Covenants that may have reference to the event mentioned by Joel. The first occurs in Section 45:47-49:

Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations. And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake. And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

This passage refers to the "mount," which is, as the context shows, the Mount of Olivet. There may be also an allusion to Joel 3:16, which deals with the Day of the Lord in the valley of decision. The second passage occurs in Section 133:19-21:

Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him. For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion. And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people.

It will be noticed that this scripture mentions the Mount of Olivet, but mentions also other far-distant places. Thus the idea of the place of judgment would seem to be greatly extended. There is a definite allusion to Joel 3:16 in this passage. It seems to me that these passages in the Doctrine and Covenants refer to the same general subject of the judgment scenes dealt with in the third chapter of Joel. The definite allusion to Joel 3:16 in D. & C. 133:21 would seem to make this decision valid.

In verses 4-8, 19 of this chapter Joel depicts the retribution that shall come upon Tyre, Zidon, Philistia, Egypt and Edom because of the hostility manifested towards his people in his own time and because of the acts of violence they have perpetrated. These powers carried off gold and silver and other treasures which they placed in their own temples; they sold Israelitish children to the Greeks (Jevanim), and in other ways demonstrated their unrighteous attitudes. Joel's predictions have been mostly fulfilled through the centuries; those which have not yet been fulfilled we may assume will be in the judgment scenes he describes concerning the latter days.

Verses 9-17 contain a moving and powerful description of the fulfillment of the judgment upon all the nations predicted in verse 2. As Professor C. F. Keil writes:

The call is addressed to all nations to equip themselves for battle, and march into the valley of Jehoshaphat to war against the people of God, but in reality to be judged by the Lord through His heavenly heroes [mighty ones], whom he sends down thither. . . . It is to the last decisive judgment, in which all the single judgments find their end, that the command of Jehovah to His strong heroes refers. . . . The judgment is represented under the double figure of the reaping of the fields and the treading out of the grapes in the wine-press. . . . The ripeness of the grain is a figurative representation of ripeness for judgment. [^13]

The enemies of God are destroyed, but He will prove a refuge and strong tower to His people.

Proclaim ye this among the nations,

Prepare war;

Stir up the mighty men;

Let all the men of war draw near,

Let them come up.

Beat your ploughshares into swords,

And your pruninghooks into spears;

Let the weak say: 'I am strong.'

Haste ye, and come, all ye nations round about,

And gather yourselves together;

Thither cause Thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord!

Let the nations be stirred up, and come up

To the valley of Jehoshaphat;

For there will I sit to judge

All the nations round about.

Put ye in the sickle,

For the harvest is ripe;

Come, tread ye;

For the winepress is full, the vats overflow;

For their wickedness is great.

Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision!

For the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.

The sun and the moon are become black,

And the stars withdraw their shining.

And the Lord shall roar from Zion,

And utter His voice from Jerusalem,

And the heavens and the earth shall shake;

But the Lord will be a refuge unto His people,

And a stronghold to the children of Israel.

So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God,

Dwelling in Zion My holy mountain;

Then shall Jerusalem be holy,

And there shall no strangers pass through her anymore.

(3:9-17)

Joel ends his prophecy by showing that after God's judgment upon the nations has taken place, Israel shall be blessed and prospered "from generation to generation." In figures typical of the Hebrew genius he has the "mountains drop down sweet wine" and the "hills flow with milk" which express how fruitful the Lord's land shall be.

And it shall come to pass in that day,

That the mountains shall drop down sweet wine,

And the hills shall flow with milk,

And all the brooks of Judah shall flow with waters;

And a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord,

And shall water the valley of Shittim.

* * *

But Judah shall be inhabited for ever,

And Jerusalem from generation to generation.

And I will hold as innocent their blood that I have not held as innocent; [^14]

And the Lord dwelleth in Zion. (3:18, 20, 21)

The Book of Joel must ever remain to the Mormon people one of the most important prophecies of the Old Testament. The fact that part of it was quoted by Moroni, the holy messenger from God, to the young Prophet Joseph Smith at the beginning of this dispensation emphasizes the point. The world, we fear, may take its "voice of warning" to heart too late, because its "apocalyptic" nature is held too cheaply at the present time.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The transgressions and punishments of six foreign nations (1:3-3:3). Condemnation of Israel's ruling classes (3:1-4:3). Three visions: The locusts, the fire, the plumbline (7:1-9). The prosperity was very similar to that in America during and after the first World War.
[^2] The transgressions and punishment of Judah (2:4, 5). Israel's failure to understand the Lord's judgments (4:4-13). Interlude: The experience of Amos at Bethel (7:10-17). E. Henderson, The Book of the Twelve Prophets, 2nd. Ed., p. 127.
[^3] The transgressions and punishment of Israel (2:6-16). Lamentations, exhortations, reproofs, and threats of ruin (5:1-17). The fourth vision: The basket of summer fruit (8:1-3). "Amos," International Critical Commentary, Intro., CVII.
[^4] Woe and terror upon those who desire the day of the Lord (5:18-27). Interlude: Denunciation, judgment, effects of the judgment (8:4-14). The Greek version of the Old Testament.
[^5] Woe upon the careless rich, the self-satisfied, and arrogant (6:1-14). The fifth vision: The smitten sanctuary (9:1-6). John E. McFadyen, A Cry for Justice, p. 2.
[^6] The Lord's respect for character, not race (9:7-10). The student is advised to locate these countries in succession upon a map. Notice the web Amos spins around Israel.
[^7] Epilogue: The eventual redemption and glorification of Israel (9:11-15). McFadyen, op. cit., p. 23.
[^8] McFadyen, op. cit., pp. 36 f.
[^9] This expression in Amos 4:6 means hunger.
[^10] Amos 5:2, 3. Notice the tithe of Israel left. In the light of 4:4 it is a rather grim figure.
[^11] Amos 5:4-7. Note the satirical word play on Bethel. The latter was the site of the Israelite court and means "house of God."
[^12] G. L. Robinson, The Twelve Minor Prophets, pp. 91 f.
[^13] The older translations usually render 6:13 as follows: "Ye who rejoice in a thing of nought, that say: 'Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?' " This does not give good sense because the names of the two cities, Lodebhar (no thing) and Karnaim (horns), have been literally translated. The above rendering brings out the meaning beautifully.
[^14] Consider Amos 3:12; 5:3. A remnant to escape. These passages are in harmony with 9:8b.
