Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty Three

OBADIAH, PROPHET OF EDOM'S DOOM

The Prophet and His Book.—;Obadiah is another prophet of whose life and ministry we know little or nothing beyond what can be deduced from the twenty-one verses of his prophecy. His book is not only the smallest among the prophets, but it is the smallest in the Old Testament. But as the English scholar Robertson Smith pointed out many years ago, its difficulty is "out of all proportion to its length." Various writers have attempted—;unsuccessfully we believe— identify Obadiah with one of the dozen or more men of the same name mentioned in the Old Testament. [^1] Obadiah's name, judging from the way it is vocalized in our present Hebrew Old Testament, signifies "worshiper of Jehovah." Some Greek manuscripts of the Old Testament would presuppose the meaning "servant of Jehovah."

The caption of the prophecy, The vision of Obadiah, implies to the author the fact that Obadiah was a seer— seer in the sense that he saw the future with supernatural objectivity as distinguished from his own thinking and imagining. He was what the Hebrews called a chozeh or gazer. That Obadiah saw the salvation of Israel and other important events in the latter days may be in part responsible for the preservation of his little book.

The questions relative to the date and unity of the Book of Obadiah have proved puzzling and perplexing to scholars. Very competent authorities have differed by as much as nearly six hundred years—om 889 B. C. to 312 B. C.—;in the matter of dating. Some hold the prophecy to be a unity, contending that Obadiah wrote all of it; others say that the prophet wrote only part of it and that additional verses were later appended by unknown authors. I shall not confuse and bewilder the reader with a technical discussion of these points other than to say that I see no good reason to doubt the unity of Obadiah. As to the date of the book, let me assign it to approximately 730 B. C. I do this with an open mind, believing that the last word has not been said on the subject.

One very interesting literary feature of Obadiah should be called to the reader's attention. All students of the subject have observed very marked resemblances between Obadiah 1-9 and Jeremiah 49:7-22. Anyone who will take the trouble to compare them will be convinced, I am sure, that these resemblances are not purely coincidental. They are usually explained in one of three ways: (1) Jeremiah borrowed from Obadiah; (2) Obadiah borrowed from Jeremiah; or, (3) both borrowed from a common original. My own feeling is that Obadiah is the older document, though in a few places Jeremiah differs in such a way as to lead one to believe his version is original. This suggests a fourth solution, namely, that both saw or had revealed to them the same things and expressed them in somewhat differing thought patterns. We find this kind of phenomenon occurring very often in the Doctrine and Covenants, where the Prophet Joseph Smith makes obvious allusions to certain Biblical passages, but not always in precisely their same language. The reader will recall some examples quoted in the chapter on Joel. A thorough discussion of this question would lead us into the problem of the nature of inspiration, and we desist.

The prophecy of Obadiah may for convenience be studied in four divisions: (1) Announcement of the doom of Edom (1-9); (2) The cause of Edom's doom (10-14); (3) The Day of the Lord and retribution upon the nations (15, 16); (4) The exaltation of Israel and the coming of Saviors on Mount Zion (17-21).

Before treating these divisions, we should say something about Edom and its relations with Israel. A better understanding of the spirit of Obadiah's prophecy will be gained thereby.

The Traditional Relations Between Israel and Edom.—;The history of the relations between Israel and Edom is from the beginning fraught with envy and hate. In Gen. 36:1 we have the following statement: "Now these are the generations of Esau—e same is Edom." This recalls to us the struggle for supremacy from birth, or even before, of Esau and his younger brother Jacob (Israel). According to the history in Genesis,

Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife, because she was barren; and the Lord let Himself be entreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived. And the children struggled together within her; and she said: 'If it be so, wherefore do I live?' And she went to inquire of the Lord. And the Lord said unto her:

Two nations are in thy womb,

And two peoples shall be separated from thy bowels;

And the one people shall be stronger than the other people;

And the elder shall serve the younger. (Gen. 25:21-23)

The sequel of this story is familiar to us all: the eventual triumph of Jacob over his brother in accordance with the revelation of the Lord to Rebekah. Esau sold his birthright to his brother for a mess of pottage and finally the holy patriarchal inheritance also. Esau, it will be recalled, married among the Canaanites, which fact was a great trial to his parents. He even threatened the life of Jacob, who was forced to flee to Haran, the home of his kinsmen. In these stories the Old Testament writers strongly contrast the two brothers. [^2] Jacob, the younger brother and progenitor of the tribes of Israel, seeks to serve God and obtain His blessings at any cost. On the other hand, to put it in the words of Sir George Adam Smith:

Esau is a profane person, [^3] with no conscience of a birthright, no faith in the future, no capacity for vision; dead to the unseen, and clamoring only for the satisfaction of his appetites. The same was probobly the character of his descendants; who had, of course, their own gods, like every other people in that Semitic world, but were essentially irreligious, living for food, spoil and vengeance— people who deserved even more than the Philistines to have their name descend as a symbol of hardness and obscurantism. It is no contradiction to this that the one intellectual quality imputed to the Edomites should be that of shrewdness and a wisdom obviously worldly. The wise men of Edom, the cleverness of Mount Esau [^4] were notorious. It is the race which has given to history only the Herods—ever, scheming, ruthless statesmen, as able as false and bitter, as shrewd in policy as destitute of ideals. That fox, cried Christ, and crying stamped the race. [^5]

Israel's other enemies, such as the Canaanites, Philistines, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, Egyptians, and Syrians, arose and fell in successive waves, but the Edomites, like the poor, were always with them. Hidden in the mountain-lands of Seir southeast of Palestine and extending even into the desert the Edomite nation was ever a threatening menace. Among magnificent and scarcely penetrable rocky defiles and with good water and food supplies, its people usually had little trouble in defending themselves. Hence the cry of Obadiah:

O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock,

Thy habitation on high;

That sayest in thy heart:

'Who shall bring me down to the ground?' (1:3)

The self-sufficiency of the Edomites was aggravated by their key position on several important ancient trade routes. In early times they became traders and middlemen, and many of them became wealthy. We understand readily, therefore, when Obadiah cries out:

How is Esau searched out!

How are his hidden places sought out! (1:6)

Israelite kings who wanted the trade from the East were compelled to conquer Edom in order to control it. Hence revolts were frequent, and after each one the hatred of the contending parties only increased. Through the centuries the Edomites became more and more in the eyes of the prophets of Israel a symbol of wickedness. Edom represented the world with all of its crass materialism and lack of spiritual vision or feeling. It is interesting to notice that in later times the Jewish scribes transferred the name of Edom to Rome. [^6]

The Interpretation of Obadiah.—;In interpreting the prophecy of Obadiah one ought, first of all, to read it through several times, using a good modern translation. In the light of what has already been said about the relations of Edom and Israel, the reader will readily understand why, in the opening verses (1-9), Edom is the target of a withering prediction of doom from the Lord. She is to be made small among the nations and greatly despised; her arrogance is fatal, for she shall be brought low; she is to be completely cleared out by her enemies—;worse than if she were visited by ordinary thieves or robbers, for they would leave a few things; in the midst of her calamity even her allies will forsake and abandon her to her enemies in order not to be entangled in her troubles; finally, the worldly wisdom and insight of her wise men will prove of no avail against the slaughter to come.

The vision of Obadiah.

Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom:

We have heard a message from the Lord,

And an ambassador is sent among the nations:

'Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.'

Behold, I make thee small among the nations;

Thou art greatly despised.

The pride of thy heart hath beguiled thee,

O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock

Thy habitation on high;

That sayest in thy heart:

'Who shall bring me down to the ground?'

Though thou make thy nest as high as the eagle,

And though thou set it among the stars,

I will bring thee down from thence, saith the Lord.

If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night—;

How art thou cut off!—;

Would they not steal till they had enough?

If grape-gatherers came to thee,

Would they not leave some gleaning grapes?

How is Esau searched out!

How are his hidden places sought out!

All the men of thy confederacy

Have conducted thee to the border;

The men that were at peace with thee

Have beguiled thee, and prevailed against thee;

They that eat thy bread lay a snare under thee,

In whom there is no discernment.

Shall I not in that day, saith the Lord,

Destroy the wise men out of Edom,

And discernment out of the mount of Esau?

And thy mighty men, O Teman, [^7] shall be dismayed,

To the end that everyone may be cut off from the mount of Esau by slaughter. (1:1-9)

In verses 10-14 the Lord indicates the reasons for Edom's doom. These may be summed up as follows: (1) Violence done to Jacob (Israel); (2) They gloat over the distress of Israel and instead of aiding her, actually give support to her enemies. In verses 12-14 the effect is given of a speaker actually face to face with the situation and giving appropriate advice to the Edomites:

For the violence done to thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee,

And thou shalt be cut off forever.

In the day that thou didst stand aloof,

In the day that strangers carried away his substance

And foreigners entered into his gates,

And cast lots upon Jerusalem, [^8]

Even thou wast as one of them.

And look not on the day of your brother,

On the day of his misfortune,

And rejoice not over the sons of Judah

In the day of their destruction;

And do not magnify thy mouth [^9]

In the day of distress.

Do not enter into the gate of My people

In the day of their misery;

Do not look—en thou!— his hurt

In the day of his misery,

And stretch not forth a hand on his substance

In the day of his calamity.

Nor stand in the crossway,

To cut off his fugitives;

Nor deliver up his survivors

In the day of his distress. (1:10-14)

In these verses the author has followed the Hebrew rather literally. In relation to this section Professor Keil stated it well when he said:

Wrong, or violence, is all the more reprehensible, when it is committed against a brother. The fraternal relation in which Edom stood towards Judah is still more sharply defined by the name Jacob, since Esau and Jacob were twin brothers. The consciousness that the Israelites were their brethren, ought to have impelled the Edomites to render helpful support to the oppressed Judeans. Instead of this, they not only revelled with scornful and malignant pleasure in the misfortune of the brother nation, but endeavored to increase it still further by rendering active support to the enemy. [^10]

As one studies and ponders over the two sections of Obadiah thus far considered, he acquires a feeling that the prophet has a far deeper message to communicate than the destruction of the Edomite nation. To be sure the destruction is one of his points, but he also uses Edom in a symbolic sense. One begins to sense this in the very first verse of the prophecy:

We have heard a message from the Lord,

And an ambassador is sent among the nations;

'Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.'

Edom is viewed here as the object of the fury of any or all nations without discrimination. The language used seems too strong to take literally. It appears very probable, therefore, that Edom is used as a symbol of the wicked world with all its pomp and power, the devastation of which is forecast in the verses following. All nations, regardless of their worldly wisdom, shall fall if they direct their wrath and power against God's people. That this interpretation of Obadiah is correct is made certain, I believe, by the next section, verses 15, 16:

For the day of the Lord is near upon all the nations;

As thou has done, it shall be done unto thee;

Thy dealing shall return upon thine own head.

For as ye have drunk upon My holy mountain,

So shall all the nations drink continually,

And they shall drink, and swallow down,

And shall be as though they had not been.

It will be remembered that in our study of Joel we found the meaning of the Day of the Lord. It refers, according to the Doctrine and Covenants, to a time yet future in which the coming of the Son of Man shall take place. [^11] At that time, the power, glory, and judgment of the Lord shall be manifested unto the nations. (D. & C. 45:44) In the verses just quoted we find Obadiah speaking of the Day of the Lord and God's judgments upon the nations in essentially the same terms as we found in Joel. When Obadiah says, "As thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee," he is, therefore, referring to Edom as a symbol of the ungodly world of the latter days. In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord makes a reference to Edom under the symbolism just referred to. After speaking of the difficulties in the latter days when peace shall be taken from the earth and the devil shall have power over his own dominion, He continues:

And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world. (D. & C. 1:36; italics ours.) [^12]

From Maccabean times (167 B. C.—;65 B. C.), Edom was known as Idumea. Hence the allusion is easily understood in the light of history.

In the last section of Obadiah, verses 17-21, the prophet sees the eventual restoration of Israel. The picture is essentially that which we have already seen in the prophecies thus far studied. I believe that Obadiah saw clearly the blessings of God upon the various divisions of Israel in their different geographical locations. Mount Zion is particularly pointed out. This, as we have learned, refers to America and especially the city of the New Jerusalem, which is to be a holy place. [^13] Latter-day Saints know that this continent is especially reserved for the descendants of Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh). (2 Nephi 1:5; 3:2) Obadiah speaks of the house of Joseph as a "flame." The prophet probably means the ten tribes when he mentions Joseph, and by the house of Jacob he doubtless means Judah. The kingdom of Judah is divided into three parts: the Negeb (South), the Shephelah (Lowland), and Benjamin, each of which is assigned a special district to take possession of, "the countries being mentioned in the place of their inhabitants." Esau is to be dispossessed and judged—;in fact, to be for "stubble."

But upon mount Zion there shall be deliverance,

And it shall be holy;

And the house of Jacob shall inherit their possessions.

And the house of Jacob shall be a fire,

And the house of Joseph a flame,

And the house of Esau for stubble,

And they shall burn among them, and consume them;

And there will not be a survivor of the house of Esau;

For the Lord hath spoken.

And they of the South shall possess the mount of Esau,

And they of the Lowland the Philistines;

And they shall possess the field of Ephraim,

And the field of Samaria;

And Benjamin shall possess Gilead.

And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel,

Shall possess the land of the Canaanites unto Zarephath, [^14]

And the captivity of Jerusalem, that is in Sepharad, [^15]

Shall possess the cities of the South.

And saviors shall come up on mount Zion

To judge the mount of Esau;

And the kingdom shall be the Lord's. (1:17-21)

The last verse of Obadiah relative to "saviors" on Mount Zion has always been much quoted by the Mormon people and interpreted in a special sense. It will be appropriate to discuss it at this point.

On Sunday, January 21, 1844, the Prophet Joseph Smith preached a sermon at the southeast corner of the Nauvoo Temple to several thousand people on the subject of the sealing power of the priesthood. In his discourse, a synopsis of which was reported by Elder Wilford Woodruff, he says:

The Bible says, "I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." [^16]

Now the word turn here should be translated bind, or seal. But what is the object of this important mission? Or how is it to be fulfilled? The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion [last italics ours].

But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion [italics ours]? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. And I would to God that this temple was now done, that we might go into it, and go to work and improve our time, and make use of the seals while they are on earth. [^17]

These words would seem to imply that the modern American prophet understood Obadiah's predictions concerning "saviors on Mount Zion" to have reference to the vicarious work for the dead that shall be carried on in the temples of our dispensation and, too, that those who hold the keys of this work shall judge the wicked world represented by the "Mount of Esau."

If the writer's interpretation of Obadiah is correct, we see again, as we saw in Joel, how important to the present generation is this little-read and generally misunderstood prophecy.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The reader is invited to compare verse 2 with Ps. 18:6; 3 with Ps. 42:7; 4 with Ps. 31:22; 8 with Ps. 31:6, and 9 with Ps. 50:14.
[^2] Quoted by F. C. Eiselen, The Prophetic Books of the Old Testament, II, 464.
[^3] For evidence on these points see R. D. Wilson, A Scientific Investigation of the Old Testament, Ch. IV.
[^4] A Midrash "was the expansion, doctrinal or homiletic, of a passage of Scripture, and frequently took the form, dear to Orientals, of parable or invented story about the subject of the text."
[^5] See S. B. Sperry, The Spirit of the Old Testament, pp. 151 ff.
[^6] Jonah 1:3. Tarshish or Tartessus is supposed to have been a Phoenician colony in southwestern Spain. Some scholars doubt this.
[^7] The word in Hebrew literally means "to dig."
[^8] See Jonah's prayer in Chap. 2:2-9.
[^9] Some authorities point out that the phrase "three days journey" in Jonah 3:3 is an Oriental expression, referring to superior size. See G. L. Robinson, The Twelve Minor Prophets, p. 80.
[^10] George A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Rev. Ed.), II, 518 f.
[^11] Jonah 4:1. The racy modern expression "it burned him up" very closely approximates the meaning of the original Hebrew.
[^12] Smith, op. cit., II, 528
[^13] Cf. John 3:16.
[^14] Cf. I Sam. 15:22; Acts 5:29.
[^15] Robinson, op. cit., pp. 90 f.
[^16] 16. Mal. 4:5, 6.
[^17] 17. D. H. C., VI, 183 f. See also IV, 360, 599.
