Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty Four

JONAH, THE PROPHET WHO TRIED TO RUN FROM GOD

Our Knowledge of the Prophet.—;We know little of the life of Jonah, but that little is more than we know about some of the other prophets discussed in this volume. In the first verse of the book under his name he is said to be "the son of Amittai." But the Book of Jonah is not the only Old Testament book in which he is mentioned. In II Kings 14:25 we are told that Jeroboam II, king of Israel,

. . . restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath unto the sea of Arabah, according to the word of the Lord, the God of Israel, which he spoke by the hand of His servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was of Gath-hepher.

There can be little doubt, therefore, that Jonah was a historical person and was engaged in prophetic activities. The prophet's home, Gath-hepher, according to Joshua 19:10-13, was located in the territory of the tribe of Zebulun. According to monastic tradition it was the same as the present Arab village of El-Meshed, some three miles northeast of Nazareth, where one of the many Moslem tombs of Nebi Yunus, the Prophet Jonah, is pointed out. St. Jerome (circa 400 A. D.) also speaks of Gath-hepher as being situated two Roman miles from Sepphoris towards Tiberias.

Jonah's name means "dove" and that of his father "truthful."

Since Jonah lived during the reign of Jeroboam, it is possible to date him at approximately 788 B. C.

The Book and Its Literary Form.—;The Book of Jonah consists of only four short chapters, but it contains the most profound religious message in the Old Testament. In reality it is not a prophecy but a story about a prophet. There can be little question that the book is a unity. Even Jonah's prayer in Chapter Two, consisting as it does of passages nearly all parallel to others in the Psalter, [^1] has a vital unity of its own and is not a mere string of quotations. The obvious intent of the book is to drive home a religious lesson, whether or not we agree that its details are historical.

Most present authorities are inclined to date the Book of Jonah late, sometime between 450 B. C. and 300 B. C. Since such a dating is several centuries after the prophet lived, some explanation is in order. Scholars point to the fact that certain words used in Jonah are common in post-Biblical Hebrew and do not occur elsewhere in the Old Testament. A great deal of stress is laid on the presence of Aramaic words in the text and of expressions that are alien to classical Hebrew. These facts are supposed to be indicative of the late period in which the book was written. Then the observation that Jonah is nowhere mentioned as the author and is always spoken of in the third person, except where the author places direct utterances in his mouth, is held to be significant, especially so in view of the fact that "there are none of those casual allusions to time, place, or person which we expect in a man's account of his own experiences." [^2] Then, again, the theological ideas expressed and the tone of the book are supposed to favor the late dating. If to all these reasons we add some historical inaccuracies supposed to be inherent in the book, we have a fair picture of the case advanced by scholars favoring the view that the book was written in late times.

Those authorities who date the book early—at is, in Jonah's life-time, deny that any of the above reasons are conclusive. Aramaisms, they say, are no positive criterion that a book containing them is late. Neither are the so-called late Hebrew expressions. [^3] The fact that Jonah is written in the third person is not surprising, for some other prophets write that way, not to speak of profane authors whose works can be cited. The theological argument is too subjective and unproved to be of any value. Many modern authorities try to state arbitrarily what the religion of a given century must have been when sufficient positive evidence is not at hand to determine it completely. The historical argument, it is said, can hardly be decisive for the very good reason that Jonah was a Hebrew who probably did not know Assyrian customs and history very well. Furthermore, in an account whose main interest was religious we ought not to expect precise historical details.

Such are the differences of opinion regarding the date of the book. But most of us will very properly be more concerned with the message of the book than with its date.

In relation to its literary form the book has been classed as simple religious history, a myth, a prophetic parable, an allegory, and a Midrash. [^4] Since the writer has discussed most of these elsewhere, [^5] we shall not do so again. Because of the problems that arise concerning the book, such as the date and the miraculous element, few people seem to be able to agree on its literary type. But whatever the type, the significance of its teaching can in no wise be affected by the diversity of opinion. We can agree, however, that most of the little book is prose, remarkable for its simplicity of style. The only poetry is found in the prayer contained in Chapter 2:3-9, which possesses considerable spirit and force. The text of the book has been preserved in very good order.

Jonah Refuses God's Call to a Mission.—;A call on a mission— direct from the Lord! But it was no surprise to the prophet to be called, for he had probably carried out many missions for the Lord in Israel before. His surprise lay not in the fact of the call but in the kind of call, and rebellion arose in his heart. It was a call to go to Nineveh, "the great city" of Assyria, and preach to its heathen inhabitants, for their wickedness had come up before the Lord.

Jonah had bitter recollections of Assyria—t that she, indeed, had been a serious menace to Israel in his lifetime, but because her cruelties were proverbial and her inhabitants given to idolatry and all manner of wickedness. A generation or so before his time, Assyria had defeated a coalition of kings including Ahab, king of Israel, at the battle of Karkar (853 B. C.). Some years later, 841 B. C., Shalmaneser III, king of Assyria, forced Jehu, king of Israel, to humbly pay tribute to him. These defeats of Israel did not help Jonah's temper any, for even prophets are human and subject at times to recriminations. Then the prophet's mind reverted back to Abraham's day, and he recalled that God had sent the Father of the Faithful out of the general region where the hated Assyrians lived. The emotions that arose in his heart were hot and defiant. Why should the Lord select him, of all men, to go to preach to these idolatrous and corrupt heathens who were not worth saving? There were plenty of backsliders in Israel who needed preaching to without his going to Nineveh. But Jonah had a feeling that if he did go to Nineveh, God would do something to save her inhabitants. Past experience had taught the prophet something of the Lord's patience and tender mercies toward all men.

I knew that Thou art a gracious God, and compassionate, long suffering, and abundant in mercy, and repentest Thee of the evil. (4:2.)

Such was the prophet's statement at a later time.

Jonah was torn between his loyalty to God and the whip of his emotions. The latter were at a fever pitch and in the end determined his actions. Because he couldn't face the mission call, he determined to flee the country and get away from the unpleasant responsibility. He did not intend to lay down his prophetic office; he merely wanted to absent himself without leave for a time until an unpleasant situation adjusted itself.

Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord; and he went down to Joppa, and found a ship going to Tarshish; so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it to go with them unto Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord. [^6]

Herein Jonah displayed his human weaknesses. But let us not judge him too harshly. Remember how many folk at this critical period in our own history are ready to let their emotions rise to the exploding point when the Russians are mentioned. Let the Assyrians be substituted for these peoples and we have a situation closely analogous to the one in which Jonah found himself. Modern Christians can hate as fiercely as the Hebrew prophet in his worst moments. Men often become irrational and devoid of brotherly feeling in times of stress. All the more reason, therefore, why the Book of Jonah should be carefully evaluated and reconsidered by the world of today.

Some scholars believe that Jonah attempted to flee from Jehovah's jurisdiction—at is, Jehovah was the national God of Palestine, and all one had to do to get away from Him was to get out of His territory. The author feels this is quite unlikely in view of the prophet's statement on the boat to the effect that "I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, who hath made the sea and the dry land." (1:9) In any event, Jonah learned what so many of us learn sooner or later—;God is not mocked, neither can we get away from His power and influence. God "hurled" a great wind into the sea, and soon both ship and passengers were in trouble. Observe that the mariners, despised heathens also, did something about it. First they prayed to their gods, and then they set about throwing the ship's tackling into the sea to lighten her. But Jonah slept through it all. The ship's master called upon him to wake up and pray:

What meanest thou that thou sleepest? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not. (1:6)

In this and succeeding passages there is most delicious irony. Instead of Jonah preaching to the heathen, God is preaching to Jonah by means of a heathen. Imagine one of these despised people calling upon a Hebrew prophet to pray! The watchman on the tower of Zion had fallen asleep at his post. Lots were cast, and it was determined that Jonah was the cause of the trouble to the ship. Jonah's conscience smote him, and he asked to be thrown into the sea; all would be quiet then. Like the Prodigal Son he "came to himself" at last— least in part. What a fine thing it is when men find their better selves. "The awakening of the conscience," says Victor Hugo, "is the grandeur of the soul." But the seamen, out of fear, reverence, pity, and respect, refused to sacrifice one of their fellow men. They rowed [^7] hard to bring the ship to land, but to no avail.

Only when all measures to save Jonah and the ship had failed did they finally consent to throw the Hebrew prophet overboard. (1:14, 15) The miraculous cessation of the storm seems to have further convinced the sailors that Jonah's God was the true "God who hath made the sea and the dry land." They were ostensibly converted to Him, for the record says:

Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly; and they offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows. (1:16)

Jonah Turns to God.—;Jonah had to be saved physically and receive a spiritual resuscitation; otherwise we should not have had the great message of the Book of Jonah. So the Lord directed a large fish to engulf him three days and nights. From the bowels of the fish Jonah cried mightily to God. [^8] Most men in their desperate need pray to God, when in less trying circumstances they completely forget Him. The prophet was humbled and changed within. The book ironically points out that God hearkened to Jonah's prayer and had the fish "vomit" Jonah upon the dry land. (2:10)

Jonah Accepts God's Second Call to a Mission.—;Through bitter experience Jonah learned that life is much sweeter and better as one runs with God rather than from Him. God repeated the call to Jonah, and this time he accepted by going to Nineveh.

Opposite Mosul, the well-known emporium of trade on the right of the Upper Tigris, two artificial mounds lift themselves from the otherwise level plain. The more northerly takes the name of Kujundschik, or 'little lamb,' after the Turkish village which couches pleasantly on its north-eastern slope. The other is called in the popular dialect Nebi Yunus, 'Prophet Jonah,' after a mosque dedicated to him, which was once a Christian church; but the official name is Nineveh. These mounds are bound to each other on the west by a broad brick wall, which extends beyond both, and is connected north and south by other walls, with a circumference in all of about nine English miles. The interval, including the mounds, was covered with buildings, whose ruins enable us to form some idea of what was for centuries the wonder of the world. Upon terraces and substructions of enormous breadth rose storied palaces, arsenals, barracks, libraries and temples. A lavish water system spread in all directions from canals with embankments and sluices. Gardens were lifted into mid-air, filled with rich plants and rare and beautiful animals. Alabaster, silver, gold and precious stones relieved the masses of brick and flashed sunlight from every frieze and battlement. The surrounding walls were so broad that chariots could roll abreast on them. The gates, especially the river gates, were massive.

All this was Nineveh proper, whose glory the Hebrews envied and over whose fall more than one of their prophets exult . . . Beyond the walls were great suburbs, and beyond the suburbs other towns, league upon league of dwellings, so set on the plain as to form one vast complex of population, known to Scripture as The Great City. To judge from the ruins which cover the ground, the circumference must have been about sixty miles, or three days' journey. [^9] It is these leagues of common dwellings which roll before us in the story. None of those glories are mentioned, of which other prophets speak, but the only proofs offered of the city's greatness are its extent and its population. . . . [^10]

In this great district Jonah began to preach, and he apparently relished the message he delivered:

Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. (3:4)

Presumably, the prophet had learned the letter of the lesson recently taught him but had not imbibed its spirit, for when the king and the people of Nineveh received the prophet's message—;greatest miracle of all— repented of their evil deeds with God's blessing and approbation,

It displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was angry. [^11]

Therefore the Lord had to teach His representative another lesson.

God Teaches Jonah a Profound Lesson.—;Jonah went out of Nineveh and sat in a safe place on the east side of the city, sulking and still hoping that God's judgments would descend upon the repentant heathen. So God appointed a gourd to shade Jonah from the sun. Soon, however, a worm cut down the plant, and Jonah fainted by reason of both a hot east wind and the sun. He requested that he might die.

And God said to Jonah: 'Art thou greatly angry for the gourd?' And he said: 'I am greatly angry, even unto death.' And the Lord said: 'Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for which thou hast not labored, neither madest it grow, which came up in a night, and perished in a night; and should not I have pity on Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand, and also much cattle?' (4:9-11)

It is apparent throughout the story that Jonah could not stand to see God's love, so much promised to Israel, and cherished by her, bestowed on others, particularly, her heathen oppressors.

God has vindicated His love to the jealousy of those who thought it was theirs alone. And we are left with this vague vision of the immeasurable city, with its multitude of innocent children and cattle, and God's compassion brooding over all. [^12]

The Abiding Lessons of Jonah.—;Many competent critics think that Jonah "stands preeminent as the noblest, broadest, and most Christian of all Old Testament literature."

The greatest lesson of the book is that God's divine grace is universal. [^13] In it is conveyed the lesson that all men are precious in God's eyes and acceptable to Him if only their hearts turn toward Him. Jonah as the representative of the Chosen people had the responsibility of being the bearer of salvation to all men, but by reason of his unrighteous antipathies and irrational lack of love, he was put to shame by the Lord. The loving providence and heartfelt sympathy of God are shown to embrace even the countless heathen, "so that for the sake of their many children, who have done no wrong, and their cattle, which are irresponsible, He does not desire their death, but that they may turn and live." This is the type of teaching so frequently driven home by the New Testament. Another and obvious lesson of the book is that of obedience. [^14] To this may be added the lesson that prophecy is conditional. "Judgment, indeed, through repentance may be exchanged for salvation." Finally, another lesson lies in the spirit of higher patriotism which pervades the book. We can agree with Professor Robinson that:

Over against the narrow patriotism of the mean and contemptible little spirit of Jonah, who was a mirror for the nation, the author gives us, as we have already seen, a picture of the loving, fatherly, catholic God. The comparison was meant to sting Israel to the quick for their bigotry and hardness of heart. [^15]

In our day, when the clash of arms and the engines of war have often been heard in the nations, in an hour when narrow loyalties and hatred are rampant in the world, the Book of Jonah stands like a beacon in the darkness showing that God is loving and merciful and that all men are brothers.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] An apostrophe of judgment to the nations of the earth (1:2-4). Condemnation of Israel's civil rulers (3:1-4). The Lord's case against Israel (6:1-5) "Social wrongs are felt more acutely, not in the town, but in the country. So in the days of Rome, whose earliest social revolts were agrarian. So in the Middle Ages . . ." G. A. Smith, The Book of the Prophets (New and Rev. Ed.), I, 413 f.
[^2] The announcement of judgment upon Israel and Judah (1:5-7). Denunciation of hireling prophets (3:5-8). The answer of the people, betraying their lack of comprehension of the inner demands of true religion (6:6, 7). Micah 2:1-5. Verse 5 probably means that the ungodly will receive no further part in the inheritance of the Lord; they are to be separated from the congregation of the Lord.
[^3] A lament over the coming devastation of Judah (1:8-16). Renewed condemnation of Israel's civil and religious leaders (3:9-12). Counter of Micah with the demands of true religion (6:8). Smith, op. cit., p. 416.
[^4] Woe upon the haughty nobles who oppress the people (2:1-5). The glorification and blessing of Zion and Jerusalem, the Lord's capitals, in the latter days (4:1-5). A denunciation of Israel's present wickedness (6:9-16). See Abr. 2:8-11.
[^5] The prophet's censure of those who cannot endure the truth, but wish predictions of good (2:6-11). Restoration of Israel to her former dominion (4:6-8). Israel's confession of her terrible state (7:1-6). The term "breaker" has been interpreted as a great future leader corresponding to a Moses, but may with greater probability refer to the Lord, "their King," who prepares the way before them.
[^6] Promise of eventual restoration of the remnant of Israel (2:12, 13). The invasion of Judea, the Babylonian captivity, and the liberation of the Jews (4:9, 10). A confession of faith on the part of Israel (7:7-10). Smith, op. cit., p. 422 f.
[^7] Israel to be gathered in the latter days and to bring retribution upon their enemies, whose wealth shall be consecrated to the Lord (4:11-13; cf. 3 Nephi 20:17-21). A glorious promise of Israel's future restoration (7:11-13). That is, they preach peace if they receive something to bite (eat).
[^8] The birth of the Savior in Bethlehem and His greatness (5:1-4). The prophet's prayer for the Lord's fulfillment of this promise (7:14-17). See, e.g., Jer. 51:33.
[^9] The Savior to be Judah's reliance when Assyria invades (5:5, 6). A doxology or ascription of praise to God (7:18-20). This verse (3) has occasioned much discussion relative to its meaning. I am inclined to believe that "she who travaileth" has reference, not to the personal mother of the Messiah, but to the "daughter of troops" mentioned in 5:1, who is equivalent to the "daughter of Zion" lying in travail of 4:9, 10. The verse as a whole would seem to imply that the Lord will allow the Jews to be smitten and afflicted until Zion has been established in the latter days, i.e., "hath brought forth." See Isa. 66:7-10. Then the scattered remnants of God's people shall be brought together.
[^10] The retributive power of the remnant of Jacob among the Gentiles in the latter days (5:7-15; cf. 3 Nephi 21:12-21) 3 Nephi 21:12-21. The rest of the chapter will be found interesting and instructive. See also 3 Nephi 20:15, 16.
[^11] Jonah 4:1. The racy modern expression "it burned him up" very closely approximates the meaning of the original Hebrew.
[^12] Smith, op. cit., II, 528
[^13] Cf. John 3:16.
[^14] Cf. I Sam. 15:22; Acts 5:29.
[^15] Robinson, op. cit., pp. 90 f.
