Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty Five

MICAH, PROPHET OF JUDGMENT, COMFORT, AND SALVATION

Some Facts About Micah.—;From the superscription of the Book of Micah it is apparent that the prophet's ministry was during the reigns of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. His preaching, therefore, took place during the years from approximately 740 B. C. to 697 B. C. We may assign to him an approximate date of 725 B. C. This date reveals Micah as a contemporary of the great Isaiah and possibly also of Hosea and Amos.

The name Micah is an abbreviation of Micaiah, as the prophet is called in Jer. 26:18, which in turn is probably a contraction of Mikayahu, "who is like unto Jehovah?" The prophet is to be distinguished from the elder prophet Micah, the son of Imlah (I Kgs. 22:8 ff.), as well as from ten other persons of the same name in the Old Testament. The fact that Micah is called the Morashtite would point strongly to his being a native of Moresheth-Gath, which is mentioned in the text. (1:14) The name of the town means Territory or Property of Gath and seems to have been located in the Shephelah or low hill region of Judea some twenty miles southwest of Jerusalem. If our location of Moresheth is correct, the writer is happy to have had the privilege of walking all over the place, which is located upon a relatively high (1000 feet) terrace. It commands a marvelous view of the surrounding country and anciently must have been of considerable importance. Micah was, therefore, a product of the open hills and valleys and seems to have had no special love for the cities. (1:5; 5:11; 6:9)

Since Micah was a contemporary of Isaiah, Hosea, and Amos, the problems he faced were much the same as theirs. The reader is referred especially to the chapter on Hosea for a more extended description of them than we shall give here. Micah was not a statesman like Isaiah; consequently,

he was not so much concerned about his nation's political sins. The prophet was more like Amos in that his grievances were social in character. He was especially concerned with the attempts of the nobles to build up large estates by ejecting small property owners. Corrupt judges assisted their greedy friends in robbing the weak; widows and orphans without means of defense were deprived of their goods by force and oftentimes sold into slavery. The common people were kept in bondage through high taxation, and creditors were unmerciful on their victims. Micah held the nobility to be responsible for the terrible moral and social corruption among his people. He likened the nobles to cannibals, who eat the flesh of the people and chop their bones in pieces for the pot. There was no end to their greed and rapacity, and decisions were given to those who paid the largest bribes.

The Content and Literary Style of Micah.—;The Book of Micah divides quite naturally into three sections. 1. Chapters 1:2 to 2:13 deal with coming judgments upon Israel and Judah—;whose capitals were Samaria and Jerusalem respectively—;, their sins and punishment, and a brief promise of eventual restoration of the remnant of Israel. 2. Chapters 3 to 5 have to do with the sins of the two nations' leaders, the destruction of Jerusalem, the glorification and blessing of Zion and Jerusalem in the latter days, the restoration of Israel to her former dominion, the Babylonian captivity and subsequent rescue, the birth of the Savior in Bethlehem and, finally, the beneficent and terrible power of the remnant of Jacob among the nations in the latter days. 3. In chapters 6 to 7 the Lord shows Israel the way to salvation by the expedient of a very dramatic controversy or law-suit. She has repaid His loving care and benefits with ingratitude, her worship is mistaken if not insincere, and her social sins point to her doom. The Lord will again have compassion on His people and show forth His marvelous works to the nations if Israel will but confess her sins and turn to Him.

Each of these sections begins with the words "Hear ye." A beautiful prayer and doxology conclude the book.

Since Micah has in it so many things of interest to Latter-day Saints, a somewhat detailed outline of the book is given herewith:

The superscription (1:1).

I. Coming judgments upon Israel and Judah; the eventual restoration of the remnant of Israel (1:2-2:13).

II. A contrast between Israel's present state and her future exaltation (3:1-5:15).

III. The Lord's controversy with Israel; the final settlement (6:1-7:20)

At the present time most commentators deny to Micah extensive portions of the prophecy, more especially in chapters four to seven. However, there are good scholars, even now, who defend the authorship of the book, with the possible exception of a few minor parts that are supposed to be additions. The writer sees little reason to deny the book as a whole to Micah. To be sure, the Hebrew text is often corrupt, and there are numerous difficulties that arise in interpretation, but there is no positive proof that Micah did not write most of what has been transmitted to us.

With the exception of the superscription (1:1), all of the Book of Micah is in poetic form. The prophet had the ability to write excellent Hebrew, and his thoughts and language amply justify his statement that he was full of power by the spirit of the Lord (3:8). His style very often equals that of Isaiah in boldness and sublimity; it is concise and yet perspicuous, nervous, vehement, and forceful. Rapidity of movement, vivid description, picturesque phraseology, and directness are characteristic of the prophecy. Micah is rich and beautiful in the varied use of figurative language, indulges in word plays, is regular in the formation of his parallelisms, and exhibits great emotion and tenderness when administering threats and conveying promises. He has keen insight, clearness of vision, and ability to give logical development to his discourses. The later chapters in Micah, especially four to six, possess a greater variety and unevenness of style than do chapters one to three. The prophet's description of the gracious character of the Lord (7:18-20) is unrivalled by any other contained in the scriptures.

An Apostrophe of Judgment to the Nations of the Earth.—;In vivid language reminiscent of the opening lines of Isaiah, Micah commences with a sublime apostrophe of judgment to the nations of the earth:

Hear, ye peoples, all of you;

Hearken, O earth, and all that therein is;

And let the Lord God be witness against you,

The Lord from His holy temple.

For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of His place,

And will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.

And the mountains shall be molten under Him,

And the valleys shall be cleft,

As wax before the fire,

As waters that are poured down a steep place. (1:2-4)

These lines are preliminary to a more specific announcement of the Lord's coming judgments.

The Announcement of Judgment Upon Israel and Judah.—;Micah proceeds to disclose the reasons for the Lord's anger:

For the transgression of Jacob is all this,

And for the sins of the house of Israel.

What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria?

And what are the high places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem? (1:5)

The prophet identifies the sources of apostasy or transgression of Israel as the capital cities of the Northern and Southern kingdoms respectively. The reference to the "high places" is an allusion to the sinister and immoral Canaanite religious practices adopted by Israel and put into operation upon high or elevated spots on mountains and hills. The prophets constantly attacked these foreign elements in Israel's religion. And what will be God's judgment upon Samaria? The answer comes forcefully and without equivocation:

Therefore I will make Samaria a heap in the field,

A place for the planting of vineyards;

And I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley,

And I will uncover the foundations thereof. (1:6)

In the process of Samaria's destruction the prophet is very careful to emphasize the end of certain religious equipment and practices taken over from the Canaanites:

And all her graven images shall be beaten to pieces,

And all her hires shall be burned with fire,

And all her idols will I lay desolate;

For of the hire of a harlot hath she gathered them,

And unto the hire of a harlot shall they return. (1:7)

How far Canaanite religion had penetrated Israel the reader may judge for himself. The lesson to modern Israel is obvious.

A Lament Over the Coming Devastation of Judah.—;Nor does Micah spare Judah and Jerusalem. In a lament the prophet wails over the coming devastation of Judah that shall reach the gates of Jerusalem itself:

For this will I wail and howl

I will go stripped and naked;

I will make a wailing like the jackals,

And a mourning like the ostriches.

For her wound is incurable;

For it is come even unto Judah;

It reacheth unto the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem. (1:8, 9)

From this point Micah continues with a dirge containing an ominous series of puns or word plays on Judean towns difficult to imitate in English. Here it is:

Tell it not in Gath,

Weep not at all;

At Beth-le-aphrah roll thyself in the dust.

Pass ye away, O inhabitant of Shaphir, in nakedness and shame;

The inhabitant of Zaanan is not come forth;

The wailing of Beth-ezel shall take from you the standing-place thereof.

for the inhabitant of Maroth waiteth anxiously for good;

Because evil is come down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.

Bind the chariots to the swift steeds, O inhabitant of Lachish;

She was the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion;

For the transgressions of Israel are found in thee.

Therefore shalt thou give a parting gift to Moreshethgath;

The houses of Achzib shall be a deceitful thing unto the kings of Israel.

I will yet bring unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah, him that shall possess thee;

The glory of Israel shall come even unto Adullam.

Make thee bald, and poll thee for the children of thy delight;

Enlarge thy baldness as the vulture;

For they are gone into captivity from thee. (1:10-16)

Woe Upon the Haughty Nobles Who Oppress the People.—;We are today still feeling the effects of a world revolution which has been due in part to social wrongs that have constantly beset the poor and innocent in every country. Micah felt keenly the social injustices that plagued Israel in his own day. Coming, as he did, from the country, he no doubt felt these wrongs more acutely than he would had he come from the city. [^1] He could not help but cast his invective at the wealthy, greedy land grabbers, who descended upon the rural districts and made the poor their debtors. Even today, the agricultural communities in our own nation could well take a leaf from Micah's note book and beware letting their properties go into the hands of money lenders.

Woe to them that devise iniquity

And work evil upon their beds!

When the morning is light, they execute it,

Because it is in the power of their hand.

And they covet fields, and seize them;

And houses, and take them away;

Thus they oppress a man and his house,

Even a man and his heritage.

Therefore thus saith the Lord:

Behold, against this family do I devise an evil,

From which ye shall not remove your necks,

Neither shall ye walk upright; for it shall be an evil time.

In that day shall they take up a parable against you,

And lament with a doleful lamentation, and say:

'We are utterly ruined;

He changeth the portion of my people;

How doth he remove it from me!

Instead of restoring our fields, he divideth them.'

Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast the line by lot

In the congregation of the Lord [^2]

Micah was not so much concerned about the taking of mere chattels. What ground his soul and made him righteously indignant was that unscrupulous men were allowed to commit wrongs so easily and put human beings in their power. Personal independence was lost, and the security of home and family was put in the hands of a few capricious men.

Micah feels that by themselves the economic wrongs explain and justify the doom impending on the nation. When this doom falls, by the Divine irony of God it shall take the form of a conquest of the land by the heathen, and the disposal of those great estates to the foreigner. [^3]

The Prophet's Censure of Those Who Cannot Endure the Truth.—;The Prophet's words meet with violent opposition on the part of corrupt men in high places as well as from false prophets. Micah replies (2:6-11) by showing that these men abuse the patience and mercy of the Lord; that by defrauding or robbing the poor, the widows (women of My people), and the orphans, they are bringing about the inevitable captivity of the land. Such preaching on the part of Micah does not please the corrupt great men, for they imagine that his threats are irreconcilable with the goodness of the Lord. Micah interposes (verse 7) by pointing out that God is not wrathful and has no love for chastening, but that He is stirred up to anger by the nation's sins and is obliged to punish. When the prophet has overthrown (verses 7-9) the objections to his prophecies by pointing out the transgressions of the people, he repeats the prediction of punishment in the form of a summons to Israel (verse 10) to depart out of the land because it cannot bear uncleanness and abominations. To this Micah adds the point that the people only want to hear predictions of good, that they would rather hear the lies of false prophets who pursue the wind (i.e., emptiness and nothingness) than to be impelled by the Spirit of the Lord.

If a man walking in wind and falsehood do lie:

'I will preach unto thee of wine and of strong drink';

He shall even be the preacher of this people. (2:11)

Promise of Eventual Restoration of the Remnant of Israel.—;The thought of the prophet suddenly shifts from his own wicked generation to the distant future. He still has in mind his own people, but his eye is especially upon the righteous remnants of their descendants in the latter days—e dispensation of the fullness of times—;when the Gospel of Jesus Christ is to be restored to the earth for the last time. He comforts the righteous people of his own time by showing them that although God shall bring dire punishment upon both Israel and Judah for their sins, still, at that great future time, their descendants shall be gathered and blessed in order that God's promises to Abraham may be fulfilled. The Lord had long ago decreed that through Abraham's descendants should all nations be blessed with the Gospel. [^4] Micah knows that all of Israel shall not be destroyed in the coming punishments; otherwise the Lord's predictions to the Father of the Faithful could not be fulfilled. The predictions of Micah regarding the remnant of Israel are of special interest to all Latter-day Saints, since many of us are descendants of men and women who were gathered out of the nations for the Gospel's sake.

I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee;

I will surely gather the remnant of Israel;

I will render them all as sheep in the fold;

As a flock in the midst of their pasture,

They shall make great noise by reason of the multitude of men.

The breaker is gone up before them; [^5]

They have broken forth and passed on,

By the gate, and are gone out thereat;

And their king is passed on before them,

And the Lord at the head of them. (2:12, 13)

This scripture is regarded by many modern commentators as a reference to the return of Israel from the Babylonian Exile. With this opinion we cannot agree.

Condemnation of Israel's Civil Rulers.—;At the beginning of the next section of his discourse Micah turns back to the immediate situation confronting him and threshes Israel's civil rulers with one of the most bitter denunciations to be found in all prophecy. They do not know justice. They hate good, love evil, and in their administrative capacities are like so many cannibals eating up the people instead of acting as their servants.

And I said:

Here, I pray you, ye heads of Jacob,

And rulers of the house of Israel:

Is it not for you to know justice?

Who hate the good, and love the evil;

Who rob their skin from off them,

And their flesh from off their bones;

Who also eat the flesh of my people,

And flay their skin from off them,

And break their bones;

Yea, they chop them in pieces, as that which is in the pot,

And as flesh within the caldron.

Then shall they cry unto the Lord,

But He will not answer them;

Yea, He will hide His face from them at that time,

According as they have wrought evil in their doings. (3:1-4)

What Micah said in his day very often applies with equal force today. As Professor George Adam Smith writes:

Is there nothing of the same with ourselves? While Micah spoke he had wasted lives and bent backs before him. Pinched peasant-faces peer between his words and fill the ellipses. Among the poor today are there not starved and bitten faces—dies with the blood sucked from them, with the Divine image crushed out? We cannot explain all of these by vice. Drunkenness and unthrift account for much; but how much more only the following facts! Men among us live in fashionable streets and keep their families comfortable by paying their employees a wage on which it is impossible for men to be strong or women to be virtuous. Are those not using these as their food? They say that if they gave higher wages they must close their business, and cease paying wages at all; and they are right if they continue to live on the scale they do. As long as any families are maintained in comfort by the profits of businesses in which some or all of the employees work for less than they can nourish their bodies upon, the fact is that the one set are feeding upon the other. [^6]

Micah Denounces the Hireling Prophets.—;We have already seen in the reading of the Book of Amos that the prophet of Tekoa protested he was no "prophet nor a son of a prophet." (Amos 7:14) That is, he was not a professional or hireling prophet. Micah also makes reference to the hireling prophets. It seems that in the generation of Amos and Micah the leaders of Israel—rants would be a better name —;used professional prophets and seers to cloak their misdeeds. Religion, unfortunately, lends itself, or rather its cloak, very easily to the uses of the hypocrite. So the rich and unscrupulous leaders of Israel found it easy—r a price— hire professional religionists to cover their actions by flattery and falsehood. The hireling prophet depended upon his rich clients for a living. He could not, therefore, be independent in his thinking and in his judgment. He was highpressured into siding with the rich, and consequently shut his eyes to the real conditions among the people. Naturally he could not attack the sins of the day that made it possible for his clients to exploit Israel's common people. Micah exposed the pseudo-prophets as follows:

Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people to err;

That cry: 'Peace,' when their teeth have any thing to bite; [^7]

And whoso putteth not into their mouths,

They even prepare war against him:

Therefore it shall be night unto you, that ye shall have no vision;

And it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine;

And the sun shall go down upon the prophets,

And the day shall be black over them,

And the seers shall be put to shame, and the diviners confounded;

Yea, they shall all cover their upper lips;

For there shall be no answer of God. (3:5-7)

On the other hand, Micah shows that he as a true prophet has the spirit of the Lord with the accompanying insight, vision, and courage to tell the people of their sins:

But I truly am full of power by the spirit of the Lord,

And of justice, and of might,

To declare unto Jacob his transgression,

And to Israel his sin. (3:8)

Renewed Condemnation of Israel's Civil and Religious Leaders.—;Micah renews his bitter condemnation of Israel's civil and religious leaders with words that need no commentary:

Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob,

And rulers of the house of Israel,

That abhor justice, and pervert all equity;

That build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity

The heads thereof judge for reward,

And the priests thereof teach for hire,

And the prophets thereof divine for money;

Yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say:

'Is not the Lord in the midst of us?

No evil shall come upon us'?

Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field.

And Jerusalem shall become heaps,

And the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest. (3:9-12)

The Glory of Zion and Jerusalem in the Latter Days.—;After denouncing Israel's leaders, Micah makes another sudden transition in his thought and looks once more to the glory of his people in the latter days. Many nations at that time are to come up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, to be taught divine law. Micah has practically the same views in this respect as are to be found in Isaiah 2:2-4. As a result of divine judgments, nations shall not learn war any more, and every man shall sit in security under his own vine and under his own fig-tree with none to make afraid. Latter-day Saints believe that this glorious prediction of Micah is now in the process of fulfillment. Eventually the law and word of the Lord shall go forth to the earth from two capitals, Zion (the New Jerusalem) in the United States and Jerusalem in Palestine.

But in the latter days it shall come to pass,

That the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the tops of the mountains,

And it shall be exalted above the hills;

And peoples shall flow unto it.

And many nations shall go and say:

'Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,

And to the house of the God of Jacob;

And He will teach us of His ways,

And we will walk in His paths';

For out of Zion shall go forth the law,

And the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And He shall judge between many peoples,

And shall decide concerning mighty nations afar off;

And they shall beat their swords into plowshares,

And their spears into pruning-hooks;

Nation shall not lift up sword against nation,

Neither shall they learn war any more.

But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig-tree;

And none shall make them afraid;

For the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken.

For let all the peoples walk each one in the name of its god,

But we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. (4:1-5)

The Mormon people think that they have assisted the Lord greatly in the work which was foreseen by Micah and that in the future they shall take an ever-increasing part in bringing to pass peace and righteousness in the world.

Micah also sees the Lord reigning over His people and the restoration of Israel to her former dominion:

In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth,

And I will gather her that is driven away,

And her that I have afflicted;

And I will make her that halted a remnant,

And her that was cast far off a mighty nation;

And the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from thenceforth even for ever.

And thou, Migdal-eder, the hill of the daughter of Zion,

Unto thee shall it come;

Yea, the former dominion shall come,

The kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem. (4:6-8)

The Power of Gathered Israel in the Latter Days.—;After foretelling the invasion of Judea, the Babylonian captivity, and the subsequent liberation of the Jews (4:9, 10), Micah points out that the nations who are enemies of Zion shall be threshed as sheaves on the threshing floor by Israel, the daughter of Zion.

The metaphor of threshing is often used by the prophets to denote the complete destruction of a people. [^8] The time when this shall take place is in the latter days when Israel is to have power over her enemies. The prophet continues the metaphor by indicating that Zion's horns are to be of iron and her hoofs to be of brass. The allusion is to animals used in beating out grain on the threshing floor. The horn was a symbol of power exercised in subduing and punishing enemies.

And now many nations are assembled against thee,

That say: 'Let her be defiled, and let our eye gaze upon Zion.'

But they know not the thoughts of the Lord,

Neither understand they His counsel;

For He hath gathered them as the sheaves to the threshing-floor.

Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion;

For I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass;

And thou shalt beat in pieces many peoples;

And thou shalt devote their gain unto the Lord,

And their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. (4:11-13)

That the interpretation given above to this passage is correct is attested to in the Book of Mormon, and by no less a personage than the risen Savior Himself. After explaining the gathering of Israel in our dispensation, He goes on to point out to the Nephites that, if the Gentiles do not repent, the remnant of Israel shall have power over them. The Savior even quotes portions of the passage from Micah under consideration:

Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off. And I will gather my people together as a man gathereth his sheaves into the floor. For I will make My people with whom the Father hath covenanted, yea, I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass. And thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. And behold, I am he who doeth it. And it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that the sword of my justice shall hang over them at that day; and except they repent it shall fall upon them, saith the Father, yea, even upon all the nations of the Gentiles. And it shall come to pass that I will establish my people, O house of Israel. (3 Nephi 20:17-21)

This statement of the Savior is for all practical purposes a perfect commentary on a part of Micah often misunderstood.

The Prediction of the Coming of the Messiah.—;Micah now turns for a moment from his predictions concerning Israel in the latter days and turns back in time to the little village of Bethlehem. Out of this village, one of Judah's smallest, he sees coming one who is to be ruler over all Israel. This is to be the Messiah, or Savior of His people. His works, Micah sees, reach back into eternity. He shall stand and feed or shepherd His flock. Moreover, His power and influence shall be great to the ends of the earth:

But thou, Beth-lehem Ephrathah,

Which art little to be among the thousands of Judah,

Out of thee shall one come forth unto Me that is to be ruler in Israel;

Whose goings forth are from of old, from the days of eternity.

Therefore will He give them up,

Until the time that she who travaileth hath brought forth;

Then the residue of his brethren shall return with the children of Israel. [^9]

And he shall stand, and shall feed his flock in the strength of the Lord,

In the majesty of the name of the Lord his God;

And they shall abide, for then shall he be great unto the ends of the earth. (5:2-4)

The Power of the Remnant of Jacob Among the Gentiles in the Latter Days.—;After making a brief allusion to the Savior as the one who would eventually deliver his people from the power of Assyria (5:5, 6), Micah turns once more to proclaim the power that the gathered remnant of Jacob shall have against its enemies in the dispensation of the fullness of times. It is to be as a dew from the Lord, as a lion that teareth among the flocks, as a power able to cut off all enemies. The Gentiles at that day, unless they repent, are to have their power of resistance shattered, their false and idolatrous worship abolished—;in short, God will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the nations. It so happens that this passage (5:7-15) was also quoted and commented upon by the Savior while explaining the great events of the latter days to the Nephites. The reader is urged to study the statements of Micah and compare them with the Savior's comments, which we quote herewith:

And my people who are a remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he go through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. Their hand shall be lifted up upon their adversaries, and all their enemies shall be cut off. Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off they horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots; and I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strongholds; and I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy land, and thou shalt have no more soothsayers; thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thy hands; and I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee; so will I destroy thy cities. And it shall come to pass that all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, shall be done away. For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from among my people, O house of Israel;

and I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard. [^10]

The attention paid by the Savior to Micah's prophecies is remarkable, and its importance to this generation is— should be—[vious to every Latter-day Saint.

The Lord's Case Against Israel.—;We come now to the third and concluding division of the Book of Micah. It is like entering calmer waters after a heavy storm. The prophet is not so bitter in his invective, and the tone of this division is much more peaceful than that of the preceding ones. The Lord pleads His case with Israel in a mood reminiscent of court procedure. The mountains are summoned to be present; the Lord presents his complaint and appeals to His past mercies:

Hear ye now what the Lord saith:

Arise, content thou before the mountains,

And let the hills hear thy voice.

Hear, O ye mountains, the Lord's controversy,

And ye enduring rocks, the foundations of the earth;

For the Lord hath a controversy with His people,

And He will plead with Israel.

O My people, what have I done unto thee?

And wherein have I wearied thee?

Testify against Me.

For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt,

And redeemed thee out of the house of bondage,

And I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

O My people, remember now what Balak king of Moab devised,

And what Balaam the son of Beor answered him;

From Shittim unto Gilgal,

That ye may know the righteous acts of the Lord. (6:1-5)

The Answer of the People.—;Because of these loving acts of God, which cannot be questioned, the audience is made to reply (in the first person singular) in its sincere but mistaken way:

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord,

And bow myself before God on high?

Shall I come before Him with burnt-offerings,

With calves of a year old?

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams,

With ten thousands of rivers of oil?

Shall I give my first-born for my transgression,

The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? (6:6, 7)

This answer, of course, betrays the lack of comprehension on the part of the people of what constitutes the inner demands of true religion. It is true that under the Law of Moses the Lord required sacrifice and other ritualistic practices, but they were all symbolic of principles that were to lead His people to higher and better things. But Israel' worship had become formalized, and the wickedness of the people had rendered their ritual unacceptable to God.

Micah conveyed to the people the fundamental requirements of true religion in an answer that is one of the noblest of all time:

It hath been told thee, O man, what is good,

And what the Lord doth require of thee:

Only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. (6:8)

In these few lines Micah has summed up the essence of the teachings of the prophets. They were coined in the same spirit as the lines of the Christ when He said:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the great and first commandment. And the second is like unto it. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. (Matt. 22:37-39)

A Glorious Promise of Israel's Future Restoration.—;After once more denouncing Israel's present wickedness (6:9-16), Micah personifies her as giving a confession of her terrible state (7:1-6) and as confessing her faith (7:7-10). He then proceeds to give a glorious promise of her future restoration. The tremendous interest of the prophet in latter-day Israel must impress the reader with gratitude, but at the same time with a profound feeling for the importance of the subject in Old Testament studies:

'The day for building thy walls, even that day, shall be far removed.'

There shall be a day when they shall come unto thee,

From Assyria even to the cities of Egypt,

And from Egypt even to the River,

And from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.

And the land shall be desolate for them that dwell therein,

Because of the fruit of their doings. (7:11-13)

Micah Prays for the Lord's Fulfillment of His Promise.—;After promising Israel's restoration, Micah prays beautifully for its fulfillment. The prayer is distinguished for the poetical elevation of its style and the appropriateness of its petition. Like many other Old Testament prayers it is prophetic in its spirit:

Tend Thy people with Thy staff, the flock of Thy heritage,

That dwell solitarily, as a forest in the midst of the fruitful field;

Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.

'As in the days of thy coming forth out of the land of Egypt

Will I show unto him marvellous things.'

The nations shall see and be put to shame for all their might;

They shall lay their hand upon their mouth,

Their ears shall be deaf.

They shall lick the dust like a serpent;

Like crawling things of the earth they shall come trembling out of their close places;

They shall come with fear unto the Lord our God,

And shall be afraid because of Thee. (7:14-17)

A Doxology or Ascription of Praise to God.—;Micah ends with a doxology. He revels in the prospect of Israel's glorious future and breaks out into a strain of sublime praise and admiration for the divine attributes of loving-kindness, faithfulness, and compassion, to be manifested by God in her deliverance:

Who is a God like unto Thee, that pardoneth the iniquity,

And passeth by the transgression of the remnant of His heritage?

He retaineth not His anger for ever,

Because He delighteth in mercy.

He will again have compassion upon us;

He will subdue our iniquities;

And Thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.

Thou wilt show faithfulness to Jacob, mercy to Abraham,

As Thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. (7:18-20)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Lord's avenging wrath (1:2-10). The attack upon Nineveh and sack of the city (2:1-10). Retribution upon the city for outrages against other nations (3:1-7). The Greek version of the Old Testament.
[^2] Reproaches or threats against a foe (presumably Nineveh) and words of comfort and deliverance to Judah (1:11-15). Sarcastic exultation over the destruction of the city (2:11-13). Nineveh's fate to be that of No-Amon in Egypt (3:8-11). See Asher, The Itinerary of Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela, I, 110. Page 68.2 of Hebrew text.
[^3] Nineveh's inability to save herself (3:12-19). Quoted in F. C. Eiselen, The Prophetic Books of the Old Testament, II, 504.
[^4] See D. D. Luckenbill, The Annals of Sennacherib.
[^5] G. L. Robinson, The Twelve Minor Prophets, pp. 108 ff. By permission.
[^6] G. A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Rev. Ed.), II, 89 f.
[^7] The lines or stanzas of an alphabetic acrostic begin with the letters of the alphabet in regular order.
[^8] Smith, op. cit., P. 90.
[^9] Ibid., P. 77.
[^10] The great Bible translator (A. D. 400) who rendered much of the scripture into Latin.
