Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty Six

NAHUM, PROPHET OF NINEVEH'S DOOM

The Prophet's Name and Home.—;The prophet's name occurs nowhere else in the Bible except in the genealogy of Joseph, the husband of Mary the mother of Christ. (Luke 3:25) It means "Comforter" or "Consoler." The superscription of the Book of Nahum refers to the prophet as the "Elkoshite." (1:1) This latter designation probably has reference to the place of his birth, rather than to his ancestor's name. It seems to mean that Nahum came from a place called Elkosh, in the same sense that Micah the Morashtite came from Moresheth. (Micah 1:1) The Septuagint [^1] refers to the prophet as "Nahum the Elkesite." Unfortunately, we do not know the exact location of Elkosh, which is not mentioned elsewhere in the Bible. Several sites have been identified as the place: 1. The modern Al-Kush, a small town about twenty-six miles north of Nineveh. Here a small "plaster box" has been pointed out by Christians, Jews, and Mohammedans alike as Nahum's tomb. This identification has little to recommend it, and the tradition in its favor can be traced back only to the sixteenth century A. D. 2. Ain-Japhata, a town south of Babylon, where in A. D. 1165 Nahum's grave was pointed out to a Jewish traveler, Benjamin of Tudela. In his "Itinerary" the Rabbi says: "To Ain-Japhata, three parasangs; this place contains the sepulchre of the prophet Nahum who rests in peace." [^2] The site has nothing more to commend it than the statement given. 3. St. Jerome, great Bible translator (circa A. D. 400), located Elkosh in Galilee. He said:

Elkesie (or Helkesei) is still at this day a hamlet in Galilee, small indeed, and scarcely showing traces by ruins of ancient buildings, but for all that known to the Jews and pointed out to me by a guide. [^3]

Most scholars reject this identification because the prophet's book gives no sign that he had any connection with Galilee. 4. Certain scholars have identified Elkosh with Capernaum of New Testament fame. Capernaum means "village of Nahum," and it is supposed that Elkosh was changed to that name because of the prophet's fame. Aside from the name itself there is no support for this site. 5. Another tradition places Elkosh in southern Judah. A Syriac account of the prophets, falsely attributed to Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis on the Island of Cyprus during the latter part of the fourth century A. C., speaks of Nahum as "of Elkosh beyond Bet Gabre, of the tribe of Simeon." This site probably corresponds to the modern Beit Jibrin, through which the writer has traveled many times by foot or by car. Since a place in Judah seems to be more in harmony with the prophet's interest, many authorities are inclined at the present time to place Elkosh in southern Palestine.

The Date and Times of the Prophet.—;The date of Nahum's activities has to be deduced from certain statements made in the prophecy. In Chapter 3:8-10 reference is made to the destruction of the city of No-Amon, the Egyptian Thebes, as an already accomplished fact. We know Thebes was captured by Assurbanipal, the Assyrian, in 663 B. C. Therefore, Nahum's prophecy must have been written after that date. And since Nahum's prophecy deals with the coming destruction of Nineveh, we know it must have been written before 612 B. C., the date of her downfall. We may date Nahum's ministry with some degree of probability, therefore, between the years 663 B. C. and 612 B. C.

Because Nahum deals almost exclusively with Assyria's or rather Nineveh's downfall, it may be of value to review Israel's relations with this cruel colossus of the north. In the year 853 Shalmaneser III, king of Assyria, defeated (so he says) a coalition of kings including Ahab, king of Israel. This was the first occasion on which Israel came into definite contact with her northern neighbor, but it was not to be the last. In 841 B. C. Jehu, king of Israel, paid tribute to Shalmaneser III. And in 738 B. C. Menahem of Israel was forced to pay tribute to Tiglath-pileser III. Tiglath-pileser, in the year 732 B. C., replaced Pekah, the Israelite king, with Hoshea,

but northern Israel suffered through the Assyrian expedition, and a large part of the population was deported to Assyria. King Ahaz of Judah also submitted to the Assyrian yoke, and Assyrian religious customs were introduced by 723 B. C. The kingdom of Israel came to an end when the capital city of Samaria capitulated after a siege conducted by Shalmaneser V and Sargon II. Sargon also captured Ashdod in southwestern Palestine in 711 B. C. Then in 710 B. C. followed the great Assyrian expedition against Judah. The suffering caused by the cruel Assyrians was terrible. Since we have Sennacherib's "Annals," anyone may read the Assyrian king's own account. [^4] There followed the invasion of Judah by Esarhaddon about 679 B. C., if the account in II Chronicles 33:10, 11 can be trusted. Manasseh, king of Judah, was carried captive to Nineveh and was forced to pay homage to Esarhaddon. Ezra 4:2 speaks also of settlements made in Palestine by Esarhaddon, and Ezra 4:10 of immigrants introduced by Assurbanipal, mentioned before. This brings us down to approximately Nahum's own times. Dr. George L. Robinson speaks of Assurbanipal, the Assyrian king who destroyed No-Amon or Thebes, in these words:

Assurbanipal was exceptionally cruel. He even boasts of his violence and shameful atrocities: how he ruthlessly tore off the lips and limbs of kings, forced three captured rulers of Elam to drag his chariot through the streets, compelled a prince to wear round his neck the decapitated head of his king, and how he and his queen feasted in a garden with the head of a Chaldean monarch whom he had forced to commit suicide hanging from a tree above them. No other king even of Assyria ever boasts of such inhuman and atrocious barbarities. As he advanced toward Egypt on one of his expeditions, twenty-two kings are said to have paid him homage; upon his arrival both Memphis, the capital of Lower Egypt, and Thebes, the capital of Upper Egypt, were successfully wrested from Tirhakah and cruelly punished. The poor people of Judah and Jerusalem were spectators of all these horrors. Indeed they had beheld for generations an almost endless succession of Assyrian invasions of Palestine . . . and now Assurbanipal; the worst seemed yet to come. Nahum and his compatriots in Jerusalem apparently lay bound and helpless in the grasp of a cruel, tyrannical enemy. [^5]

So far as the ordinary man could see, the power of Assyria was still strong after nearly two hundred years. To be sure, there was a revolt about 650 B. C. in Assyria, but Nineveh, the capital city, was not endangered. But after 626 B. C., the year of Assurbanipal's death, Assyria showed some signs of cracking up. The Prophet Nahum seems to have foreseen the imminent fall of Nineveh, and we may date his prophecy about 620 B. C., with the possibility of an error either way of several years. If persons reading the prophecy are shocked at Nahum's predictions of terrible woe and desolation upon Nineveh, let them keep in mind the history of Assyria's cruelty. A man is no less a true prophet because he denounces and predicts the downfall of a power as cruel for its time as that led recently by Hitler and his companions in international banditry. The author believes that Sir George Adam Smith is too severe upon Nahum, of whose writings we have but forty-seven verses, when he declares:

His heart, for all its bigness, holds room only for the bitter memories, the baffled hopes, the unappeased hatreds of a hundred years . . . he represents no single movement of his people's progress, but the passion of the whole epoch drawing to a close. Nahum's book is one great At Last!

And, therefore, while Nahum is a worse prophet than Zephaniah, with less conscience and insight, he is a greater poet, . . . [^6]

We protest against such a statement because common experience in dealing with people ought to teach us that few public men can be righteously judged on the basis of a single speech even several times the length of Nahum's prophecy. If the Prophet Joseph Smith were judged only by the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, which deals with God's threatened judgments on the present generation, we might say that he was narrow and pessimistic— poor prophet. Such statements would not be at all true, because we know from the prophet's other writings and from statements of his contemporaries, that he was generous, lovable, broadminded, and tolerant to a fault. Such may have been true also of Nahum. Statements concerning the character and teachings of Old Testament prophets must be made carefully, especially when we have but few of their writings.

From what we have said of Nahum, it is apparent that he could have been a contemporary of Jeremiah and Zephaniah and possibly was acquainted with them. But of this we cannot, of course, be certain.

The Content and Style of the Book.—;The Book of Nahum in both its Hebrew and English dress consists of forty-seven verses divided into three chapters. Each of the first two chapters in the Hebrew Version contains fourteen verses, whereas the corresponding chapters in the English translation contain fifteen and fourteen verses respectively. The text of Nahum has been fairly well preserved with the possible exception of chapters 1:2-2:2, which is supposed by some scholars to have originally formed an alphabetic acrostic. [^7] I am dubious that an acrostic was ever intended, and even then the text of the passage may be considered only in fair shape. It has been supposed by certain authorities that Chapter One of Nahum is late and was added by some editor after the Exile. The question is bound up with that of the presence of an acrostic. I consider it far safer to assume that Nahum was the original author of Chapter One than to rely on mere theories, at present incapable of proof, that he was not. For our purposes, therefore, in this book we shall consider that Nahum was the author of practically all the text that goes under his name.

The prophecy of Nahum, as we have pointed out before, centers about one theme—e destruction of Nineveh. The three chapters respectively deal with the decree of Nineveh's destruction, the siege and capture of the city, her wickedness, and inevitable doom. The book may conveniently be studied according to the following outline:

The superscription (1:1)

I. Nineveh's doom decreed (1:2-15).

II. The siege and destruction of Nineveh (2:1-13).

III. Nineveh's wickedness and inevitable doom (3:1-19).

Nahum was a master of Hebrew style. The poetry of his prophecy is among the finest in the Old Testament. None of the Minor Prophets can be said to be finer in this regard, and only Isaiah among the Major Prophets possibly excels him in animation, boldness and sublimity; or, in proportion to the size of his book, in the freshness, richness, variety, elegance, and force of his imagery. "His language is strong and brilliant; his rhythm rumbles and rolls, leaps and flashes, like the horses and chariots he describes." [^8]

Nahum is especially marked for his descriptive powers. He is vivid and impetuous, fiery and vigorous, colorful and dramatic, and notable for his picturesque phraseology. Sir George Adam Smith declares the Book of Nahum is composed of three odes. The first, Chapter 1, "is general and theological, affirming God's power of vengeance and the certainty of the overthrow of His enemies. The second, Ch. 2., with the omission of ver. 2, and the third, Ch. 3, can hardly be disjoined; they both present a vivid picture of the siege, the storm and the spoiling of Nineveh." [^9]

In Chapter 2:11-13 there is a beautiful allegory, in which Nahum, with triumphant sarcasm, asks where the residence is of the once victorious and rapacious foe.

The Superscription.—;The superscription of the Book of Nahum is composed of two parts and reads as follows:

The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite. (1:1)

Nahum is the first of the prophetic books to begin with the announcement that it is a massa, or burden, as indeed it is the first and only one to state that it is a book. The Hebrew word massa is derived from a root which means to "lift up,"

"to carry," "to heave." Consequently, the noun means "a carrying," "lifting," or "burden." But such a definition thus applied to a prophecy is strange to the average reader and devoid of meaning. Nor is the meaning entirely clear even to scholars. St. Jerome, [^10] centuries ago in commenting on Habakkuk 1:1 where the same word occurs, observes that "Massa never occurs in the title, except when it is evidently grave and full of weight and labor." Many scholars have approved this statement and point out that burden is never placed before simple announcements of salvation, but only before prophecies of a threatening nature. Other scholars translate massa as utterance or oracle.

In the second part of the superscription the word vision indicates that Nahum's book is the book of seeing—at is, what the prophet saw through the spirit concerning the coming destruction of Nineveh. Nahum was, therefore, a chozeh or seer.

The Lord's Avenging Wrath.—;The prophecy opens with a sublime description of the attributes and works of God. This is provided for the purpose of inspiring the Jews to have confidence in Him as their protector. Stated in words of Dr. E. Henderson, an English scholar of nearly a century ago:

Nothing can exceed in grandeur and sublimity the description which the prophet furnishes of the Divine character. The attributes of infinite purity, inflexible rectitude, irresistible power, and boundless goodness, set forth and illustrated by images borrowed from the history of the Hebrews, the scenery of Palestine, and the more astounding phenomena of nature, present to view a God worthy of the profoundest reverence, the most unbounded confidence, and the most intensive love. [^11]

The Lord is shown to be a God of both vengeance and mercy. These two aspects of the Lord's character are, of course, not contradictory. When men boast in their own strength and set at naught the counsels of God and follow after the dictates of their own will and carnal desires, they must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon them. [^12] The Assyrians were overwhelmingly guilty and ripe for God's vengeance.

Nahum was amply justified in announcing those facts. The prophet points out also that the Lord is faithful to those who rely on Him and that darkness shall pursue His enemies. He assures Judah that God will bring utter destruction upon the ancient foe:

The Lord taketh vengeance on His adversaries,

And He reserveth wrath for His enemies.

The Lord is long-suffering, and great in power,

And will by no means clear the guilty;

The Lord, in the whirlwind and in the storm is His way,

And the clouds are the dust of His feet.

He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry,

And drieth up all the rivers;

Bashan languisheth, and Carmel,

And the flower of Lebanon languisheth.

The mountains quake at Him,

And the hills melt;

And the earth is upheaved at His presence,

Yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.

Who can stand before His indignation?

And who can abide in the fierceness of His anger?

His fury is poured out like fire,

And the rocks are broken asunder before Him.

The Lord is good,

A stronghold in the day of trouble;

And He knoweth them that take refuge in Him.

But with an overrunning flood

He will make a full end of the place thereof,

And darkness shall pursue His enemies.

What do ye devise against the Lord?

He will make a full end;

Trouble shall not rise up the second time.

For though they be like tangled thorns,

And be drunken according to their drink,

They shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.

Nineveh Reproached and Judah Comforted.—;In the remaining verses of Chapter One the Lord reproaches or threatens a foe which is in all probability Nineveh. The latter's doom is decreed because she has devised evil against the Lord. Judah's yoke, on the other hand, is to be broken and her bonds burst asunder. The gods of Nineveh are to be rooted up, and Judah is promised that the "wicked one" shall no more pass through her. In verse fifteen the prophet quotes words apparently from Isaiah 52:7:

Behold upon the mountains the feet of him

That bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace!

These words are referred to by the Savior [^13] as recorded in the Book of Mormon and in the Doctrine and Covenants. (D. & C. 113:10) They seemingly deal with the principle of revelation to Israel in the latter days. Nahum uses them, however, in dealing with the situation at hand. The word of the Lord through him is to the effect that Judah's religious feasts, otherwise interrupted by the Assyrians, are to be kept. Furthermore, the Jews shall never again be menaced by their enemy.

The Siege and Sack of Nineveh.—;Having prophetically announced the overthrow of the Assyrian power, Nahum proceeds to describe, as if truly present, the siege and capture of Nineveh. This is done with graphic minuteness, and in the most sublime and vivid manner.

We have already presented a brief description of the city of Nineveh in the chapter on Jonah, to which the reader is referred. There only remains to be said a word about the circumstances of Nineveh's fall, in order to give a little more background for Nahum's prophetic poetry.

After the death of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, in 626 B. C., Babylon recovered her independence under the Chaldean, Nabopolassor. Little is said in the records of this ruler until the year 616 B. C., when the vengeance of oppressed peoples began to assert itself very strongly against Assyria. In that year Nabopolassor marched north and inflicted a severe defeat on the Assyrians at a place called Kablini. He failed to hold his ground here, as indeed he did again in another campaign up the valley of the Tigris. He managed, however, to return safely to Babylon. Early in the year 614 B. C. the Medes also appeared on the scene and captured Ashur, while the Chaldean army hastened northward to join them. When junction was made by the two armies, Nabopolasser and Kyaxares, king of the Medes, made an alliance. In the year 612 B. C. the combined forces made an assault on Nineveh. The fighting in the suburbs and immediately before the walls was most desperate, and three terrific engagements took place before the defenses could be stormed. Finally, however, the allies' superior strength won out, and Nineveh fell. It is with these great engagements that the following poetry of Nahum deals:

The hammer is come up before thee;

See the rampart, keep watch on the way,

Strengthen the loins, fortify thy power mightily.

For Jehovah causes the pride of Jacob to return,

Like the pride of Israel!

For the plunderers plundered them,

And destroyed their vine branches.

The shields of his heroes are red,

The warriors are in scarlet:

The chariots flash with steel in the day of his preparation,

And the horsemen are prancing.

The chariots rage through the streets,

They dash around in the broad ways:

The appearance of them is like torches,

Like lightnings they dart to and fro. [^14]

He calls to his nobles: they stumble in their march;

They hasten to the wall, and the mantelet is prepared.

The river gates are opened, and the palace is dissolved.

And it is decreed; she is uncovered, she is carried away,

And her handmaids mourn as with the voice of doves,

Beating upon their breasts.

And Nineveh! like a reservoir of waters are her waters,

And they flee away; Stand, stand [they cry]; but no one rallies them.

Plunder the silver, plunder the gold:

For there is no end of the treasure, a mass of all precious things.

She is empty, and void, and waste:

And the heart melts, and the knees shake.

And anguish is in all loins,

And the faces of all lose their color. (2:1-10)

A Sarcastic Allegory Over Nineveh's Destruction.—;Having described the sack of Nineveh, Nahum proceeds to exult over the wicked city. The exultation takes the form of a beautiful allegory. In the last verse the literal is intermixed with the figurative:

Where is the den of the lions,

Which was the feeding-place of the young lions,

Where the lion and the lioness walked,

And the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?

The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps,

And strangled for his lionesses,

And filled his caves with prey,

And his dens with ravin.

Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts,

And I will burn her chariots in the smoke,

And the sword shall devour thy young lions;

And I will cut off thy prey from the earth,

And the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard. (2:11-13)

Retribution Upon Nineveh for Past Outrages Against Other Nations.—;In the first verse of Chapter Three the prophet again turns on Nineveh and pronounces a woe upon the bloody city. Then follows a vivid description of the noise of the conflict and the glitter of the paraphernalia of war. Nahum points out that the judgment on the city is well merited. She has acted the part of a harlot, and the harlot's fate she must endure. No one shall have pity upon her or comfort her in her hour of destruction:

Woe to the bloody city!

It is all full of lies and rapine;

The prey departeth not.

Hark! the whip, and hark! the rattling of wheels;

And prancing horses, and bounding chariots;

The horseman charging,

And the flashing sword, and the glittering spear;

And a multitude of slain, and a heap of carcasses;

And there is no end of the corpses,

And they stumble upon their corpses;

Because of the multitude of the harlotries of the well-favored harlot,

The mistress of witchcrafts,

That selleth nations through her harlotries,

And families through her witchcrafts.

Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts,

And I will uncover thy skirts upon thy face,

And I will show the nations thy nakedness,

And the kingdoms thy shame.

And I will cast detestable things upon thee, and make thee vile,

And will make thee as dung.

And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee Shall flee from thee,

And say: 'Nineveh is laid waste;

Who will bemoan her?

Whence shall I seek comforters for thee?' (3:1-7)

Nineveh's Fate to be That of the Egyptian City of No-Amon.—;Nineveh, the prophet observes, is no better than the Egyptian city of No-Amon (Thebes), and her great strength and natural resources will be of no more avail. Even as Assurbanipal had devastated the great Egyptian city, the remnants of whose greatness are described by Dr. James H. Breasted as "the mightiest ruins of ancient civilization to be found anywhere in the world," so should Nineveh be despoiled and destroyed

Art thou better than No-amon,

Which sat upon the Nile streams—;waters round about her—;

Whose rampart was the sea, and of the sea her wall?

Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was without end;

Put and Libya were among thy helpers.

Even she was for exile, she went into captivity:

Her children likewise were dashed in pieces at the corners of all the streets:

And they cast lots for her nobles,

And all her great men were bound in chains.

Thou also wilt be drunken, thou wilt grow faint.

Thou also wilt seek a defence against the enemy. (3:8-11)

Nineveh's Inability to Save Herself.—;Nahum last of all proceeds to describe the city's great fortress as ripe figs ready to be shaken into the mouth of the eater. Her people are weak as women and unable to prevent the entrance of the enemy into the city. The siege is near at hand, and preparation should be made for it; but all resistance will be in vain, for the sword will cut off all the inhabitants. There is no healing for the hurt of the city, and all who hear the news about her will clap their hands.

All thy fortresses are like fig trees with the firstripe figs:

If they be shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater.

Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women;

The gates of thy land will certainly be opened to thy enemies:

Fire devours thy bolts.

Draw thee water for the siege, strengthen thy fortresses:

Go into mud and tread the clay,

Lay hold of the brick-mould.

There the fire devours thee; the sword cuts thee off,

It devours thee like the locust:

Make thyself many like the grasshoppers.

Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven.

The locust spreads itself and flies away.

Thy crowned ones are like locusts, and thy commanders like swarms of grasshoppers,

Which encamp on the walls in the cold day,

But when the sun has risen they vanish,

And one does not know the place where they are.

Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria:

Thy nobles are at rest:

Thy peoples are scattered on the mountains,

And no one gathers them.

There is no healing for thy hurt;

Thy wound is fatal.

All who hear the news of thee will clap the hands at thee;

For upon them has not thy wickedness passed continually? (3:12-19)

The Teaching of Nahum.—;Many significant reflections may pass through the mind as one reads the Book of Nahum, but there is very little direct religious teaching therein. Most of what there is is contained in Chapter One. There one finds emphasized divine holiness, vengeance, and mercy. The manifestation of God's vengeance results in the destruction of the wicked and His demonstration of mercy in the salvation of the oppressed. Faith in the Lord will secure for men His favor and protection. The fact that Nahum's purpose is very restricted—e announcement of Nineveh's destruction—ounts for his lack of reference to the sins of his own people or for the absence of any discussion of high ethical or religious themes such as is found in others of the prophets.

Assyria! Thy sceptre lies in dust,

Thy bow is broken and thy pomp has fled.

Perished thy fruits of conquest, blood and lust,

With all the warriors that Tiglath led!

—;President Charles W. Penrose.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Query: Why does the Lord remain apparently indifferent in the presence of iniquity and violence (1:2-4)? Woe upon lust for conquest and spoils (2:5-8). Superscription (3:1). As quoted in E. Henderson, The Book of the Twelve Minor Prophets, 2nd Ed., p. 311.
[^2] The Lord's answer: He is not indifferent; the Chaldeans are to execute His judgment (1:5-11). Woe upon base avarice, through which a dynasty seeks to firmly establish its rule (2:9-11). Petition (3:2). Quoted in C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament (The Twelve Minor Prophets), II, 53.
[^3] Query: Why does the Lord, who is pure, holy and everlasting, choose a wicked nation to punish a people more righteous than itself (1:12-17)? Woe upon building cities with the blood and sweat of subjugated nations (2:12-14). A theophany (3:3-15). F. C. Eiselen, Prophecy and the Prophets, pp. 180 f. The Methodist Book Concern. New York & Cincinnati.
[^4] The Lord's answer: The Chaldeans may be temporarily puffed up, but their end is certain; the righteous may be afflicted temporarily, but they shall live by faith forever (2:1-4). Woe upon cruelty in the treatment of conquered nations (2:15-17). Calm and joyous confidence in the Lord (3:16-19). "As the eagle builds its nest on high, to protect it from harm, so does the Chaldean seek to elevate and strengthen his rule by robbery and plunder, that it may never be wrested from his family again."
[^5] Woe upon idolatry (2:18-20). A figurative representation of the seducing arts by which the Chaldeans overthrow their victims. The nakedness is a figure of the shame that falls on the victim. How appropriate these statements are to describe the methods of Hitler!
[^6] An obvious curse upon the idolatrous nation.
[^7] Hab. 3:3-15. This theophany has its literary roots in earlier lyrical descriptions of God's revelations to Israel. Cf. v. 3 with Deut. 33:2; v. 5 with Ps. 68:24; v. 6 with Ps. 18:7; v. 8 with Ps. 18:10; Ps. 68:4, 33; vss. 10-15 with Ps. 77:16-20. In these verses of Habakkuk only an echo of the psalms is often to be observed. The word "Selah" used in the theophany, as in certain psalms, is not understood. It may refer to the music used, whether vocal or instrumental.
[^8] Smith, op. cit., P. 90.
[^9] Ibid., P. 77.
[^10] The great Bible translator (A. D. 400) who rendered much of the scripture into Latin.
[^11] E. Henderson, The Book of the Twelve Minor Prophets, 2nd Ed., p. 273.
[^12] See D. & C. 3:4.
[^13] See 3 Nephi 20:39, 40.
[^14] Some persons have interpreted this verse as having reference to lighted automobiles and trains in the latter days. It is obvious that the context and purposes of Nahum's prophecy permit no such interpretation.
