Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty Seven

HABAKKUK, THE PROPHET OF LIVING FAITH

The Name and Person of the Prophet.—;The name of the Prophet Habakkuk is commonly supposed to be derived from a Hebrew root which would give it the meaning of "embrace" or "ardent embrace." There is a possibility, however, that the name is connected with the Assyrian hambakuku, the name of a garden plant.

It is unfortunate that neither history nor tradition has left us with any reliable facts concerning Habakkuk's person or the age in which he lived. Ancient Jewish rabbis suggested that the prophet was to be identified as the son of the Shunammite woman whom Elisha raised from the dead. (2 Kings 4:32-37) Another tradition states that Habakkuk brought food in a miraculous way to Daniel in the lions' den; and in the Preface to the same story, in the Codex Chisianus of the Septuagint, he is said to be the son of Jesus of the tribe of Levi. According to the ancient Lives of the Prophets he belonged to the tribe of Simeon. When Nebuchadrezzar was advancing on Jerusalem, Habakkuk is said to have fled to Ostrakine on the Egyptian coast but to have returned to Palestine, where he died two years before the return of the Jews under Cyrus in 537 B. C. Eusebius, the ancient church historian, states that in his day the tomb of the prophet was shown in both Gibeah and Keilah! Such are the nature of the legends and traditions that have arisen concerning Habakkuk.

As we shall see later, the prophet was a philosopher, original and forceful, inquiring and speculative, and very sensitive to spiritual impressions. He is known as the "suppliant" among the prophets and, as the Hebrew text of the superscription implies, was also a chozeh or seer.

The Content and Literary Style of the Prophecy.—;The book differs markedly from the other prophetic books. Whereas most of the others contain the words of the Lord addressed to the people, in the Book of Habakkuk the prophet, as the representative of the people, addresses and challenges the Lord. He begins by complaining about the apparent indifference of the Lord to violence, strife, and widespread corruption in Judah. The prophet is puzzled over this indifference, knowing as he does the righteous and holy character of God. The Lord, in answer to this complaining, states that He is about to raise up the Chaldeans to execute judgment. The prophet is only the more perplexed at this answer for he fails to understand why the Lord should use the cruel and fierce Chaldeans to execute judgment upon people who are more righteous than they are. The Lord, however, points out that the Chaldeans are to be but temporarily triumphant; they shall eventually meet with destruction, whereas the righteous shall live by faith. The oppressed nations may begin at once to rejoice over the fall of the Chaldeans; hence the prophet's "taunt-song" against them, which takes the form of five woes upon the corrupt traits in the enemy's character and his many cruelties. The book ends in a beautiful anthem of praise, called in the title of Chapter Three "A prayer of Habakkuk the Prophet."

The prophecy contains fifty-six verses divided into three chapters. It may be conveniently studied according to the following scheme:

The superscription (1:1). Much of what was said about the superscription of Nahum applies here.

I. The two fold perplexity of Habakkuk and the Lord's solutions (1:2-2:4).

II. A taunt-song over the destruction of the Chaldeans (2:5-20).

III. Habakkuk's prayer: Petition, Appreciation, Trust (3:1-19).

From the standpoint of literary style the Book of Habakkuk is one of the most distinguished among the prophets. In dignity and sublimity it is surpassed by none. The prophet is distinctly original in the way he writes. Whatever he may have in common with earlier writers is worked up in his own peculiar manner. His parallelisms are generally regular and complete. His descriptions are graphic and pointed; his expressions bold and lively. The third chapter of Habakkuk, a lyric ode or psalm, is one of the most splendid and magnificent pieces of poetry in the Old Testament. The master pen of Robert Lowth, a great English churchman, has given the following description of this sublime ode:

The prophet, indeed, illustrates this subject throughout with equal magnificence; selecting from such an assemblage of miraculous incidents, the most noble and important, displaying them in the most splendid colors, and embellishing them with the sublimest imagery, figures, and diction, the dignity of which is so heightened and recommended by the superior elegance of the conclusion, that were it not for a few shades, which the hand of time has apparently cast over it in two or three passages, no composition of the kind would, I believe, appear more elegant or more perfect than this poem. [^1]

Professor Franz Delitzsch, a great German scholar of the past century, spoke thus of Habakkuk:

His language is classical throughout, full of rare and select words and turns, which are to some extent exclusively his own, whilst his view and mode of presentation bear the seal of independent force and finished beauty. Notwithstanding the violent rush and lofty soaring of the thoughts, his prophecy forms a finely organized and artistically rounded whole. Like Isaiah, he is, comparatively speaking, much more independent of his predecessors, both in contents and form, than any other of the prophets. [^2]

The Hebrew text of Habakkuk has not been so very well preserved, and for that reason difficulties occur in translating and interpreting certain parts of the book. More than half of the text of Habakkuk, including the entire Chapter 3, is generally rejected as not being the prophet's. The author of this work does not accede to such an action in view of the lack of positive historical proof. It is obvious to any competent authority that we do not have the text of Habakkuk exactly as it left the pen of the prophet, but it is far safer in the present state of our knowledge to assume that what has come down to us is from him than to rely on unsupported theories as to what is or what is not his. Many persons may agree with this judgment when they learn that practically every verse of the prophecy has been denied to Habakkuk by one or more scholars and that wide divergence of opinion still exists.

The Interpretation of Habakkuk—;The Prophet's First Query.—;The date of Habakkuk is so bound up with the interpretation of chapters one and two that we may consider these at once. In Chapter 1:2-4 the prophet complains to the Lord about violence, iniquity, strife, and contention that cause the law to be paralyzed and judgment thwarted. The wicked also beset the righteous:

How long, O Lord, shall I cry

And Thou wilt not hear?

I cry out unto Thee of violence

And Thou wilt not save.

Why dost Thou show me iniquity

And beholdest mischief?

And why are spoiling and violence before me?

So that there is strife, and contention ariseth.

Therefore the law is slacked,

And right doth never go forth;

For the wicked doth beset the righteous;

Therefore right goeth forth perverted. (1:2-4)

The question naturally arises, Who is responsible for the wickedness, oppression, and violence? Are the Jews? Is the prophet giving a description of the sins of his own people? Or, as critics have variously suggested, is the Jewish nation being persecuted by the Assyrians, Chaldeans, or Egyptians? The date for the writing of Habakkuk will depend on the answers given to these questions. The author dates the prophecy about 605 B. C.

Unfortunately, those who hold that the Chaldeans are the oppressors whose doom is impending, have to regard Chapter 1:5-11 as an originally independent prophecy, which may have once occupied a place before Chapter 1:2. By the removal of these verses out of their place, plausibility is given to the interpretation. Those who hold that either the Assyrians or the Egyptians are the oppressors, whose overthrow is to be accomplished by the Chaldeans, have to place Chapter 1:5-11 immediately after Chapter 2:4, in order to sustain their interpretation. According to the first group of critics, the woes in Chapter 2:5-20 would be upon the Chaldeans, whereas the second group would apply them to either the Assyrians or the Egyptians. The Book of Habakkuk is variously dated, therefore, between 630 B. C. and 600 B. C. We shall not enter here into a more detailed discussion of the criticism of Habakkuk.

The writer, in common with many others, believes that it is possible to give a reasonable interpretation to Habakkuk without meddling with the text. We shall, therefore, follow the scheme of study given above. In regard to Chapter 1:2-4, quoted above, the writer believes it quite natural to assume that Habakkuk has reference to the wickedness, oppression, and violence among his own people, the Jews. The prophet, as we have pointed out before, is perplexed over the apparent indifference of the Lord to the trying situation. It was quite natural for the prophet so to be. He was like many folk in our own day who wonder why the Lord seemed apparently aloof from the terrible world war that recently caused the death of millions and misery to countless others, many of whom can be assumed to have been righteous. Habakkuk would be a good book for such folk to read. For the Lord, in answer to the prophet's query as to His indifference, gives him to understand that He is not indifferent. Judgment is to be executed upon the wicked, for the fierce and terrible Chaldeans are to be His agents:

Look ye among the nations, and behold,

And wonder marvellously;

For, behold, a work shall be wrought in your days,

Which ye will not believe though it be told you.

For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans,

That bitter and impetuous nation,

That march through the breadth of the earth.

To possess dwelling-places that are not theirs.

They are terrible and dreadful;

Their law and their majesty proceed from themselves.

Their horses also are swifter than leopards,

And are more fierce than the wolves of the desert;

And their horsemen spread themselves;

Yea, their horsemen come from far,

They fly as a vulture that hasteth to devour

They come all of them for violence,

Their faces are set eagerly as the east wind;

And they gather captives as the sand.

And they scoff at kings,

And princes are a derision unto them;

They deride every stronghold,

For they heap up earth, and take it.

Then their spirit doth pass over and transgress,

And they become guilty:

Even they who impute their might unto their god.

(1:5-11)

The Prophet's Second Query.— [^3]ch an answer only intensifies the prophet's complexity. How is it possible for the Lord to employ the Chaldeans and condone their cruelties? Is a wicked nation to be allowed to swallow up another nation that is more righteous than itself? Are the righteous Jews to be exterminated by the treacherous foreigners? Are the Chaldeans to have a continual triumph? This all presents a new problem to the prophet and tests his faith to the extreme:

Art not Thou from everlasting

O Lord my God, my Holy One?

We shall not die.

O Lord, Thou hast ordained them for judgment,

And Thou, O Rock, hast established them for correction.

Thou that art of eyes too pure to behold evil,

And that canst not look on mischief,

Wherefore lookest Thou, when they deal treacherously,

And holdest Thy peace, when the wicked swalloweth up

The man that is more righteous than he;

And makest men as the fishes of the sea,

As the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?

They take up all of them with the angle,

They catch them in their net,

And gather them in their drag;

Therefore they rejoice and exult.

Therefore they sacrifice unto their net,

And offer unto their drag;

Because by them their portion is fat,

And their food plenteous.

Shall they therefore empty their net,

And not spare to slay the nations continually?

(1:12-17)

Though the faith of the prophet is tested severely, he does not allow it to be wrecked. He watches and waits to see what the Lord will tell him (2:1). And therein lies a profound lesson for us all. The Lord grants him a vision which is to be written down, for while its fulfillment may be delayed, it will certainly come to pass:

I will stand upon my watch,

And set me upon the tower

And will look out to see what He will speak by me,

And what I shall answer when I am reproved.

And the Lord answered me, and said:

'Write the vision,

And make it plain upon tables,

That a man may read it swiftly

For the vision is yet for the appointed time,

And it declareth of the end, and doth not lie;

Though it tarry, wait for it;

Because it will surely come, it will not delay.'

Behold, his soul is puffed up, it is not upright in him;

But the righteous shall live by his faith. (2:1-4)

The verse, "Behold his soul is puffed up, it is not upright in him; but the righteous shall live by his faith," while somewhat obscure, is one of the great passages of the Old Testament. It means essentially this: There is a moral and spiritual distinction between the Chaldeans and the people of Judah. The Chaldeans, puffed up and arrogant, priding themselves in their wealth and power and deceptive in their dealings with other nations, do not possess the moral and spiritual elements which alone can insure permanence and stability. The people of the Lord, on the other hand, possess moral integrity, fidelity, and spiritual insight which insure for them a future. "The future belongs to the righteous." When the prophet says that "the righteous shall live by his faith (more accurately faithfulness)" he implies permanency.

The thought expressed by the prophet is not identical with that expressed by the apostle who quote the words (Gal. 3:11); nevertheless the former also gives expression to a truth of profound significance. "Faithfulness" is with the prophet an external thing; it signifies integrity, fidelity, steadfastness under all provocations; but this implies, in a real sense, the New Testament conception of faith as an active principle of right conduct. A living faith determines conduct; religion and ethics go hand in hand, and especially in the hour of adversity a belief in Jehovah and unflinching reliance upon him are the strongest preservers of fidelity and integrity. Faith without works is dead; faith expresses itself in life. Habakkuk places chief emphasis upon the expressions of faith, and he does so rightly; but in doing this he also calls attention, by implication at least, to the motive power behind the external manifestations. [^4]

The statement "the righteous shall live by his faith" is the outstanding teaching of Habakkuk. Theologically the prophet made therein an original and significant contribution to the world. Not Luther nor Augustine, nor even Paul is to be credited with it—;it belongs to Habakkuk.

The prophet is thus assured by the Lord that the righteous among his people will in the end triumph, whereas the cruel and unrighteous Chaldeans must inevitably perish.

A Taunt-song Over the Chaldeans' Destruction.— [^5]nce the prophet sees that God has determined the destruction of the cruel Chaldeans, he has the vanquished and enslaved nations lift up their voices in a series of five woes or curses in condemnation of the foe. We shall not quote these complete (2:5-20), but reproduce herewith the kernel or gist of them. In our age of power politics, all nations seeking unrighteous dominion over others ought to consider carefully the whole taunt-song of Habakkuk. The reader is advised to study it at his earliest convenience. It has particular value in our times.

Woe unto him that increaseth that which is not his!

* * *

Woe to him that gaineth evil gains for his house,

That he may set his nest on high,

That he may be delivered from the power of evil! [^6]

* * *

Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood,

And establisheth a city by iniquity!

* * *

Woe unto him that giveth his neighbor drink,

That puttest thy venom thereto and makest him drunken also,

That thou mayest look on their nakedness! [^7]

* * *

Woe unto him that saith to the wood 'Awake,'

To the dumb stone: 'Arise!' [^8]

Habakkuk's Prayer.—;This sublime ode, prayer, psalm, or rhapsody, as it has been called, is now generally denied to the prophet. I frankly see no need to do this. Supposing the style and temper of the poem to be a little different from the first two chapters, can a prophet not have a change of mood? Certainly the early part of Habakkuk is great poetry, and the last chapter corresponds in this respect. And the reasons given by the later critics for denying the poem to Habakkuk are too subjective to be convincing.

The superscription of the prayer reminds one of certain titles in the Psalms:

A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet.

Upon Shigionoth. (3:1)

The "shigionoth" are supposed to be stringed instruments. Possibly the prayer was set to music anciently and used in the Temple.

The prophet, first of all, petitions the Lord to renew His loving kindness, power, and goodness in delivering His people as He did in days of old. In other words, he wants a revival

of God's work for the benefit of his people now living "in the midst of the years."

O Lord, I have heard the report of Thee, and am afraid;

O Lord, revive Thy work in the midst of the years,

In the midst of the years make it known;

In wrath remember compassion. (3:2)

In verses 3-15 we have a magnificent theophany in which the prophet describes the coming of the Lord in the glory of His omnipotence, to deliver His people and His anointed from the bondage of the power of the world. Pestilence and great earthly manifestations precede His indignant march to thresh the nations in anger:

God cometh from Teman,

And the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah.

His glory covereth the heavens,

And the earth is full of His praise.

And a brightness appeareth as the light;

Rays hath He at His side;

And there is the hiding of His power.

Before Him goeth the pestilence,

And fiery bolts go forth at His feet.

He standeth, and shaketh the earth,

He beholdeth, and maketh the nations to tremble;

And the everlasting mountains are dashed in pieces,

The ancient hills do bow;

His goings are as of old.

I see the tents of Cushan in affliction;

The curtains of the Lord of Midian do tremble.

Is it, O Lord, that against the rivers,

Is it that Thine anger is kindled against the rivers,

Or Thy wrath against the sea?

That Thou dost ride upon Thy horses,

Upon Thy chariots of victory?

Thy bow is made quite bare;

Sworn are the rods of the word. Selah

Thou dost cleave the earth with rivers.

The mountains have seen Thee, and they tremble;

The tempest of waters floweth over;

The deep uttereth its voice,

And lifteth up its hands on high,

The sun and moon stand still in their habitation;

At the light of Thine arrows as they go,

At the shining of Thy glittering spear.

Thou marchest through the earth in indignation,

Thou threshest the nations in anger.

Thou art come forth for the deliverance of Thy people,

For the deliverance of Thine anointed;

Thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked,

Uncovering the foundation even unto the neck. Selah

Thou hast stricken through with his own rods the head of his rulers,

That come as a whirlwind to scatter me;

Whose rejoicing is as to devour the poor secretly.

Thou has trodden the sea with Thy horses,

The foaming of mighty waters. [^9]

Finally, the prophet ends his prayer with an expression of calm and joyous confidence in the Lord (3:16-19). As an expression of living faith, verses 17-19 are unsurpassed in the Old Testament:

When I heard, mine inward parts trembled,

My lips quivered at the voice;

Rottenness entereth into my bones,

And I tremble where I stand;

That I should wait for the day of trouble,

When he cometh up against the people that he invadeth.

For though the fig-tree shall not blossom,

Neither shall fruit be in the vines;

The labor of the olive shall fail,

And the fields shall yield no food;

The flock shall be cut off from the fold,

And there shall be no herd in the stalls;

Yet I will rejoice in the Lord,

I will exult in the God of my salvation.

God, the Lord, is my strength,

And He maketh my feet like hinds' feet,

And He maketh me to walk upon my high places.

For the Leader. With my string-music. (3:16-19)

To the other great lesson we have already learned in Habakkuk—mely, that "the righteous shall live by his faith," we must add another. It is that the Lord is supreme over all the earth. The destinies of all nations lie in His hands. The wicked may temporarily triumph, but their rule is eventually cut short, for righteousness must achieve supremacy in a world over which the Lord is head

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The terror of the Day of the Lord—e only way to escape is to seek the Lord. Judah especially threatened (1:2-2:3). See I Chron. 6:36; II Kings. 25:18; Jer. 21:1; 37:3.
[^2] Destruction of Philistia, Moab and Ammon, Ethiopia and Assyria, nations which had always been hostile to Israel (2:4-15). See the full account in II Kings 22, 23.
[^3] A special denunciation of Jerusalem, the polluted city (3:1-7). Zeph. 1:12. The metaphor has reference to the sediment that settles at the bottom of a cask of wine.
[^4] A key verse (3:8) "Day of wrath! O day of mourning." See Zephaniah 1:15.
[^5] The Jews were taken into captivity by the Babylonians about 590 B.C. Even before and after that time there were deportations and great destruction. Assuming that Zephaniah wrote about 626 B.C., our point is evident
[^6] Or Molech.
[^7] These "guests" are Israel's foes, who have been consecrated to war in order to consume her. See Jer. 10:25; 22:7. In Isa. 13:3 the nations appointed to war against Babylon are called consecrated or sanctified. It will be found rewarding to read verses 3-6
[^8] The allusion here is not exactly clear. Some interpreters suppose the meaning is furnished by I Sam. 5:5, where the worshipers of Dagon avoided treading on the threshold of his house after he had fallen across it and had been broken in pieces. Others think the allusion is to breaking into a house.
[^9] The Hebrew reads, "before the bringing forth (or birth) of a decree" which has been variously interpreted. I take it to mean God's decree of punishment on a guilty nation. The line just before this is also difficult.
