Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty Eight

ZEPHANIAH, PROPHET OF THE LORD'S DAY OF WRATH

The Prophet's Name and Genealogy.—;Zephaniah's name means "Jehovah hides" or "Jehovah has hidden." He is the only one of the prophets of whom a considerable genealogy is given in a superscription. This I consider due probably to the fact that he was a descendant of Hezekiah, king of Judah. According to the record, he was a great-great-grandson of the Hebrew king:

The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah. (1:1)

Zephaniah very probably lived in Jerusalem, judging from his familiar reference to parts of the city, such as the "fish gate" and "Maktesh," the merchants' quarter. (1:10, 11) Also his reference to "this place" in 1:4 strongly supports that opinion.

Two other Zephaniahs are mentioned in the Old Testament besides the prophet. [^1] Little is known of Zephaniah's personal history aside from what has been indicated or the few facts that may be gathered from his utterances. There is an ancient tradition that he was of the tribe of Simeon, but this is considered worthless by most authorities.

The Prophet's Times.— [^2]nce Zephaniah's prophecy is dated in the days of Josiah, king of Judah, his ministry lasted until at least the year 639 B. C., the time of the king's accession, or stretched well into the years of the monarch's reign of thirty-one years. Times must have been turbulent in Judah when Josiah ascended the throne. The Book of II Kings relates that Josiah's father, Amon, was slain in his own house by conspiring servants, and that the people of the land in turn slew them and secured the throne for Josiah, then a child of eight. We are also informed that Amon's reign of two years was evil, like that of his father Manasseh before him. Idolatry, therefore, went on apace, as did the shedding of blood. (II Kings 21:19-24) Since Josiah was a good king, it would appear that a strong group of men and women of character took charge of the king in his early years on the throne and thus paved the way for the reforms that took place in his lifetime. But the evil years of the reigns of Manasseh and Amon must have continued to affect adversely the worship and conduct of the Hebrew people during the early years of Josiah's reign. Zephaniah mentions the remnant of Baal still in the land, the Kemarim of idol-priests who probably went about in black, the people who worshipped the host of heaven upon the housetops, and those who swear by Jehovah and Malkam. (1:4, 5) Many people had apostatized from or had grown indifferent to the true worship of Jehovah. (1:6) The nobility affected foreign fashions and clothing in direct violation of the Law of Moses, which provided for clothing that was designed to keep the Hebrew people distinct from others. (1:8; Num. 15:37-40) The rich of the day were rapacious and cruel. Even the servants filled their masters' houses "with violence and deceit." (1:9) Social injustice and corruption were rampant, (3:1, 3, 7) professional prophets were wanton and treacherous, and priests violated or outraged the law when expounding it to their people. (3:4) Jeremiah, who was probably a contemporary of Zephaniah, mentions also the worship of the Queen of Heaven. (Jer. 7:18; 44:19) Zephaniah may have lived to see and take part in the religious reforms of Josiah, which commenced after the finding of "the book of the law" in the Temple by Hilkiah the priest. [^3] The account of these reforms mentioned in II Kings 23 indicates that the times of Zephaniah before 621 B. C. were even worse than we have described. Consequently we can understand and appreciate the vehemence and power with which the prophet denounced Judah. The people, however, seem to have been "settled on their lees," [^4] that is, they were corrupt, selfish, and indifferent, to such an extent that the message of Zephaniah failed to influence them. They said in their hearts, "The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil." (1:12) They were, therefore, ready for the promised destruction.

The Date, Contents, and Literary Characteristics of the Book.—;The exact date of the Book of Zephaniah is not known. Those who attempt to date it usually do so with reference to Josiah's reforms, which began in 621 B. C. There are some scholars who would place the book after that time, but the general consensus seems to favor a date a few years earlier, let us say about 626 B. C.

The content of the book centers about one great theme, the coming of the Day of the Lord. It will be remembered how much the same theme figures in the prophecies of Joel and Obadiah. The book divides quite naturally into two parts of unequal length. The first part, 1:2-3:7, deals with the near approach of the terrible day and consists almost exclusively of threats and denunciations. The second, 3:8-20, contains a beautiful picture of the eventual salvation, glorification, and joy of the redeemed Israel. The book may be treated under the following heads:

The superscription (1:1)

I. The universality of God's judgments upon the earth (1:2-3:8).

II. A vision of the latter days (3:9-20). Salvation and blessing to come upon the repentant, especially the "remnant of Israel," who will be praised among the peoples of the earth as the redeemed of the Lord The Book of Zephaniah, as may have been noticed, contains three short chapters. The style of the prophet reminds one somewhat of Isaiah, though his poetry is not so good. His message demanded vigor and clarity; these he supplied with a sure hand, thus in part making up for lack of elegance and charm. Large portions of chapters 2 and 3 are written in a vivid, dirge-like meter—at is, in lines of 3 plus 2 beats each. Chapter One can be classed definitely as oratory. Repetition of words and phrases helps to enhance the emphasis desired by the prophet. Occasional puns and epigrams tend to increase the reader's interest, especially if he can use the Hebrew text.

The originality of practically every verse in chapters 2 and 3 has been questioned at some time or other by one or more authorities. Nor has Chapter 1 entirely escaped. There may be some minor interpolations, but the author feels that the text as a whole must have come from Zephaniah. Criticisms of a particular verse of larger portions of the text as not being from Zephaniah are bound, in general, to be very subjective in nature and incapable of absolute proof. The Hebrew text of Zephaniah has come down to us fairly well preserved. Very often the Septuagint (Greek version) helps where error is suspected.

Zephaniah's terrible note of doom for the nations has attracted the notice of many men through the ages. In the thirteenth century an Italian Franciscan monk, Thomas of Celano, was so impressed by it that he gave to the world a great poem, Dies Irae, Dies Illa, [^5] "so awful in its grandeur and so intense in its earnestness and pathos that we hear in it, as it were, 'the final crash of the universe!' "

The Interpretation of Zephaniah's Prophecy.—;Zephaniah is unquestionably one of the most difficult of the prophetic books. One who reads it for the first time, even in a modern translation, will probably come away somewhat bewildered by the experience. The book should be read several times and then pondered over. One cannot expect to catch the spirit of the prophet without considerable effort. The great theme of the book, as we have already pointed out, is the terrible Day of the Lord. Notice the following expressions indicative of that fact: "The day of the Lord is at hand," (1:7) "the day of the Lord's sacrifice," (1:8) "the great day of the Lord is near," (1:14) "that day is a day of wrath . . . trouble and distress . . . wasteness and desolation . . . etc.," (1:15) "He will make an end, yea, a terrible end," (1:18) "the day when one passeth as the chaff," (2:2) "the day that I rise up to testify." (3:8) Let the reader keep in mind that Zephaniah's fundamental concept of the Day of the Lord is essentially the same as that of Joel, Obadiah, and Malachi. They all understand well that the term referred to the Second Advent of the Lord in the latter days, with its accompanying scenes of judgment and desolation. Each of them used the concept in accordance with his own needs and with reference to particular truths or teachings he wanted made known to his own or to a future generation. Thus Malachi makes known that Elijah is to precede the "great and terrible day of the Lord." (Mal. 4:5) and that the Lord is to "purify the sons of Levi." (Mal. 3:3) It does not follow, because the other prophets do not mention the coming of Elijah and the sons of Levi, that they did not understand these matters as well as Malachi. Joel mentions great cosmic signs in heaven and on earth that are to be seen before the Day of the Lord comes. (Joel 2:30) Malachi and the other prophets do not refer to these facts, at least not so specifically as Joel, but they probably understood them just as well. As we have implied, each may emphasize some particular truth or truths respecting the doctrine of the Day of the Lord which do not appear in the teachings of the others. Zephaniah's use of the theme of the Day of the Lord was brought about by the wickedness of the people of Judah. Their crimes and excesses merited a stern and vigorous rebuke. Knowing the great judgments and desolations that were to descend upon the world in the latter days at the Lord's Second Advent, Zephaniah determined to bring home to his people the awful retribution that should shortly befall them in terms descriptive of that great but future event in world history. Zephaniah's prophecy is definitely apocalyptic; it is a great revelation of the future, designed to impress the people of his own and future times with the fact that crime, wickedness, and religious indifference can not be forever condoned by a patient and merciful God. That which men sow they must inevitably reap. Such a lesson is of abiding value. For that reason the Book of Zephaniah is another prophetic warning to our own generation. In form the prophecy is a series of denunciations, threats, and warnings to Judah and the nations that were always hostile to the Hebrews, set in a framework descriptive of the great and terrible day of the Lord. The latter part of the prophecy, Chapter 3:8-20, is intended to console the righteous of his (Zephaniah's) and succeeding generations in the thought that God will remember them and eventually bring to pass a just and better world order in which "the king of Israel, even Jehovah" will reside. With these explanations we may now examine the prophecy in some detail.

A Declaration of World Judgment.—;In ominous and portentous language, reminding one in certain respects of the opening verses of the Book of Joel, the prophecy of Zephaniah begins by announcing a great world judgment. Exaggerated figures are purposely used to bring home to men the terrible nature of God's judgments in the great Day of the Lord:

I will utterly sweep away all things

From off the face of the earth,

Saith the Lord.

I will sweep away man and beast,

Sweep away the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea,

And the offences with the wicked;

And I will cut off man from the face of the earth,

Saith the Lord. (1:2, 3)

Having announced the theme of world judgment, Zephaniah then proceeds to play upon it as a composer does a theme in a symphony he is creating. The prophet turns special attention to the Jews; naturally his primary interest lies in the fate of his own people. He sees the terrible arm of the Lord reaching out to punish them for their misdeeds. This punishment may be near at hand for Judah, [^6], but it is announced in terms of world judgment far away in point of time. The reasons for punishment are given in some detail.

The Lord's Judgment Upon Judah.—;

And I will stretch out My hand upon Judah,

And upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem;

And I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place,

The name of the idol-priests with the priests;

And them who bow down upon the roofs to the host of heaven;

And them who bow down, who swear to the Lord

And swear by Malkam; [^7]

And them who apostatise from the Lord;

And who seek not the Lord, nor inquire after him.

Be silent before the Lord Jehovah;

For the day of the Lord is near,

For the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice,

He has consecrated His guests. [^8]

And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lord's sacrifice

That I will punish the princes, and the king's sons,

And all who clothe themselves in foreign apparel.

And I will also punish all who leap over the threshold in that day, [^9]

Who fill the house of their Lord with violence and deceit. (1:4-9)

In the next few verses, 10-13, the prophet shows his intimate knowledge of the city of Jerusalem as he describes the wailing, crashing, and desolation that shall await her inhabitants in the judgments to come. Those men who think God is indifferent to their actions shall lose their wealth. Their homes and vineyards shall avail them nothing. Then follows a masterly description of the Day of the Lord:

The great day of the Lord is near

Near and hasting greatly

The voice of the day of the Lord,

Wherein the mighty man crieth bitterly

A day of wrath is that day

A day of anguish and stress,

A day of destruction and desolation

A day of darkness and gloom,

A day of clouds and obscurity

A day of trumpet and battle-cry

Against the fortified cities, and against the high battlements.

And I will bring distress upon men,

And they shall walk like the blind,

Because they have sinned against the Lord;

And their blood shall be poured out like dust,

And their flesh like dung.

Neither their silver nor their gold

Shall be able to deliver them

In the day of the Lord's wrath;

And in the fire of His zeal the whole earth will be consumed;

For He will make an end, yea, terrible destruction,

Of all the inhabitants of the earth. (1:14-18)

This description of the destruction and terror that God shall pour out upon the wicked in the latter days is meant by the prophet to symbolize the desolation and woes that shall befall Judah if she does not repent. He calls upon his people in these words:

Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together,

Thou nation unconcerned;

Before the decree is executed, [^10]

(The day passes like chaff), [^11]

Before the burning anger of the Lord comes upon you,

Before the day of the Lord's wrath comes upon you. (2:1, 2)

The next verse could as well be a call to our own generation as to Zephaniah's:

Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth,

Who have wrought His judgment;

Seek righteousness, seek humility.

Possibly you shall be hidden in the day of the Lord's wrath. (2:3)

The Destruction of Foreign Nations Hostile to Judah.—;The next movement—;if we may call it such— Zephaniah's symphony of world judgment concerns those nations traditionally hostile to Judah. The prophet has already predicted the punishment of his own people, but he knows that the foreign nations who have taunted and reviled them are even more worthy of destruction. So he names them one by one and pronounces God's judgments upon them. The cities of Gaza, Ashkelon, Ashdod, and Ekron, representing the Philistines, are to be forsaken, desolated, rooted up, and destroyed. They shall become meadows and folds for flocks to be inherited by the remnant of Judah when the Lord turns their captivity.

For Gaza shall be forsaken,

And Ashkelon a desolation;

They shall drive out Ashdod at the noonday

And Ekron shall be rooted up.

Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea-coast,

The nation of the Cherethites!

The word of the Lord is against you,

O Canaan, the land of the Philistines;

I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.

And the sea-coast shall be pastures,

Even meadows for shepherds, and folds for flocks.

And it shall be a portion for the remnant of the house of Judah,

Whereon they shall feed;

In the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening;

For the Lord their God will remember them,

And turn their captivity. (2:4-7)

Moab and Ammon, because of their taunts and revilings, are to become as Sodom and Gomorrah. The Ethiopians are to be slain by the sword.

I have heard the taunt of Moab,

And the revilings of the children of Ammon,

Wherewith they have taunted My people,

And spoken boastfully concerning their border

Therefore as I live,

Saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:

Surely Moab shall become as Sodom,

And the Ammonites as Gomorrah,

A region overrun with nettles and saltpits

And a desolation, forever.

The remnant of My people shall spoil them,

And the residue of My nation shall inherit them.

This shall happen to them for their pride

Because they reproached and vaunted themselves

Against the people of the Lord of hosts.

The Lord will be terrible unto them;

For He will thin out [^12] all the gods of the earth;

Then shall all the isles of the nations worship Him,

Every one from its place.

Ye Ethiopians also,

Ye shall be slain by My sword. (2:8-12)

It is indeed strange that Zephaniah did not mention Edom in this list of nations, since she was one of Israel's most hated enemies through the centuries. The prophet turns to Assyria, Colossus of the North, and pronounces judgment upon her. Assyria had cruelly ravaged Israel in times past, but the vengeance of a just God is to overtake her:

And He will stretch forth His hand against the north,

And destroy Assyria;

And will make Nineveh a desolation,

And dry like the desert.

And all beasts of every kind

Shall lie down in the midst of her in herds;

Both the pelican and the bittern

Shall lodge in the capitals thereof;

Voices shall sing in the windows;

Desolation shall be on the thresholds;

For the cedar-work thereof shall be uncovered.

This is the exultant city

That dwelt in security,

That said in her heart:

'I am, and there is none else';

How is she become a desolation,

A lair for wild beasts!

Every one that passeth by her

Shall hiss, and wag his head. (2:13-15)

All of these nations in the course of time met the judgments decreed by God through Zephaniah. The break-up of the Assyrian Empire was completed by 610 B. C., about sixteen years after Zephaniah's prophecy was uttered. The great city of Nineveh fell in 612 B. C. under the onslaught of the Medes and Chaldeans. This has already been discussed in the chapter on Nahum. After going over the district occupied by the Philistines a few years ago, the author would judge that little has been left of the cities of that nation. And history attests the fall of the Moabites, Ammonites, and Ethiopians. The captivity of the Jews has not as yet been completely turned so that they can inherit the territory of Moab, Ammon, and Philistia, but judging from present events in the world, it would be a rash man who would predict that such could not take place in the course of the next few years. Israel now has its own government in Palestine

Jerusalem the Polluted City.—;The prophet now turns his attention back to his own people. He varies the theme of judgment a little by centering his attention on Jerusalem rather than denouncing Judah as a whole

Woe to her that is rebellious and polluted

The oppressing city!

She harkened not to the voice

She received not correction;

She trusted not in the Lord

She drew not near to her God

Her princes in the midst of her are roaring lions;

Her judges are evening wolves,

They do not strip off the bones in the morning. [^13]

Her prophets are wanton

And treacherous men;

Her priests have profaned that which is holy

They have done violence to the law.

The Lord who is righteous is in the midst of her,

He will not do unrighteousness;

Every morning doth He bring His right to light,

It faileth not;

But the unrighteous knoweth no shame.

I have cut off nations,

Their corners are desolate;

I have laid waste their streets,

So that none passeth by;

Their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man,

So that there is no inhabitant.

I said: 'Surely thou wilt fear Me,

Thou wilt receive correction;

So her dwelling shall not be cut off,

All that I had appointed concerning her';

But they hastened the more to corrupt all their doings. (3:1-7)

This is a severe arraignment of Zephaniah's own people and is truly prophetic. Israel has special privileges; hence responsibilities inevitably follow. A chosen people elects spiritual responsibilities, and when they choose to turn away from God their doom follows. Zephaniah's warning left no room for misunderstanding, particularly on the part of Israel's leaders.

A Key Verse.—;In the following verse, 3:8, we have a transition between the denunciations, threats, and warnings that have gone before and the ideal picture which follows. Not only so, but the verse is important as a check to our interpretation of the book. In a word, it is a key. In my interpretation of Zephaniah I have assumed that the prophet warns Judah and the other nations of near destruction in terms of the great Day of the Lord, which was centuries removed from Zephaniah's time and, in fact, is still future. In the verse under consideration that interpretation seems to be borne out. The Lord addresses Himself to the righteous, apparently of Zephaniah's own generation, and tells them of the great day in which God will pour out His indignation and fiery anger upon the kingdoms of the earth. To Latter-day Saints it is clear from the verses immediately following that this judgment is to take place in the present dispensation, since they refer to the gathering of Israel:

Therefore, wait ye for Me, saith the Lord,

Until the day that I rise up to testify;

For My determination is to gather nations,

To assemble kingdoms,

To pour out upon them Mine indignation,

All the heat of My wrath;

For with the fire of my zeal

The whole earth shall be consumed. (3:8)

A Vision of the Latter Days.—;Zephaniah, like so many of the prophets, finds it hard indeed to see only the gloomy and evil side of his people. Idealistic as he is, he looks also for the good. Not all of Israel are to be destroyed. There will still exist in the centuries to come a righteous remnant with whom God can work and bring to pass His righteous purposes in the earth. Since the prophet has warned his people in terms of the world judgment of the latter days, he considers it only just to hold out to them the rosy and beautiful picture of gathered and redeemed Israel of the same era. If it does not impress the wicked and cause their reform, it will at least comfort the righteous and show them that their lives and work will not have been in vain.

For then [^14] will I turn to the peoples

A pure language, [^15]

That they may all call upon the name of the Lord,

To serve him unitedly.

From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia

Shall they bring My suppliants,

Even the daughter of My dispersed,

As Mine offering. (3:9, 10)

The prophet then shows that the remnant of Israel will be ashamed for their doings, their iniquities, and deceitful ways. As an afflicted and poor people they shall take refuge in the Lord. Finally, the prophet bursts into a paean of song and rejoicing over the redeemed Israel, whose Lord is in the midst of her:

Sing, O daughter of Zion,

Shout, O Israel;

Rejoice and exult with all the heart,

O daughter of Jerusalem.

The Lord hath taken away thy judgments,

He hath cast out thine enemy;

The King of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee;

Thou shalt not fear evil any more.

In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem:

'Fear thou not;

O Zion, let not thy hands be slack.

The Lord thy God is in the midst of thee,

A Mighty One who will save;

He will rejoice over thee with joy,

He will be silent in His love, [^16]

He will joy over thee with singing.'

I will gather them that are far from the appointed season, who are of thee,

That hast borne the burden of reproach. [^17]

Behold, at that time

I will deal with all thy oppressors;

And I will save the lame,

And gather the outcast;

And I will make them to be a praise and a name,

Whose shame hath been in all the earth.

At that time will I bring you in,

And at that time will I gather you;

For I will make you to be a name and a praise

Among all the peoples of the earth,

When I turn your captivity before your eyes,

Saith the Lord. (3:14-20)

Zephaniah saw our day and beyond. In it he both suffered and rejoiced. He suffered in spirit because of the desolation and destruction which he saw, but he was able to use this as a warning and threat to his own people. In the redemption and final blessings of Israel he saw a ray of hope to extend to Judah. No prophet has written more clearly or vigorously of the Day of the Lord. Zephaniah must be added to the list of prophets who give us a grave warning of disaster.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] An early Christian Father.
[^2] It will be recalled that Brigham Young was territorial governor of Utah.
[^3] The year 590 B. C. is undoubtedly nearer the time of Jerusalem's fall than 586 B. C., the date usually given. This conclusion is based on statements made in the Book of Mormon.
[^4] George Adam Smith, The Book of the Twelve Minor Prophets (New and Rev. Ed.), II, 215. For a somewhat different view see W. O. E. Oesterley, A History of Israel, II, chs. VII and VIII.
[^5] See Amos 4:6-11; Mal. 3:7-12
[^6] See Hag. 2:7 in Authorized Version.
[^7] The Latin version of the Scriptures, mainly the work of St. Jerome (circa A. D. 400).
[^8] See Hymn No. 158, "Come, O Thou King of Kings", Latter-day Saint Hymns, Deseret News, Salt Lake City, 1927.
[^9] Note the obvious reference here to Mal. 4:2.
[^10] Cf. Luke 2:2, 26 and I Kings 8:10, 11.
[^11] See Oesterley, op. cit., II, 84, 131; Ezra 6:6-10; 7:11-22; 8:24-34; II Macc. 3:2.
[^12] Lev. 6:24-29; Num. 6:6; 19:11-16, 22.
[^13] C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament (The Twelve Minor Prophets), II, 204 f.
[^14] Smith, op. cit., II, 246.
[^15] H. G. Mitchell, "Haggai," in International Critical Commentary, p. 78.
[^16] See II Sam. 7:12-16; Isa. 16:5; Jer. 23:5; 30:9; Ezek. 34:23, 24; 37:24-28. Some of these passages, in the opinion of the author, are commonly misinterpreted in our time.
[^17] For the full account of the dedication see Ezra 6:14-18.
