Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Twenty Nine

HAGGAI, PROPHET OF THE SECOND TEMPLE

The Prophet and His Times.—;Nothing is known of Haggai other than what is recorded in Ezra and in the prophecy under his name. To be sure there are Jewish and Christian legends centering about him, but these seem to have little or no foundation. Some of the Jewish traditions suggest that Haggai was a man of mature, if not advanced, years on his return to Palestine. And Augustine tells us that both Haggai and Zechariah prophesied while in Babylon of the return from captivity, before being released from exile. Certain other Christian traditions of early date state that Haggai was born in Babylonia but returned to Jerusalem as a young man. Here he lived to see the Temple completed, died, and was buried near the priests, being of a priestly family. Hesychius, [^1] in fact, informs us that he was of the tribe of Levi. Certain psalm titles in the Greek, Latin, and Syriac versions of the Psalter carry the name of Haggai.

There has been considerable speculation as to the meaning of Haggai's name. Perhaps the more general opinion is that it means Festal, coming from a Hebrew root meaning feast or festival.

According to the superscription of the book, Haggai's four prophecies were delivered "in the second year of Darius the King." This can be no other than Darius I (Hystaspis), who ruled over the Persian Empire, which included Palestine, from 522 B. C. to 486 B. C. If the time of the King's accession to the throne is correct, we can date Haggai's prophecies during the latter part of the year 520 B. C. They were delivered on the first day of the sixth month (our September), (1:1) the twenty-first day of the seventh month (October), (2:1) and twice on the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month (December). (2:10, 20)

The historical situations that led to the prophetic activities of Haggai are briefly these: In the year 539 B. C. the Babylonian empire capitulated to Cyrus, King of Persia. The Jews who were in captivity in Babylon then came under the jurisdiction of the Persians. Cyrus seems to have been one of the most broadminded and tolerant rulers of the ancient world, and for that matter one of the most enlightened rulers who ever lived. He did what he could to conciliate the nations he conquered, instead of oppressing and humiliating them; he encouraged his subjects to worship according to their usual customs; he permitted captives in exile to return to their homes, and this privilege he possibly extended to the Jews, though there are apparent discrepancies in our sources which thus cause a division in the opinions of scholars. It will be remembered that at least one hundred and sixty years previous to 539 B. C., Isaiah the prophet had predicted the rebuilding of Jerusalem and the laying of the foundation of the Temple under Cyrus:

[The Lord] saith of Cyrus: 'He is My shepherd,

And shall perform all My pleasure';

Even saying of Jerusalem: 'She shall be built';

And to the temple: 'Thy foundation shall be laid.

Thus saith the Lord to His anointed,

To Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden,

To subdue nations before him,

And to loose the loins of kings;

To open the doors before him,

And that the gates may not be shut. (Isa. 44:28; 45:1)

According to the Book of Ezra, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to issue a decree permitting the Jews to return to Palestine and build a house to the Lord. And furthermore, the Jews were to be helped in every way with material assistance. (Ezra 1:1-4) Upwards of fifty thousand persons are reported to have returned under the leadership of Joshua, the high priest, and Zerubbabel, their civil ruler. (Ezra 2:64, 65)

They erected the altar for burnt offerings and laid the foundation of the Temple. (Ezra 3:2, 3, 10) This return from Babylon would seem to have taken place about 537 B. C. As the story in Ezra seems to imply, the Jews, after laying the foundation of the Temple, were interrupted in their work by enemies until the reign of Darius. (Ezra 4:1-5)

Following the death of Cyrus in 529 B. C., his son, Cambyses,

ascended the throne and reigned until 522 B. C. Cambyses had no son, and there arose a certain Gautama, who claimed to be the son of Cyrus. After holding the rulership for seven months, he was assassinated, and Darius Hystaspis came to the throne. This brings us down to the time when Haggai the prophet steps upon the scene, as recorded in his prophecy.

This story of the return of the Jews in the days of Cyrus sounds plausible enough in the light of the Book of Ezra, but when we begin the study of Haggai, certain difficulties appear. These we shall notice somewhat as we consider the book, though a full solution of them is not at present possible.

The Book of Haggai and Its Contents.—;The Book of Haggai is a very small one, containing only thirty-eight verses divided between two chapters. The Hebrew text is in fairly good order, though it contains a number of corruptions. The style of the book is by no means distinguished for its excellence. Some scholars have condemned it as being "crabbed" and "threadbare," but this criticism is rather severe on the prophet, whose main desire was to get his people in a frame of mind to build the Temple. He has a certain pathos and vehemence when reproving the Jews for their remissness and exhorting them in the performance of their duty. Vivacity is also given to the delivery by the frequent use of interrogatives. In the opening verse of Haggai we are given to understand that the prophet uttered the short addresses in the book, and there is little doubt that he did so. But it would seem very probable that these are only brief resumes of what he told his people. A prophet whose enthusiasm is such that he rouses a dilatory people to build a temple would not likely be limited to such short statements. Either this is true or else we may conclude that the book contains only the formal revelations of the Lord to Haggai. Upon them the prophet based his exhortations and preaching to the people. After their reception, these short revelations would be written down and accompanied with a few brief historical notes. In this form they have come down to us.

We may consider the content of the book according to the following outline:

The superscription (1:1).

I. A divine rebuke for religious indifference. The Jewish people are reproached for their selfishness and exhorted to build a house of the Lord (1:2-11).

II. The Lord's rebuke effective: building operations proceed on the Temple (1:12-15).

III. The people exhorted to be strong, and the spirit of the Lord will attend them. The Temple to be filled with glory (2:1-9).

IV. The people to be blessed on completion of the Temple. Haggai points out that the unclean is more contagious than the clean and that offerings cannot atone for his people's indifference. Indifference will result in calamity, and zeal will assure their prosperity (2:10-19).

V. Instruction of the Lord to Zerubbabel and the divine promise to choose him (2:20-23). Verses 21-23 offer difficulties and are to be compared and considered with verses 6-9.

The superscription makes plain that the words of the Lord through Haggai are addressed to Zerubbabel, the governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the high priest. These men, as the civil and religious heads of the Jews, would naturally be informed of the Lord's desire first, and they would help spread the message to their people. There is an interesting point, I believe, in the fact that the word of the Lord came through Haggai and not through Joshua, the high priest. This fact would tend to show that Haggai held the Melchizedek Priesthood and had notably higher functions to perform in relation to Israel's religion than did Joshua, who, as high priest, had jurisdiction over the Aaronic Priesthood in the Hebrew Church. Zerubbabel ruled over his people as the pechah or Persian governor. He was in civil functions the Brigham Young of his day. [^2]

If Zerubbabel and Joshua had led their people from Babylonia in the days of Cyrus, they would have been in Palestine seventeen years when Haggai's prophecy was made known to them (537 B. C.-520 B. C.). There are those who deny that there was a return of the Jews under Cyrus. And it does seem strange that the Jews should return in 537 B. C., some nineteen years before the completion of the seventy years' captivity predicted by Jeremiah. (Jer. 25:11, 12; 29:10) If the city of Jerusalem fell to the Babylonians in 590 B. C., [^3] the return from the captivity could have been expected in 520 B. C., two years after Haggai's prophecy. (See chapters on Daniel where a different view is adopted relative to the captivity.) Yet Haggai is silent in respect to a future return, and neither does he say anything about a return of the Jews in the days of Cyrus. Some authorities claim that Haggai 2:18 proves there had been no temple foundation laid prior to 520 B. C. This, of course, makes it difficult to interpret the stories given in Ezra. Sir George Adam Smith says:

We may concede that in Haggai and Zechariah there is nothing which implies that the Jews had made any beginning to build the Temple before the start recorded by Haggai in 520. The one passage, Haggai 2:18, cited to prove this, is ambiguous, and many scholars claim it as a fixture of that date for the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month of 520. At the same time, and even granting that the latter interpretation of Haggai 2:18 is correct, there is nothing in Haggai or Zechariah to make it impossible that the foundation had been laid some years before, but abandoned in face of Samaritan obstruction, as alleged in Ezra 3:8-11. [^4]

The problem in relation to the laying of the foundations of the Temple and the return of the Jews are admittedly difficult. We have to admit that in the absence of more precise data concerning them, few conclusions can be said to be other than tentative in nature.

In the first prophecy, delivered by Haggai (1:2-11) in September, 520 B. C., (our reckoning) the Lord first rebukes His people for not building the Temple by telling them that they rationalize and excuse themselves in saying, "The time is not come, the time that the Lord's house should be built." In so saying they expose their selfishness, for the Lord reminds them that they live in relatively fine houses while His house lies waste:

Is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in your ceiled houses, while this house lieth waste? (1:4)

The fact that the people had been able to build fine, cedarpaneled homes was a sufficient rebuttal to their untenable grounds of excuse. They are reminded that, because they have neglected the Lord's House, things have not been going well with them:

Take stock of your conduct.

Ye have sown much, and brought in little,

Ye eat, but ye have not enough,

Ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink,

Ye clothe yourselves, but there is none warm;

And he that earneth wages earneth wages

For a bag with holes. (1:5, 6)

The Lord's people have not had spiritual discernment enough to detect that there is a relation between their conduct and His blessings upon them. Consequently, He must bring them into remembrance by the hand of a prophet. Haggai, like Amos at an earlier time and Malachi at a later, must remind Israel that God is calling her to repentance through natural agencies. [^5] Men today raise questions over these views of the prophets, but, for all that, calamities can and sometimes do turn men to search their hearts and seek unto their God.

The people are instructed to go up to the hill-country and bring wood to build the Lord's house in which He would take pleasure and be glorified. The promise is implied, though in a negative way, that if they build the Temple, their former troubles will be done away with, the earth will produce, and the labors of their hands will come to something.

Although the Lord is doubtless highly pleased when he finds men and women spiritually sensitive enough to do the right thing without being expressly told, nevertheless, it is comforting and satisfying to Him if only they will do it at His express command. When Haggai's word went out, the rebuke was accepted by the leaders and people of Israel, and in three weeks they were hard at work. The Lord was pleased and sent through His prophet these words: "I am with you, saith the Lord." One is able to read a great many things between the lines in this account of Haggai (1:12-15). Much preaching, exhortation, and organizing must have gone on among the people. It was the task of Haggai, Joshua, and Zerubbabel to warm up the hearts of their flock and prepare them for the task at hand. Enthusiasm and hard work accomplished wonders.

Work on the Temple went on apace for nearly a month, and the construction was far enough advanced for the people to realize more vividly than ever before that the new building could not compare with the former structure of Solomon. This state of affairs must have caused them many a heartache, for most men are disinclined to admit that the work of their hands is inferior to others. (See Ezra 3:12) Perhaps the first wave of their enthusiasm began to pass as they contemplated the situation. But whatever their state, the time was ripe for more encouragement, all the more so since the twenty-first day of October (our reckoning) would be the seventh day of the feast of tabernacles (Lev. 23:34 ff.), a day of great rejoicing in normal times. The coming of this great festival in the face of a miserable harvest could not fail to call up in their minds their low estate in comparison to the abundant blessings of a former generation. But the Lord did not forget them. On the twentieth day of the month He spoke to Haggai the prophet, saying:

Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to the remnant of the people, saying: Who is left among you that saw this house in its former glory? and how do ye see it now? is not such a one as nothing in your eyes? Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the Lord; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the Lord, and work; for I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts. The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt have I established, and My spirit abideth among you; fear ye not. (2:2-5)

What a wonderful message! Admitting the poverty of the latest building in comparison with the former one, the Lord exhorts His people to be courageous in facing adversity. Be strong . . . work . . . for I am with you. This message, effective in the days of the Second Temple, could well be taken to heart today. What can a people not do if they are courageous and strong, working hard, with the consciousness that God is with them!

Haggai continues the Lord's message in lines that have excited wide comment and discussion:

For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the precious things of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts. Mine is the silver, and Mine is the gold, saith the Lord of hosts. The glory of this latter house shall be greater than that of the former, saith the Lord of hosts; and in this place will I give peace, saith the Lord of host. (2:6-9)

The usual translation of the above clause, "And the precious things of all nations shall come," is "And the desire of all nations shall come." [^6] The word "desire" has been personified by numerous commentators and identified as the Christ. Hence we ought to consider the whole passage quite carefully. If it is actually a prophecy concerning the Christ, we should give it the emphasis it deserves.

One group of interpreters holds that the passage will be ultimately fulfilled at the second coming of Christ. The shaking of the heavens, the earth, the sea, the dry land, and all nations would appear to fit the general devastation predicted by the prophets prior to the Messiah's coming. Then the Lord will come in glory to His Temple as spoken of in Malachi 3:1. Those who give this explanation are, of course, hard pressed to reconcile it with the plain fact that the temple of Haggai's day or Herod's reconstruction of it, for that matter, was destroyed long ago. Obviously our Lord could not return to a non-existent temple and fill it with glory.

Rabbi Akiba, who lived in the fourth century A. D., gave the following interpretation (paraphrase) of the passage:

For a little I will give the kingdom of Israel, after our desolation, and after the kingdom, behold I will shake heaven and earth, and Messiah shall come.

With this interpretation the Latin Vulgate [^7] is in essential agreement. It is not surprising, therefore, that the passage has for long been regarded as one of the principal prophecies relative to either the First or Second Advent of the Redeemer.

In our literature we find a beautiful poem by Elder Parley P. Pratt dealing with the Savior's Second Advent, which makes an allusion to Him as Haggai's "desire of nations." It

has been set to music and is one of our favorite hymns. [^8] We quote the first verse:

Come, O Thou King of kings—;

We've waited long for Thee,—;

With healing in Thy wings, [^9]

To set Thy people free;

Come, Thou desire of nations, come,

Let Israel now be gathered home.

Another interpretation given the passage is that the shaking of the nations and coming of the "desire of nations" has reference to the coming of Christ in the flesh, to His teaching in the Temple, and the preaching of the Gospel through which the kingdom of God was established. There are variations of this view, but the fact remains that they are unsatisfactory if only for the reason that Christ in His appearance in the Temple (Herod's) did not come in His glory. Certainly glory did not attend His appearance in the Temple in the sense that God's glory filled Solomon's temple. [^10]

Still another interpretation, the one followed by the author and reflected in the translation given above, is this: The passage is obviously intended by the Lord to be a message of comfort to His people, who felt dismayed and downcast because the temple they were building was inferior to the one built by Solomon. He says that the one built by them shall also be filled with splendid things. Hence the words:

I will fill this house with glory [splendor], saith the Lord of hosts. Mine is the silver, and Mine the gold, saith the Lord of hosts. The glory [splendor] of this latter house shall be greater than that of the former . . . (2:7-9)

The context is, therefore, in harmony with our translation "and the precious things of all nations shall come" as against the ordinary rendering of "and the desire of all nations shall come." The Hebrew word chemdath, usually translated "desire," means "longing" or "object of longing." It is a feminine word, embracing neuter function, and may be rendered as a collective, "desirable things." The verb associated with the noun is a masculine plural which causes some grammarians to question whether the word has the correct vowels. By changing the vowels—;it is not necessary to change the consonants—;we have a plural word, chamudhoth, "precious things," which agrees with the number of the verb. The ancient Greek and Italic versions also support such a reading. The reader can readily see how difficult it sometimes is for a translator, who must be an interpreter, to make an adequate translation of some scriptural passages.

It is possible that the shaking of the heavens, earth, sea, and dry land referred to in the passage has figurative reference to political shakeups that would cause the nations to bring their riches to the Temple. We know that shakeups among the nations did occur, and there is evidence that precious things were given to the Temple. [^11] These verses, dealing with the shaking of the heavens and the earth, should be compared with Haggai 2:21, 22.

On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month (December, our reckoning), 520 B. C., the Lord gave another revelation to Haggai to be delivered to His people. It was now three months since the people had started to build the Temple.

The revelation begins very abruptly, as if the Lord were interrupting an opponent who feels that he has been unjustly dealt with. And we should keep in mind the probability that a number of the Israelites were weak in the faith and given to discouragement. They no doubt felt that the Lord had given them little or no substantial token of His approval since the building of the Temple. Their interest in the enterprise was beginning to wane again. He breaks in with a defense that would readily be understood by His hearers:

Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Ask now the priests for instruction, saying: If one bear hallowed flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any food, shall it become holy? And the priests answered and said: 'No.' Then said Haggai: 'If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean?' And the priests answered and said: 'It shall be unclean.' Then answered Haggai and said: 'So is this people, and so is this nation before Me, saith the Lord; and is so every work of their hands; and that which they offer there is unclean.' (2:11-14)

The lesson here taught by the Lord was based on observances in force under the Law of Moses. [^12] The rebuke was not intended for the people as they were now engaged in the work of building the Temple, but as they had been, and was designed to warn them against falling back into their old state. Professor Keil presents an explanation of the passage that is worth passing on to the reader:

The nation, in its attitude towards the Lord, resembles, on the one hand, a man who carries holy flesh in the lappet of his garment, and on the other hand, a man who has become unclean through touching a corpse. "Israel also possesses a sanctuary in the midst of its land,—mely, the place which Jehovah has chosen for His own abode, and favored with many glorious promises. But just as no kind of food, neither bread nor vegetables, neither wine or oil, is sanctified by the fact that a man touches it with his sanctified garment, so will all this not be rendered holy by the fact that it is planted in the soil of the land which surrounds and encloses the sanctuary of Jehovah. For though the land itself becomes a holy land in consequence, it cannot spread this holiness any further, nor communicate it to what grows upon it. All that Israel raises on its holy land, whether corn, wine, or oil, remains unholy or common. No special blessing rests upon the fruits of this land, on account of the holiness of the land itself, so as of necessity to produce fruitfulness as its result; nor, on the other hand, does it in itself communicate any curse. But if, as experience shows, a curse is resting notwithstanding upon the productions of this land, it arises from the fact that they are unclean because Israel has planted them. For Israel is utterly unclean on account of its neglect of the house of Jehovah, like a man who has become unclean through touching a corpse. Everything that Israel takes hold of, or upon which it lays its hand, everything that it plants and cultivates, is from the very first affected with the curse of uncleanness; and consequently even the sacrifices which it offers there upon the altar of Jehovah are unclean." (Koehler) [^13]

The prophet himself explains the object of the words in verses 15-19 by pointing out that the failure of Israel's crops and the curse that has hitherto prevailed are the Lord's punishment for unfaithfulness, but he promises that from that time forward God's blessings shall again rest upon them. Israel's slate was, in effect, wiped clean; what counted was their future conduct.

The Lord gave another revelation to Haggai on the same day, December 24, 520 B. C. (our reckoning). With it the book is concluded:

And the word of the Lord came the second time unto Haggai in the four and twentieth day of the month, saying: 'Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying: I will shake the heavens and the earth; and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shall come down, everyone by the sword of his brother. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, My servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the Lord, and will make thee as a signet; for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts.' (2:20-23)

This prophecy was intended for Zerubbabel alone. The "shaking" referred to should be compared with Haggai 2:6, 7, already discussed. If the latter had figurative reference to a political shakeup, we should expect the same thing here

The wars and mutual destruction of the Gentiles, of which Haggai speaks, are doubtless those revolts of races and provinces which threatened to disrupt the Persian Empire on the accession of Darius in 521. Persians, Babylonians, Medes, Armenians, the Sacae and others rose together or in succession. In four years Darius quelled them all and reorganized his empire before the Jews finished their Temple. Like other Syrian governors Zerubbabel remained his lieutenant and submissive tributary. [^14]

Such is the explanation of the "shaking" and "overthrow" of the "throne of kingdoms" by one noted authority. If it is not correct, we must admit that the passage is too cryptic and difficult for us to explain at the present time. Especially is that true in view of the words: In that day . . . will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, My Servant, and . . . make thee as a signet, for I have chosen thee . . . If this scripture and Haggai 2:6, 7 refer to the latter days, as some have insisted, they are still difficult to explain satisfactorily.

The writer believes that the whole passage is a tribute by the Lord to Zerubbabel for his excellent work in speeding up the building of the Temple. This civil ruler had rendered such service that the Lord designates him as a signet. A signet or seal-ring was highly regarded by an oriental for it was engraved and used by the owner when signing letters or official documents. (See I Kings 21:8)

It represented him, and since at any time it might be needed for this purpose, he rarely parted with it, but wore it, either on a cord about his neck (Gen. 28:18), or on one of the fingers of his right hand (Jer. 22:24), everywhere. Thus the signet came to be a symbol for one's most precious possession. (Cf. Jer. 22:24 and S. of S. 8:6). Such is its significance in this connection, as appears from the causal clause, for thee have I chosen. [^15]

Some scholars think that in this passage Haggai has revived the doctrine of an ideal king and has identified Zerubbabel with the long-expected son of David. In other words,

the Messianic promise made to David [^16] was transferred to Zerubbabel and his family among David's descendants, and would be fulfilled in his person in just the same way as the promise given to David. "The fulfillment," says one scholar, "culminated in Jesus Christ, the son of David and descendant of Zerubbabel (Matt. 1:12; Luke 3:27), in whom Zerubbabel was made the signet-ring of Jehovah."

A lot of nonsense has been written about Zerubbabel and Israel's Messianic hope because of the reference to the "signet" as the Lord's "servant." Occasionally the author is tempted to give a different translation of the latter part of the passage in question. By making a different word division of the present Hebrew text where the word "signet" occurs and making another slight alteration, we can translate as follows:

In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, My servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the Lord, and will make thee a power and will uphold thee; for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts. (Cf. Isa. 41:10)

This gives good sense, but unfortunately the reconstruction is problematical.

It is a mistake on the part of commentators to say, as some of them have, that Haggai has no place among the prophets in the real sense of the word. Haggai met a critical situation and succeeded in getting his people to do their religious duty. The building of the Temple helped foster among his people a love for God and the desire to serve Him. Even apart from this, it is a mistake to judge the man adversely with such a small text at our disposal. Argument from silence is always dangerous.

The Mormon people ought to feel a keen sense of sympathy for Haggai, for we, too, have had the problem of building temples after seeing the Nauvoo Temple destroyed by our enemies. In the forty years during which the Salt Lake Temple was building, our people had to be repeatedly urged and encouraged to raise the means for its construction. Nor should we forget the St. George, Logan, and Manti temples built during the same period. We can appreciate, therefore, the task that faced Haggai and his compatriots in building the Second Temple. Our knowledge of the real use for which temples are built helps us to realize that Haggai had high religious aspirations and did not have a narrow utilitarian point of view in speaking as he did. The dedication of the Salt Lake Temple in 1893, with the fine religious enthusiasm that prevailed, had its counterpart in the dedication of the Second Temple, which occurred, according to Ezra 6:15, on the "third day of the month Adar (March, our reckoning) which was in the sixth year (516 B. C.) of the reign of Darius the king." [^17]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The angelic band of horsemen (1:7-17). Judah's hostile neighbors to be cut off; the preservation of Jerusalem (9:1-8). The wonderful deliverance of Judah and Jerusalem from all the nations that come against them in the latter days (12:1-9). Concerning the return of Zerubbabel and Joshua see chapter on Haggai.
[^2] The four horns and the four smiths (1:18-21). Prediction of the Savior's entrance into Jerusalem on an ass; His dominion and redemptive power (9:9-11. Cf. Matthew 21:5; John 12:14, 15). The spirit of grace, supplication, and mourning to come upon the Jews because of the part taken by them in the crucifixion of our Lord (12:10-14 Cf. D. & C. 45:51-53). C. H. H. Wright, Zechariah and His Prophecies, 2nd Ed., Intro., XVI.
[^3] The man with the measuring line (2:1-13). The eventual power of Israel over the Gentiles; the exaltation of God's people (9:12-17). Fountain for sin and uncleanness (baptism?) to be opened up to the Jews (13:1). Zech. 7:1.
[^4] Joshua the high priest bears the sins of himself and of his people (3:1-10) Exhortation to ask the Lord for blessings and not rely on false oracles (10:1, 2). Idols to be cut off and false prophets to cease their activities (13:2-5). See also the parallel in Luke 11:51. In this passage the words "son of Barachiah" do not occur.
[^5] The golden candlestick and the two olive trees (4:1-14. Cf. Rev. 11:3,4). The Lord to visit, strengthen, gather, and redeem His people; the pride of wicked nations to be brought low (10:3-12). The Savior to explain the wounds in His hands (13:6. Cf. D. & C. 45:51, 52). For a good account of the various views held in respect to the unity and date of Zechariah see F. C. Eiselen, The Prophetic Books of the Old Testament, II, 558-581.
[^6] The flying roll (5:1-4). A prelude to judgment (11:1-3). The fate of the sheep after the death of the shepherd; the Lord reclaims the remnant refined as with fire (13:7-9). The Jewish Publication Society translation of Zechariah prints all of the first part as prose and the second part, with the exception of the last six verses, as poetry. Some other modern translations vary somewhat from this procedure.
[^7] The woman in the ephah (5:5-11). Allegory of the good shepherd (11:4-14). The final conflict and triumph of the Lord's work (14:1-21). E. Henderson, The Book of the Twelve Minor Prophets, 2nd Ed., p. 365.
[^8] The four chariots (6:1-8). Allegory of the foolish shepherd (11:15-17). The horn seems to be a symbol of power.
[^9] The Hebrew may also mean "engravers," "artificers," "craftsmen," etc. The word "carpenters," used in the Authorized Version, is borrowed from the Septuagint.
[^10] The headdress is that worn by eminent men. It may be a turban, for the Hebrew word comes from a root meaning "to wrap," "to wind around." The adjective following the word indicates that the turban was to be a clean one.
[^11] D.H.C., VI, 253.
[^12] See also D. & C. 77:15.
[^13] See Gen. 10:10; 11:2.
[^14] This crown in the Hebrew is plural. Doubtless one splendid crown is meant, consisting of several gold and silver twists wound together, or rising one above another, as in Revelation 19:12.
[^15] Little or nothing is known of this place.
[^16] Probably the Euphrates river is meant.
[^17] Zech. 14:20, 21. See the Prophet Joseph Smith's allusion to this passage in D.H.C., II, 357, or in Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 93.
