Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Thirty

ZECHARIAH, PROPHET AND SEER OF ISRAEL'S RESTORATION

The prophet's Life and Times.—;Zechariah, whose name means "Jehovah remembers," is said in the superscription to be the "son of Berechiah, son of Iddo." At least twenty-nine different persons mentioned in the Old Testament bear the same name. In the Book of Nehemiah there occurs the following notice:

Now these are the priests and the Levites who came up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: . . . Iddo . . . These were the chiefs of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua. (Neh. 12:1, 4, 7)

This passage shows that Zechariah's family was a priestly one that returned from exile with Zerubbabel and Joshua about 537 B. C. [^1] The Book of Nehemiah further states (12:16) that in the high-priesthood of Joiakim, the son of Jeshua, the head of the house of Zechariah. If this be our prophet, which seems to me quite likely, he was probably a mere youth in 520 B. C., when he was called to the ministry. Ezra 5:1 and 6:14 speak of Zechariah as "the son of Iddo."

Zechariah appears to have been still young when called to fulfil the office of a prophet. It is, indeed, a mistake to suppose him to be specially referred to in chap. 2:4 as "this young man," though that view has been taken by many commentators. Although, however, that passage ought to be explained otherwise, the youth of Zechariah may be fairly inferred from the fact that his grandfather, Iddo, is mentioned as a person of some importance in the days of Joshua the high priest, having been one of the priests who returned with Zerubbabel and Joshua from Babylon, and that Zechariah is spoken of as having prophesied during the high priesthood of Joshua, most probably in the lifetime of his grandfather Iddo; while in the days of Joiakim, the successor of Joshua in the high priest's office (Neh. 12:10), Zechariah is mentioned as being then the head of the family. His father Berechiah must, therefore, have been already dead. But if Zechariah entered on his prophetic work during the lifetime of his grandfather, he must have been young at the time; and his grandfather being at that period the head of the family, Zechariah was naturally termed "the son of Iddo". [^2]

The Aramaic of the passages in Ezra mentioned above shows that Zechariah took a part with Haggai in instigating the work of building the Second Temple. One of these passages reads as follows:

And the elders of the Jews were building and prospering, through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they built and finished it, by the commandment of the God of Israel, and by the decree of Cyrus and Darius, and Artaxerxes, king of Persia. (Ezra 6:14)

An examination of Zechariah 6:9-15, one of the undated prophecies of the book, would seem to indicate that Zechariah prophesied even earlier than when assisting Haggai to persuade the Jews to build the Temple. The first of Zechariah's dated prophecies, as the superscription indicates, comes from "the eighth month, in the second year of Darius." This is equivalent to November, 520 B. C. The latest dated prophecy is the ninth month of the fourth year of Darius (December, 518 B. C., our reckoning). [^3] None of the prophecies following Zechariah 7 are dated.

No one knows the length of Zechariah's ministry. The ancient and widespread tradition that he lived to a ripe old age may possibly have had some historical basis, of which we now know nothing. Beyond what has been indicated, we are entirely dependent upon the book under his name.

Jewish and Christian traditions of him are, as those of other prophets, not to be trusted. According to Jewish tradition, Haggai and Zechariah were members of the Great Synagogue, to whose labors the Jews credit the reorganization of the Jewish Church and the arrangement of the canon of scripture. The accounts of the early Christian writers of the fourth and fifth centuries are very plainly legendary. Zechariah is said to have foretold to Salathiel the birth of Zerubbabel, and to have made known to him his son's future career. He prophesied to Cyrus the victory which he afterwards obtained over Croesus, as well as the accomplishments of Cyrus at Jerusalem. He died in Judea in his extreme old age and was buried in a tomb near that of the Prophet Haggai. Another legend states that Zechariah was the son of Berechia, mentioned in Isaiah 8:2. As a matter of fact, Isaiah speaks of Zechariah "the son of Jeberechiah." Hesychius states that the prophet belonged to the tribe of Levi and was born in Gilead.

The Greek, Old Latin, Vulgate, and Syriac versions of the Old Testament credit Zechariah with being a poet as well as a prophet, associating him with the Prophet Haggai in the authorship of several parts of the Book of Psalms.

A statement made by our Lord in the New Testament concerning the purported death of Zechariah "between the temple and the altar" should be discussed. The passage in question occurs in Matthew 23:35 and reads thus:

That on you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah, son of Barachiah, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. [^4]

The statement as it stands seems, on the highest possible authority, to indicate that the prophet whom we are discussing was slain by assassins in the court of the Temple. However, few scholars, even the most conservative ones, at the present time consider the reading "Barachiah" to be correct, not because the best Old Testament manuscripts do not contain the reading, but because some writer or copyist mistakenly inserted the name. The reasons for this opinion are as follows: Sometime during the reign of Joash, king of Judah, the monarch gave command that one Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada, be slain. The account states:

And the Spirit of God clothed [came upon] Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest; and he stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus says God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the Lord. (2 Chron. 24:20, 1)

This event took place about 798 B. C., several hundred years before the time of Zechariah the Prophet. The manner of the death of Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada, fills in all respects the description given by our Lord in Matthew. Only the name "Barachiah" gives us pause. Had Zechariah the prophet been murdered, some allusion would no doubt have been made to the deed in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah,

or in the prophecies of Malachi, or the writings of Josephus. It seems highly improbable that two prophets having the same name should have perished in the same manner and place, one before the days of the Exile and the other after it. There is also the possibility that Berechiah may also have been a second name of Jehoiada. Then it ought not to be forgotten that St. Jerome (circa A. D. 400), in his commentary on Matthew 23:35, points out that in the Gospel of the Nazarenes "son of Jehoiada" was found instead of "son of Barachiah." That a copyist should mistakenly insert "Barachiah" in the mouth of the Savior is no more to be wondered at than the error found in the Targum on Lamentations 2:20, where Zechariah the son of Jehoiada is called "Zechariah the son of Iddo, the high priest and faithful prophet." It is further thought by many that our Lord alludes in His statement first to the cry of Abel's blood from the ground (Genesis 4:10), and secondly to the dying prayer of vengeance of Zechariah the son of Jehoiada, who cried out, "Lord look upon it, and require it." (2 Chron. 24:22)

Such is the case usually given against our prophet being the one assassinated "between the temple and the altar." Natural curiosity on the part of every person as to the final end of Zechariah may not be satisfied in the light of the evidence given

The times of Zechariah are those we have already mentioned in connection with Haggai. The Jews were under the domination of the Persians, who had permitted them to return and build the Temple. They faltered, however, and became poor and despondent. They lost their initial enthusiasm, and not until Haggai and Zechariah preached to them and revived their spirits did they get the Temple under way. It was under these conditions that Zechariah did his work.

The Content and Literary Characteristics of Zechariah.—; The Book of Zechariah seems to fall naturally into two parts: chapters one to eight and chapters nine to fourteen. The record opens with an urgent appeal by the prophet for his people to turn from their evil ways and seek the Lord. If they fail to do this, they may suffer a fate similar to that of their fathers. About three months after he delivered this message, that is to say, on the twenty-fourth day of February, 519 B. C. (our reckoning), the Lord vouchsafed to Zechariah in a single night eight symbolical visions, the meaning of which was explained by a heavenly visitor. These deal with the destruction of the powers that have scattered Israel, the redemption of Israel, the cleansing of the Lord's people from their iniquities, the raising up of a man called "Branch" (who has been variously interpreted as (1) the Messiah, (2) Zerubbabel, and (3) a king by the name of David of the stock of the ancient king having the same name) to build a temple of the Lord and bear rule on his throne, and the encouragement of the Jews under Zerubbabel to continue their work of rebuilding the Second Temple. Unfortunately for us now, many allusions and symbols escape us which were probably clear to the ancient Jews and easily understood by them. Added to this difficulty is the involved and redundant style of the visions, the loose syntax, the apparent ommission of words and some serious disarrangements of the text. Chapter Seven is occupied with replies to questions relative to certain fasts which the Jews had observed, but which certain persons supposed might no longer be binding after the restoration of their prosperity. Zechariah is commanded to reprove them for their selfish observance of the days appointed for fasting; to call their attention to the weightier matters of the law; and to caution them, by placing before them the rebellious conduct of their fathers and the punishment which had bean dealt them because of it. In Chapter Eight the prophet speaks words of advice, promise, and blessing to his own generation and also foresees the renown of his people in the latter days, when "ten men of all languages of the nations will take hold of the skirt of a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you." (Zech. 8:22)

The second part of Zechariah is mainly apocalyptic in character and consists of a number of loosely connected prophecies dealing with events that lead up to the final triumph of God's kingdom. Judah's hostile neighbors are to be cut off, while the Lord protects His people; the Messiah is to come to speak peace to the nations, to have dominion from sea to sea, and to free prisoners from the pit. The Lord in the latter days will visit, gather, and redeem His people, but the pride of wicked nations shall be brought low. This is followed in Chapter 11:4 ff. by an allegorical description of the Lord's dealings with Israel, the latter's ingratitude, and the resulting judgment. Chapter Twelve opens with an account of a miraculous deliverance of Judah and Jerusalem from destroying nations in the latter days. A description of the spirit of grace, supplication, and mourning on the part of the inhabitants of Jerusalem over "him whom they have pierced" follows. The next chapter (13) points out that a fountain is to be opened up to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and uncleanness; idols are to be cut off and false prophets are to cease their activities; and the people are to ask concerning the wounds in the hands of "him whom they have pierced." (12:10) In the final chapter (14) another account is given of the great assault of the nations on Jerusalem; while standing upon the Mount of Olives, the Lord delivers His people. The mount parts asunder to open up a way for them to escape; the enemy is destroyed with the exception of a remnant who adopt the worship of the Lord.

We append herewith an outline of Zechariah, which may be found useful in studying the book:

The superscription (1:1)

I. Prophecies of exhortation, consolation, and encouragement (1:2-8; 23)

A. Call for Israel to repent (1:2-6)

B. Eight symbolic night visions (1:7-6:8).

C. The symbolic crowning of Joshua the high priest (6:9-15).

D. Israel's fasts versus the weightier matters of the law (7:1-14)

E. Words of advice, promise, and blessing (8:1-19); the renown of the Jews in the latter days (8:20-23).

II. Prophecies concerning the future of the wicked world powers and the eventual triumph of God's kingdom (9:1-14:21).

A. Part one (9:1-11:17).

a. The shepherd's loving care (11:4-6).

b. The people do not appreciate the shepherd (11:7, 8).

c. The good shepherd withdrawn (11:9-14; note especially verse 13 and compare Matthew 27:9, 10).

a. Actions of the foolish shepherd (11:15, 16).

b. A woe pronounced upon the foolish shepherd (11:17).

B. Part two (12:1-14:21).

a. The Lord's deliverance of Jerusalem from the assault of all nations; the Lord to be king over all the earth (14:1-9. Cf. Revelation 11:1-13; D. & C. 45:47-50; 133:20).

b. The felicity of the land (14:10, 11).

c. The fate of the hostile nations (14:12-15).

d. A remnant of the hostile nations to be converted (14:16-19)

e. Judah and Jerusalem to be holy unto the Lord (14:20, 21)

Most scholars are agreed that, in substance, chapters 1 to 8 are to be credited to Zechariah, but that chapters 9 to 14 are not his. Some very good scholars have, however, defended Zechariah's authorship of the whole book, and with them the writer is content to cast his vote. The scholars who hold against Zechariah's authorship of chapters 9-14 are themselves divided between pre-exilic and post-Zecharian theories as to the date of their origin, and fail to supply the name of their author or authors. Their conjectures regarding these chapters are often unconvincing, and it seems apparent in certain instances that they fail to enter into the true spirit of the prophecies. [^5]

The Hebrew text of Zechariah is somewhat unsatisfactory. The corruptions in some cases are small, but they spoil the sense. Dislocations of the text occasionally occur to make our problems greater. The Greek text is often a great help.

The language of Zechariah outside of the visions in the first part of the book, is simple, direct, and pure, which fact reminds one of some of the older prophets. Both parts of the book, in matters of language and style, have much in common, though not so much as to make this fact a strong argument for their unity. There are also decided differences. The first part of the record is not so adorned and poetical as the last part. [^6]

In point of style, our prophet varies, according to the nature of his subjects, and the manner in which they were presented to his mind. He now expresses himself in simple conversational prose, now in poetry. At one time he abounds in the language of symbols; at another in that of direct prophetical announcement. His symbols are, for the most part, enigmatical, and require the explanations which accompany them. His prose resembles most that of Ezekiel; it is diffuse, uniform, and repetitious. His prophetic poetry possesses much of the elevation and dignity to be found in the earlier prophets with whose writings he appears to have been familiar; only his rhythmus is sometimes harsh and unequal, while his parallelisms are destitute of that symmetry and finish, which form some of the principal beauties of Hebrew poetry. [^7]

The Interpretation of Zechariah: Part One.—;In many respects the Book of Zechariah is one of the most difficult of interpretation in the Old Testament. Many early commentators, Jewish and Christian alike, were forced to concede that they failed "to find their hands" in the interpretation of the prophet's visions, and that they became lost in the mazes of his thought. Indeed, the writer confesses freely that in comparison to Zechariah all of the other Minor Prophets are easy to interpret. Members of the Church generally will probably agree to what has been said about the difficult nature of the record. Zechariah had a great scope of vision, and his spiritual insight was profound. He saw the spiritual needs of his own day, and in addition saw the future with great clearness— [^8] much so that he records the struggle and final triumph of his people, with the Lord's aid, over their enemies. He saw the coming of the Lord in the latter days to rule and reign in the world. So important for our generation were some of the things which he saw that the Lord makes very plain allusions to them in certain sections of the Doctrine and Covenants.

The first part of Zechariah (chapters 1-8) is not so significant— decidedly not of so much interest— Latter-day Saints as the second part. In this respect it somewhat resembles the Book of Malachi, as we have treated it in the following chapter. We shall now proceed to consider some of its more interesting features.

Zechariah's Eight Night-Visions.—;On or about the evening of February 24, 519 B. C. (our reckoning), Zechariah received a series of eight visions, the symbolism of which was explained to him by a heavenly messenger. In the first vision (1:7-17) he saw a man riding a red horse among the myrtletrees, and behind him, mounted on red, sorrel, and white horses, were other horsemen. The angel explains that these have been appointed by the Lord to walk to and fro through the earth. The horsemen respond by saying:

We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest. (1:11)

The angel then asks the Lord how long He will be in showing compassion upon Jerusalem and the cities of Judah after their seventy years of punishment in captivity. The Lord speaks words of comfort by saying that He is sore displeased with the nations that are at ease; He will have compassion upon Jerusalem and have His house built in it. He then proclaims again, saying:

My cities shall again overflow with prosperity; and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem. (1:17)

One may have to make some hair-splitting decisions before deciding whether this last passage has reference to Jerusalem in the near future viewed from Zechariah's own time or has reference to the final redemption in the latter days. The context, especially verse 12 and the reference in verse 16 of the Second Temple then in the process of building, seems to decide for many in favor of the first view.

In the next vision (1:18-21) Zechariah is first shown four horns [^9] that are said to have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. He is then shown four smiths [^10] whose duties are to frighten and cast down the horns of the nations or the powers which scattered Judah. It is impossible here to give a good summary of the various opinions held as to the identity of the "four horns" and the "four smiths." I personally feel that it is unnecessary to be specific in identifying these powers. Any nation or agency that has helped scatter Israel is undoubtedly included among the "horns." The "smiths" are the forces that in part have already broken down or shall yet break down the powers that have scattered Israel.

The vision of the man with the measuring line has (2:1-13), in my opinion, definite reference to the latter days when the Lord will be in the midst of Jerusalem (v. 5) and when "many nations shall join themselves to the Lord in that day" (v. 11). Verse 7, "Ho, Zion, escape, thou that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon," seems undoubtedly to refer to our present-day Israel, which has received the command:

Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon. (D. & C. 133:14)

In the fourth vision (3:1-10) Joshua the high priest, who stands in filthy garments before the angel of the Lord with Satan ready to accuse him, seems to the writer to represent Israel in her sins. The act of replacing the filthy garments with clean garments and the setting of a regal diadem [^11] upon Joshua's head with an injunction to walk in the Lord's ways indicates the final state of Israel when she is cleansed, redeemed, and glorified before the Lord. That this is to take place in the latter days is indicated by verse 10. Verses 8 and 9 present the greatest difficulties in this vision. The identity of the Branch or Shoot in verse 8 is thought by many commentators to be the Messiah. He is referred to again in Chapter 6:12, 13, where it is said that he shall build the temple and sit and rule upon his throne. The writer is not so certain that the Messiah is meant. Those who believe that He is the individual referred to quote Jeremiah 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16; Isaiah 4:2; 11:1; 53:2 to prove their point. I can see no good reason whatever for identifying the "Branch" of Isaiah 4:2 with the Messiah, and the Hebrew words used in the other passages of Isaiah are not identical with those used in Zechariah. We are thus left with the passages in Jeremiah, which at first sight seem convincing. Let us examine the first one:

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,

That I will raise unto David a righteous Branch,

And he shall reign as king and prosper,

And shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.

In his days Judah shall be saved,

And Israel shall dwell safely;

And this is his name whereby he shall be called,

The Lord our righteousness. (Italics ours)

(Jer. 23:5, 6)

The fact that the "Branch" is to be a descendant of David and the further fact that he is called "Lord" by the words in italics seems to decide the identification in favor of the Messiah. But we call attention to the fact that in Jeremiah 33:16 it is not the "Branch" but Jerusalem that is called The Lord our righteousness. Furthermore, the original Hebrew may be translated The Lord is our righteousness, which changes the sense considerably, especially in the first quoted passage in Jeremiah. We should further call the reader's attention to the verse that immediately follows the second passage in Jeremiah:

For thus saith the Lord: There shall not be cut off unto David a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel. (Jer. 33:17)

This passage does not appear to have reference to the Messiah. It appears from the passages in Jeremiah that in the latter days some person of David's lineage is to be raised up to be king over Israel and to execute righteousness and justice. The Prophet Joseph Smith seems to have taken cognizance of this fact, for on one occasion he said:

Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the Priesthood; and the Priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage. [^12]

May we throw it out as a suggestion that the Branch spoken of in Zechariah 3:8; 6:12, 13, may be the latter-day David spoken of by Joseph Smith and presumably by Jeremiah also.

The stone spoken of in Zechariah 3:9 is difficult to interpret. It is evidently one prepared under divine direction and not by human hands.

The vision of the golden candlestick and the two olive trees (4:1-14) is made difficult by the fact that the text seems topsy-turvy in places. It is suggested that it be read in the following order: Verses 1-5, 6a (then he answered and spake unto me, saying,), 10b (These seven are the servants of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth,), 11-14, 6b (This is the word of the Lord to Zerubbabel, saying, etc.), 7-9, 10a (read as far as "Zerubbabel"). In 10b we have read with the "Inspired" version of the Bible "servants" instead of "eyes." In interpreting this vision the reader should consult Rev. 11:3, 4, which suggests that in the candlesticks and the olive trees Zechariah may have reference to the two prophets whom the Lord shall raise up in the latter days to save the Jews from their enemies. [^13] Especially note the similarity in language between Zechariah 4:14 and Revelation 11:4.

In the sixth and seventh visions—e flying roll and the woman in the ephah (5:1-11)—e symbolism signifies the destruction of the wicked and the removal of sin to the land of Shinar [^14] in which was located Babylon, the center of wickedness.

The eighth and last vision—e four chariots (6:1-8)—esents to the eye of the prophet four chariots drawn by horses of different colors coming forward from between two mountains of bronze. The chariots are said to represent the four winds (or spirits) of the heavens, coming forth from presenting themselves before the Lord. One chariot goes to the land of the north, followed by another. The third goes to the south, and no special destination is given for the fourth. It is said to go up and down through the earth. Finally, the Lord indicates that those who went north have quieted His Spirit. The writer is not prepared to interpret this vision. Many commentators think that the chariots represent divine messengers of judgment and that the vision is supposed to reveal the fate of the enemies of the Jews, especially those in the north country

The Symbolic Crowning of Joshua The High Priest.—;In a passage (6:9-15) that is really an appendix to the visions, Zechariah is commanded to adorn Joshua the high priest with a crown [^15] made of gold and silver brought by the Babylonian exiles and to say to him:

Thus says the Lord of hosts, Behold, a man called Branch; and a branch will come forth from his roots, and he will build the temple of the Lord; even he will build the temple of the Lord; and he will bear the glory, and sit and rule on his throne; and he will be a priest on his throne: and the counsel of peace will be between the two of them. (6:12, 13)

This passage seems to mean that Joshua is crowned as a type of the Branch spoken of above who is to arise from David's lineage and to bear his name in the latter days. This king is to rule over the Jews and unite in himself royalty and priesthood and shall counsel and promote the peace of his people. Inasmuch as the latter-day Branch was to build the temple of the Lord, so doubtless Joshua was to urge his people and help in the building of the temple then in the process of construction. The crown was then to be placed in the Temple as a memorial in honor of Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and Josiah, the exiles from Babylon. Zechariah then says to Joshua the high priest:

And those who are far away will come and build in the temple of the Lord, and ye will know that the Lord of hosts has sent me unto you. And [this] shall come to pass, if ye will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord your God—;(6:15)

Here the words suddenly break off and we are left without knowing what blessing the Lord was going to bestow upon Joshua.

Israel's Fasts Versus the Weightier Matters of the Law.—;On December 4, 518 B. C. (our reckoning), a deputation of men came up to Jerusalem to inquire whether or not the fasts that had been instituted to commemorate Jerusalem's destruction were still obligatory. Zechariah is commanded to reprove them for their selfish observance of the days appointed for fasting (7:4-7) and to enforce attention to the matters of the law that are really weighty. In words that are characteristic of a great prophet, Zechariah said:

Thus spoke the Lord of hosts, Execute true judgment, and practice toward each other mercy and compassion; and the widow, and the orphan, the stranger, and the poor do not oppress; and do not think evil one of another in your hearts. (7:9, 10)

He then points out that the Lord had been obliged to drive Israel among the nations because of its resistance to the requirements of love, truth, and righteousness made known to them through the former prophets (7:11-14). Now, however, the Lord will favor the people with His love and blessings (8:1-15). To merit these they are required to do the following things:

Speak truth to one another; truth and a judgment of peace practice in your gates; and do not think evil in your hearts against each other; and love not a false oath; for it is all these that I hate, saith the Lord. (8:16, 17)

If they do these things the Lord will turn their fast days into days of joy and delight. Then looking far into future time— [^16] it seems to the writer—;Zechariah foresees that in the latter days his people will be so favored of God as to win the approbation of many and powerful nations:

Thus saith the Lord of hosts: It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come peoples, and the inhabitants of many cities; and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying: Let us go speedily to entreat the favor of the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also. Yea, many peoples and mighty nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to entreat the favor of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of hosts: In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold, out of all the languages of the nations, shall even take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying: We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. (8:20-23)

The Interpretation of Zechariah: Part Two.—;We have already pointed out that the second part of Zechariah consists of loosely connected prophecies that deal with events leading up to the triumph of God's kingdom in the latter days. The prophecies in this section are very Messianic. Most of them should prove especially interesting to members of the Church.

Overthrow of the Wicked Nations and the Appearance of the Messianic King.—;In Chapter 9:1-7 the prophet utters a threat of judgment against the wicked nations about Palestine. Hadrach, [^17] Damascus, Hamath, Tyre, Zidon, Ashkelon, Gaza, and Ekron, representing the countries of Syria, Phoenicia, and Philistia, are to fall while Jerusalem (verse 8) is to be protected by the power of God. Then follows a passage that is referred to by the Gospels of Matthew and John as a prediction of the triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem upon an ass:

Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion,

Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem;

Behold, thy king cometh unto thee,

He is triumphant, and victorious,

Lowly, and riding upon an ass,

Even upon a colt the foal of an ass. (9:9)

Matthew uses this passage in the following way:

And when they drew near to Jerusalem, and came to Bethphage, to the mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples, saying to them, Go into the village that is over against you, and straightway ye will find an ass tied, and a colt with her; loose them and bring them to me. And if any one say aught to you, ye shall say, The Lord has need of them; and straightway he will send them. Now all this has come to pass, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying:

Say to the daughter of Zion,

Behold, thy King comes to thee,

Meek, and riding on an ass,

And on a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.

And the disciples went and did as Jesus directed them, and brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their garments; and he sat thereon. And most of the multitude spread their own garments in the way; others cut branches from the trees, and spread them in the way. And the multitudes that went before him and that followed, cried, saying: Hosanna to the Son of David, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest. And when he entered into Jerusalem, all the city was shaken, saying: Who is this? The multitudes said: This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee. (Matt. 21:1-11)

In John 12:12-15 the passage in question is used quite similarly. John then makes this comment:

These things his disciples understood not at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written of him, and that they did these things to him. (John 12:16)

It is quite apparent that Zechariah 9:9 was regarded in New Testament times as having reference to the Christ.

In Zechariah 9:10 the Messiah's dominion is represented as being "from sea to sea, and from the River [^18] to the ends of the earth." He also shall "speak peace unto the nations." We naturally expect the Messiah to give a message of peace This verse still awaits its complete fulfillment.

The next verse is somewhat difficult to interpret. It reads:

As for thee also, because of the blood of thy covenant

I send forth thy prisoners out of the pit

Wherein is no water. (9:11)

The verse is addressed to the "daughter of Zion"—at is, all Israel, as verse 10 indicates. Most commentators seem to think it has reference to the release of Israelites from captivity in foreign lands. That may possibly be the true meaning, though Latter-day Saints may have some reason to believe that it is a brief reference to salvation for the dead. (See D. & C. 128:22)

Israel's Power Over the Nations.—;Zechariah promises Israel (9:12-17) that the Lord "will render double to thee"—at is, give her a double measure of glory in place of the sufferings she has had in times past. Not only will the Lord liberate His people from bondage and captivity, but He will also give them strength to gain victory over the power of the world in order to subdue it completely. The sons of Zion will be pitted, according to Zechariah's figure, against the sons of Greece who represent the Gentile world:

For I bend Judah for Me,

I fill the bow with Ephraim;

And I will stir up thy sons, O Zion,

Against thy sons, O Greece,

And will make thee as the sword of a mighty man. (9:13)

This description reminds one of Micah's predictions concerning the way in which Israel shall triumph over her foes in the latter days. Zechariah proceeds to tell how the Lord will help defend and exalt His people:

And the Lord shall be seen over them,

And His arrow shall go forth as the lightning;

And the Lord God will blow the horn,

And will go with whirlwinds of the south.

The Lord of hosts will defend them;

And they shall devour, and shall tread down the slingstones;

And they shall drink, and make a noise as through wine;

And they shall be filled like the basins, like the corners of the altar

And the Lord their God shall save them in that day

As the flock of His people;

For they shall be as the stones of a crown,

Glittering over His land.

For how great is their goodliness, and how great is their beauty!

Grain shall make the young men flourish,

And new wine the maids. (9:14-17)

The Restoration of Israel and the Overthrow of Wicked Nations.—;After exhorting Israel to ask the Lord for blessings and not to rely on false oracles (10:1, 2) Zechariah again looks forward to the dispensation of the fullness of times when the Lord will fight for His people and restore them:

And they shall be as mighty men,

Treading down in the mire of the streets in the battle,

And they shall fight, because the Lord is with them;

And the riders on horses shall be confounded.

And I will strengthen the house of Judah,

And I will save the house of Joseph,

And I will bring them back, for I have compassion upon them,

And they shall be as though I had not cast them off;

For I am the Lord their God, and I will hear them.

And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man,

And their heart shall rejoice as through wine;

Yea, their children shall see it, and rejoice,

Their heart shall be glad in the Lord.

I will hiss for them, and gather them,

For I have redeemed them;

For they shall increase as they have increased.

And I will sow them among the peoples,

And they shall remember Me in far countries;

And they shall live with their children, and shall return.

I will bring them back also out of the land of Egypt,

And gather them out of Assyria;

And I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon,

And place shall not suffice them. (10:5-10)

The prophet then symbolizes the fall of the wicked nations by referring to Egypt and Assyria, but his own people are to be strengthened in the Lord:

And over the sea affliction shall pass,

And the waves shall be smitten in the sea,

And all the depths of the Nile shall dry up;

And the pride of Assyria shall be brought down,

And the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away And I will strengthen them in the Lord;

And they shall walk up and down in His name,

Saith the Lord. (10:11, 12)

The Allegories of the Good Shepherd and the Foolish Shepherd.—;Chapter 11:1-3 is a prelude of judgment that serves as an introduction to the allegories that follow in verses 4-14. By means of these allegories the prophet dips into the history of the past. He points out the Lord's relations with His people, their insensibility, the divine anger, and the judgment that resulted. The Lord appointed a good shepherd to take care of the flock, which he wishes to deliver from oppression (4-6). However, the flock was so lacking in appreciation (7, 8) that the shepherd finally decided to discontinue his labors (9-14). Verses 12 and 13 are so interesting, especially in connection with Matthew 27:9, 10, that we shall say a little about them. They read as follows:

And I said unto them: 'If ye think good, give me my hire; and if not, forbear.' So they weighed for my hire thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said unto me: 'Cast it into the treasury the goodly price that I was prized at of them.' And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them (lit. "it") into the treasury, in the house of the Lord. (11:12, 13)

When Matthew tells the story of the end of Judas and his thirty pieces of silver, he seems to quote this passage from Zechariah—rhaps from memory—t attributes it to Jeremiah.

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying:

And they took the thirty pieces of silver,

The price of him that was priced,

Whom some of the sons of Israel priced,

And gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord directed me. (Matt. 27:9, 10)

No person who knows the passage in Zechariah can read that in Matthew without being struck by the similarity in all essential points between the two. But no such passage can be found in Jeremiah. The answer to this may lie in the corruption of the Greek text. In any event, we are primarily interested in the fact that the passage from Zechariah is regarded by Matthew as being fulfilled in the betrayal of the Christ and in the death and burial of Judas the arch traitor.

When the good shepherd gives up shepherding the flock, the result is disastrous, for the Lord gives it into the care of a foolish shepherd. The latter not only neglects the sheep, but he eats the flesh of the fat and abuses the flock generally (15, 16). A woe is pronounced upon him, and he is to be visited with a terrible judgment (17).

To the thoughtful and spiritual reader these allegories are full of matter for reflection. They ought to be read in connection with John 10:7-15

The Lord to Save Jerusalem and Appear to the Jews.—;In a remarkable prophecy (12:1-4) yet awaiting fulfillment, Zechariah sees Judah and Jerusalem assaulted by the nations of the earth, which shall be gathered against it. Through the aid of the Lord the inhabitants of Jerusalem are to be defended and most of the armies of the nations destroyed. Then shall the Messiah appear, and there shall come a change upon the Jews. In the words of the record:

And I will pour upon the house of David,

And upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,

The spirit of grace and of supplication;

And they shall look unto Me whom they have pierced;

And they shall mourn for Him, as one mourneth for his only son,

And shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born. (12:10)

John 19:37 quotes part of this scripture as having reference to the crucifixion of the Christ, and Revelation 1:7 seems to allude to it. Christians for centuries have regarded it as Messianic, not to mention many Jews, ancient and modern. In this they are right, but the passage in question ought to be considered in connection with Zechariah 13:6; 14:1-5; and Revelation 11:1-13. The first mentioned passage (13:6) seems out of place in its present connection. It would give much better sense if placed immediately after 12:10. The verse in question reads:

And one shall say to Him: 'What are these wounds between thy hands?' Then He shall answer: 'Those with which I was wounded in the house of My friends (lit 'lovers').' (13:6)

Chapter 14:1-5 gives more detail concerning the assault on Jerusalem by the nations as mentioned in 12:1-9. In verses 3 and 4 of this passage another very interesting reference to the Lord's appearance among the Jews is made. They tell us that after part of Jerusalem has been taken by the enemy,

Then shall the Lord go forth,

And fight against those nations,

As when He fighteth in the day of battle.

And His feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives,

Which is before Jerusalem on the east,

And the mount of Olives shall be cleft in the midst thereof

Toward the east and toward the west,

So that there shall be a very great valley;

And half of the mountain shall remove toward the north,

And half of it toward the south.

All of the verses we have quoted give us a surprisingly clear picture of the part to be taken by our Lord when He appears to deliver His ancient covenant people. Furthermore, this picture is fully confirmed in the Doctrine and Covenants. In a revelation given to Joseph Smith on March 7, 1831, the Lord tells of events to take place at His coming. In the following passage will be observed some clear allusions to the passages in Zechariah which we have just quoted:

And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount [Olivet], and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake. And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all of the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly. And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. (D. & C. 45:48-53, see also 133:20, 35)

The account of the assault of the nations on Jerusalem and the Lord's defense of His people is amplified in Revelation 11:1-13. Two prophets or witnesses of the Lord are raised up to defend Jerusalem against the assaults of the enemy. By supernatural authority and power they do this until their testimony is finished. They are then overcome by their foes and slain. After their bodies have lain on the streets of Jerusalem three days and a half, they are revived by the power of God and caught up to heaven. Fear seizes those who behold this event. Then great destruction and judgment come upon the city.

Zechariah and John were prophets and seers of the highest order to be privileged to see these great happenings of the latter days.

Judah and Jerusalem to be Holy Unto the Lord.—;Following the great events of which we have spoken, Judah and Jerusalem are to become holy unto the Lord. In Zechariah 13:1 it is stated that a fountain will be opened for sin and for uncleanness to the Jews. Many views have been given respecting the meaning of this passage, but in the absence of more specific information the writer suggests that it has reference to the ordinance of baptism. When the Jews have recognized in the Christ their long-looked-for Messiah, what is more natural than to suppose that the Gospel will be preached to them and the essential ordinances of the Church administered?

False prophets are to cease their activities and current idolatrous practices are to be eliminated (13:2-5). The Lord in that day shall be king over all the earth (14:9). Palestine shall no longer be cursed, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely (14:10, 11). Most of the peoples who have warred against Jerusalem shall come to a terrible end, and their wealth shall be swept up. The remnant that are left shall be converted and are to worship the Lord (14:16-19).

The Book of Zechariah closes with the following ideal picture:

In that day there will be on the bells of the horses, Holy to the Lord; and the pots in the Lord's house will be like the bowls before the altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy to the Lord of hosts; and all they who sacrifice will come, and take of them, and boil therein; and in that day there will no longer be the Canaanite [or "trafficker"] in the house of the Lord of hosts. [^19]

Zechariah was such a great seer that his book deserves greater attention on the part of Latter-day Saint students. It is to be hoped that careful study by many will materially help in the interpretation of parts of the record whose meanings now elude us

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A good illustration of how even modern scholars have translated proper names is found in Amos 6:13, where Lodebhar and Karnaim, names of two cities, have been translated "a thing of nought" and "horns" respectively.
[^2] See George Adam Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Rev. Ed.) II, 325 ff.
[^3] Haggai and Zechariah, as we have seen, may be dated about 520 B. C.
[^4] Nehemiah came to Palestine about 444 B. C. Conditions prevailing in his day (cf. Neh. 3:5; 5:1-13) seem to be those mentioned by Malachi.
[^5] See III Nephi 24, 25.
[^6] Smith, op. cit.; p. 353. And, as Elder Joseph Fielding Smith has said: "Not only brains, but the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord, which every member of the Church is entitled to receive, if he righteously seeks it.
[^7] D. & C. 131:6.
[^8] D. & C. 93:36.
[^9] See Matt. 3:1, 2; 11:10 (especially important); Mark 1:2-4; Luke 3:2-6; John 1:19-23; Isa. 40:1-5.
[^10] This was fulfilled on May 15, 1829. See D. & C. 13.
[^11] See D. & C. 29:7-11, where the Lord alludes to these very things.
[^12] See I Chron. 6:1-3.
[^13] See D.H.C., IV, 210-212. See also D. & C. 124:39 where the sacrifices by the "sons of Levi" are spoken of in connection with the Temple.
[^14] The Hebrew words here translated "windows of heaven" are precisely the ones used in the story of the Flood (Gen. 7:11). The words may refer to the rain that will be poured upon the fields to make them produce. This would be in harmony with the verses that follow
[^15] In early times the "book of remembrance" was one in which inspired writings were recorded. See Moses 6:5, 6. In Persian times those who rendered service to the king had their names entered in a book with a notice of their merits, so that they might be rewarded at a future time. See Esther 6:1, 2. In the light of this custom the metaphor is readily understood.
[^16] D.H.C., I, 12.
[^17] D. & C. 29:9, 24; 133:64. The last reference mentions Malachi specifically.
[^18] 18. The Book of Mormon text, III Nephi 25:2, reads "Son of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings."
[^19] 19. The power to be given Israel over her enemies was referred to by the Savior in His discourses to the Nephites. See III Nephi 21:11-22 where he quoted Micah 5:7-15.
