Sidney B. Sperry, Voice of Israel's Prophets ( 1953)

Chapter Thirty One

MALACHI, PROPHET TO THE SONS OF LEVI, PAST AND PRESENT

Malachi and His Name.—;As we have observed with so many of the prophets, little is known of the life of Malachi apart from what can be learned in his book. And many scholars of our day even suppose that the prophecy is anonymous. They point out that the name Malachi occurs nowhere else in the old Testament and that, furthermore, some of the ancient Jewish interpreters did not believe the superscription contained a person's name. Thus the Septuagint, ancient Greek translation of the Old Testament, begins the prophecy with the words, "The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by the hand of His messenger." And the Targum of Jonathan, an ancient Aramaic paraphrase of the prophets, reads My messenger, and goes on to state that Ezra the Scribe was the person designated. At first such evidence seems quite convincing, when it is kept in mind that male'akhi, the Hebrew form of Malachi, means My messenger. Again, it is urged that the name male'akhi must have been taken bodily from Chapter 3:1, "Behold, I send My messenger."

It should be pointed out to the reader, however, that such plausible evidence is by no means decisive. First of all, there is no good linguistic reason why male'akhi or Malachi should not be the name of a person. Second, the ancient interpreters of the text cited above may have been relatively ignorant of Hebrew history and so translated the proper noun without being aware of it. [^1] Practically every Hebrew name has a meaning, whether or not it is easily recognized. Third, the fact that no other Old Testament prophet is anonymous should make us cautious in accepting this one as being such. In a most exhaustive examination of the evidence, requiring forty-six pages, Alexander von Bulmerincq of Dorpat reaches the

conclusion that "the meaning of the name Male'achi involves no hindrance to explaining it as a proper name," "the real name of the author under which he was known to his contemporaries." [^2]

But aside from all these considerations, convincing or otherwise, Latter-day Saints have a more sure word on the matter. When the resurrected Savior visited this continent, according to the account in the Book of Mormon, He delivered to the ancient Nephites the last two chapters of Malachi's prophecy and explained their significance. Preliminary to quoting the text, the ancient historian, Mormon, writes the following words:

And it came to pass that he [Christ] commanded them that they should write the words which the Father had given unto Malachi, which he should tell unto them. And it came to pass that after they were written he expounded them. And these are the words which he did tell unto them, saying: Thus said the Father unto Malachi. . . . (3 Nephi 24:1; italics ours.)

Then follows the text of Malachi 3, 4, and substantially as in the Authorized Version of the Bible. The point is clear so far as we are concerned. The Savior would surely not quote the prophecy as coming from Malachi if he did not actually write it.

The Times of the Prophet.—;According to synagogue tradition, Malachi lived after the prophets Haggai and Zechariah, [^3] and was a contemporary of Nehemiah. [^4] It is clear from the prophecy that the Temple had been completed, and moreover, enough years had passed by to see the Jews become worldly and negligent toward their spiritual duties. The priests, who should have led and taught their people correct principles, were themselves corrupt and guilty of being partial in their administration of the Law. Many marriages with the heathen women of the land were taking place, and men were guilty of divorcing their wives unjustly. Improper sacrifices were being offered up, contrary to the letter and spirit of the Law of Moses. Failure to pay tithes and offerings is also mentioned. The book seems to make clear that the Jews were living under a pechah, or Persian governor, who was kind to them. These facts and others not here mentioned lead us to believe that Malachi was written during the reign of Artaxerxes I, king of Persia, or sometime between 464 B. C. and 424 B. C. I tentatively date the book at 450 B. C.

The Literary Style of Malachi.—;Although Malachi has some things in common with the style of others of the prophets, it must be admitted that, on the whole, his style is very unusual. It is much like the style of the scribes in that it puts and answers questions and is somewhat argumentative in form. The method of the prophet partly resembles that of Socrates, the great Greek philosopher, who, in fact, was a contemporary of his. Using this so-called didatic-dialectic method, Malachi proceeds to make an accusation against the priests or people; in imagination he has them raise an objection, which he then proceeds to show is without foundation, thus substantiating the truth of his original pronouncement.

Here are two examples:

I have loved you, saith the Lord.

Yet ye say: 'Wherein hast Thou loved us?'

Was not Esau Jacob's brother?

Saith the Lord;

Yet I loved Jacob;

But Esau I hated,

And made his mountains a desolation. (1:2, 3)

Will a man rob God?

Yet ye rob me,

But ye say: 'Wherein have we robbed Thee?'

In tithes and offerings. (3:8)

The style of Malachi is animated and vigorous; it may lack some of the grandeur of the earlier prophets, but is extremely forceful. Some scholars think that the prophecy is an epitome of several addresses so cleverly put together as to give the effect of one continuous discourse. This the author is inclined to doubt.

The Hebrew of Malachi is good, and the text is fairly well preserved. It has probably suffered little in the course of its transmission through the centuries

The Interpretation of Malachi: Part One.—;The Mormon people have been particularly blessed in the fact that modern revelation has made it possible for us to interpret the most difficult part of Malachi—mely, the last two chapters. The true significance of these chapters was lost from the days of the Early Church until the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Commentators have done very well, however, on the first two chapters. The prophecy divides naturally into two parts. The first of these, comprising chapters one and two, deals with situations that confronted Malachi in his own day. The second, composed of the last two chapters, deals in part with matters yet future in relation to Malachi's own time. In fact, the prophet deals with certain important events pertaining to the opening scenes of this dispensation. All of this helps explain why the Savior, in quoting part of Malachi to the Nephites, used the last two chapters. [^5] These deal with matters of greater significance and interest to them and future generations than those of Malachi's own day portrayed in the first two chapters. These facts we shall presently bring out in greater detail. Let us proceed to consider the first part of the book.

Chapters one and two of Malachi may be conveniently studied under four heads:

The superscription (1:1)

I. The proof of the Lord's love for His people (1:2-5).

II. The Lord's condemnation of Israel for her faithlessness (1:6-2:9).

III. A reproof for foreign marriages and divorce (2:10-17). Verse 17 is really a reiteration of the Lord's displeasure with faithless Israel and provides a reason for presenting the matter that follows in section two of the prophecy.

Of the superscription we need not say anything. It is sufficiently clear as it stands

The Lord's Love for Israel.—;In Chapter 1:2-5 the Lord answers Israel's fancied question, "Wherein hast Thou loved us?" He points out that Esau (here representative of Edom) was Jacob's (Israel's) brother, but Jacob He loved and Esau He hated. That is to say, of two brothers whom one might fancy to be on equal terms before God, the one is loved and the other hated. And in proof that He loved Israel more than Esau, the Lord indicates what He did to his despised rival:

I...made his mountains a desolation,

And gave his heritage to the jackals of the wilderness.

Whereas Edom saith:

'We are beaten down,

But we will return and build the waste places';

Thus saith the Lord of hosts:

They shall build, but I will throw down;

And they shall be called The border of wickedness,

And The people whom the Lord execrateth forever.

And your eyes shall see,

And ye shall say:

'The Lord is great beyond the border of Israel.' (1:3-5)

The reader will remember our relatively full discussion of the relations between Edom and Israel in the chapter on Obadiah. Any discussion of the ethics and religion of the scripture just quoted must revolve around what was said there. It is a fact of history that, during Israel's exile in Babylon, Edom was conquered by the Nabateans, and their continued bondage is clearly reflected in the above passage. The lines distinctly reveal God's love for Israel and her divine election. If this love seems unfair, let it be remembered that God's choices are based on character and performance; between Israel and Edom His choice was historically justified. The Old Testament doctrine of election, in the words of Sir George Adam Smith, "is of election to service only. That is to say, the Divine intention in electing covers not the elect individual or nation only, but the world and its need of God and truth."

Israel Condemned for Her Faithlessness.—;The prophet now proceeds (1:6-2:9) to berate the people, and especially the priests, for the lack of honor and respect accorded God. Israel not only has questioned His love, but has stooped to such low actions that even His majesty or authority is at stake:

A son honoreth his father,

And a servant his master;

If then I be a father,

Where is My honor?

And if I be a master

Where is My reverence? (1:6)

Malachi is much concerned over this behavior, for to the Hebrew mind honor and respect is expected before love. And we see how far his people had strayed from the concept of God as a king and loving Father to them. The prophet points out how cheap and without conscience Israel's worship has become. The Lord is despised, he declares, because polluted bread is offered upon His altar, not to mention sick, lame, and blind animals, when the letter and spirit of the Law of Moses had required the finest. Would even their Persian governor accept these as a gift?

Bring it now to thy governor;

Will he be pleased with thee?

Or respect thee?

Saith the Lord of hosts. (1:8)

Malachi believes it would be far better for the doors of the Temple to be shut than for such sacrifices to be burnt:

O that there were even one among you that would shut the doors

That ye might not kindle Mine altar in vain! (1:10)

Malachi's teaching is highly applicable even to our own day. We may build inexpensive houses of worship, but let not our worship be cheap and unworthy. We may build temples economically, but let us not work in them without a due sense of the dignity and respect that God requires.

The prophet was thoroughly aroused against his own generation because it depreciated the Temple and was dishonest and stingy in its offerings. Malachi, like all the other prophets, was opposed to the ritual of worship, even that provided by the Law of Moses, being conducted unworthily by men whose lives were a discredit to their religion. In a statement remarkable for its vigor, breadth, and generosity, Malachi says:

For from the rising of the sun to its going down

My name is great among the nations;

And in every place incense is offered to My name,

And a pure offering;

For My name is great among the nations,

Saith the Lord of hosts. (1:11)

The inspired writer is here making a contrast between the smallness and contempt in which his own people hold God and the reverence and respect paid Him by the heathen. It is most interesting to notice that the offerings of the heathen are quite acceptable. Malachi would have his people know that in proportion to their light and knowledge of God, the heathen nations were as good as or better than Israel.

In Chapter 2:1-9, the prophet particularly admonishes the priests. To do so was timely and appropriate, for if the religious leaders of the people failed in their duties and responsibilities to God, how could the masses be expected to comply with the requirements of the good life: The priests were told to give glory to God, or in other words to mend their ways and change their attitudes. And if they did not receive this commandment—lled in verse 4, "My Covenant with Levi"—ey were to be cursed. By departing from the ways of their fathers they had neutralized or broken the covenant originally made with God. At first, the tribe of Levi had walked uprightly before Him. Of this fact that prophet says:

The law of truth was in his mouth,

And wickedness was not found on his lips;

Whole-heartedly and in righteousness he walked with Me,

And many he turned from iniquity. (2:6)

Malachi shows that the priests not only are irreverent and slack in their worship but are failing to live up to their intellectual responsibilities. Of all people who should gain knowledge and seek to improve their intellectual talents, it is those who are in the service of God:

For the priest's lips should keep knowledge,

And they should seek instruction from his mouth;

For he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. (2:7)

This is a remarkable statement and one of the finest in all of prophetic literature.

Religion needs all the brains we mortals can put into it. There is a priesthood of knowledge, a priesthood of the intellect, says 'Malachi', and he makes this part of God's covenant with Levi. Every priest of God is a priest of truth; and it is largely by the Christian ministry's neglect of their intellectual duties that much irreligion prevails. [^6]

In our own generation the Lord has re-emphasized this teaching of Malachi by telling us that "it is impossible for a

man to be saved in ignorance," [^7] and that "the glory of God is intelligence." [^8] And if the ancient prophet were now living, he would remind us strongly to read and re-read these words:

And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith. (D. & C. 88:118)

Also,

And set in order the churches, and study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people. (D. & C. 90:15)

Verily, religion has little use for the intellectual slacker. The Lord's work is too important to entrust to mental sluggards.

A Protest Against Foreign Marriages and Divorce.—; Malachi's next protest is against the covenant breakers of Israel, who put aside the wives of their youth and marry among the half-heathen peoples, who know little or nothing of the requirements of Israel's God. Since Israel believed in the Fatherhood of God, all members of the nation were thus one brotherhood. To divorce one's wife under these circumstances was unnatural and cruel.

Have we not all one father?

Hath not one God created us?

Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother,

Profaning the covenant of our fathers?

Judah has dealt treacherously,

And an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem;

For Judah hath profaned the sanctuary of the Lord which He loveth,

And hath married the daughter of a strange god.

* * *

And this further ye do:

Ye cover the altar of the Lord with tears,

With weeping, and with sighing,

Insomuch that He regardeth not the offering any more,

Neither receiveth it with good will at your hand.

Yet ye say: 'Wherefore?'

Because the Lord hath been witness

Between thee and the wife of thy youth,

Against whom thou hast dealt treacherously,

Though she is thy companion,

And the wife of thy covenant.

And not one has done so Who had the right spirit.

For what seeketh the one?

A seed given of God.

Therefore take heed to your spirit,

And let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.

For I hate divorce,

Saith the Lord, the God of Israel,

And him that covereth his garment with violence,

Saith the Lord of hosts;

Therefore take heed to your spirit,

That ye deal not treacherously. (2:10, 11, 13-16)

Malachi was right in protesting against mixed marriages. The experience of the race proves that. But as to His covenant people, the Lord wanted all their good qualities, built up through the centuries, to be conserved within the group. To marry outside of it not only involved the breaking of sacred covenants; it tended to dilute, squander, and dissipate the desirable qualities of the race. The spiritual loss was incalculable. It is precisely for these reasons that modern Israel is constantly reminded by its leaders not to marry outside the Church. And common hard sense says they are right.

No finer or more spiritual pronouncement on marriage has ever been made except by the Christ Himself. Those who have held Malachi to be a legalist have missed entirely, in the opinion of the author, the spirit of the prophet. And when the prophet says, "Ye cover the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with sighing," one is strongly reminded of another branch of Israel in ancient America where the men were guilty of the same offenses. The Lord, through His Prophet Jacob, says:

For behold, I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning of the daughters of my people in the land of Jerusalem, yea, and in all the lands of my people, because of the wickedness and abominations of their husbands. And I will not suffer, saith the Lord of Hosts, that the cries of the fair daughters of this people, which I have led out of the land of Jerusalem, shall come up unto me against the men of my people, saith the Lord of Hosts. For they shall not lead away captive the daughters of my people because of their tenderness, save I shall visit them with a sore curse, even unto destruction; for they shall not commit whoredoms, like unto them of old, saith the Lord of Hosts. . . .

Behold, ye have done greater iniquities than the Lamanites, our brethren. Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you. . . . (Jacob 2:31-33, 35)

The Interpretation of Malachi: Part Two.—;We indicated before that verse 17 of Chapter 2 provides the key of Malachi for considering certain future events in part two of his prophecy:

Ye have wearied the Lord with your words.

Yet ye say: 'Wherein have we wearied Him?'

In that ye say: 'Every one that doeth evil

Is good in the sight of the Lord,

And He delighteth in them;

Or where is the God of justice?'

The prophet is saddened, as these words show, by the low spiritual state of his people. He sees a day in the future when the answer to the question, "Where is the God of justice?" will be answered with vengeance. The Israelites of that day will be tried and refined, but out of their experiences great good to the human race shall result.

Part Two of Malachi, as we have said, comprises chapters 3 and 4 in our usual English versions. In the Hebrew version these are combined in one chapter. Let us study this part of Malachi under the following heads:

I. The coming of a messenger to prepare the way of the Lord; the Lord to purify and refine the sons of Levi that they may offer an offering in righteousness. (3:1-4)

II. Condemnation of Israel for various sins, with promised blessings if she complies with God's requirements (3:5-18). These verses probably have reference to Malachi's own times, but application may be made of them to future Israel.

III. The coming of Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord in which judgments shall befall the wicked. (4:1-6)

The Coming of a Messenger to Prepare the Way of the Lord.—;We pointed out earlier in the chapter that, thanks to modern revelation, we can now interpret the last two chapters of Malachi better than ever before. When the Angel Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith on that eventful evening of the 21st of September, 1823, he quoted at length from the Scriptures and proceeded to expound them. The prophet did not make known the names and chapters of the various Old Testament books that were quoted to him, with the exception of three. These consisted of part of the Third and all of the Fourth Chapter of Malachi, the Eleventh Chapter of Isaiah, and the Second Chapter of Joel, verses 28-32. We have already considered the words of Moroni bearing on Joel in the chapter on that prophet.

In his account of the heavenly vision, the Prophet Joseph Smith declared that Moroni quoted only part of the Third Chapter of Malachi, but he did not state what part. Quite natural curiosity may prompt one to ask the question, which verses of this chapter did Moroni quote? The writer is convinced that he quoted the first three verses and perhaps also verse four—;hence the division as given in the first study head just above. The reasons for our conviction in this regard are these: Verses one to four would be of prime importance to Moroni, since they deal with the events of the latter days, as our study will show. Then again, verses five to eighteen may be interpreted as dealing with infractions of the moral and religious code of Malachi's own times. They could not possibly be of immediate use to Moroni in explaining to Joseph Smith the great events that were shortly to come to pass in the world.

The first three verses of the chapter are quoted herewith:

Behold, I will send My messenger,

And he shall prepare the way before Me;

And the Lord, whom ye seek,

Shall suddenly come to His Temple;

Even the Messenger of the covenant,

Whom ye delight in,

Behold, He shall come,

Saith the Lord of hosts.

But who may abide the day of His coming?

And who shall stand when He appeareth?

For He is like a refiner's fire,

And like fuller's soap;

And He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver;

And He shall purify the sons of Levi,

And purge them as gold and silver;

That they may offer unto the Lord

An offering in righteousness. (3:1-3)

Most of us can agree, I believe, that Moroni appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith for the express purpose of explaining to him the significant events relative to the restoration and the rise of the Church of Jesus Christ in the last dispensation, and more particularly the part that Joseph Smith himself was to play in these events. The above verses must, therefore, have received careful attention on the part of the angelic visitor. They refer to three or four striking events. In the first place, a messenger was to come and prepare the way before the Lord. Second, the Lord was to appear suddenly. Third, His coming was to be one of purification and judgment. And fourth, He was to make it possible for the sons of Levi to "offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." Let us deal with these in the order given.

Who was the messenger to prepare the way before the Lord? I have heard some brethren in the Church say that it was the Prophet Joseph Smith. Indeed, this conjecture is quite plausible, for did not he help prepare the way for the yet future advent of our Lord? In revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 34:6 and 35:4 respectively, Orson Pratt and Sidney Rigdon were expressly told that they were preparing the way before the Lord's coming. If that was true of these elders, how much more so in the case of the Prophet Joseph Smith. But Malachi very evidently had in mind one special person. This person is unquestionably John the Baptist. [^9] According to the Gospel of Matthew the Savior said:

This is he about whom it is written, Lo, I send my messenger before thy face, and he shall prepare thy way before thee. (11:10)

If the passage in question refers to John the Baptist, as the Savior states, it would have to have a double meaning to refer to Joseph Smith. This seems highly improbable in view of the fact that John's first appearance only in part fulfilled the prediction in Malachi 3:1. When the priests and Levites questioned John as to his standing, he frankly admitted that he was acting in the office of Elias, one preparing the way before the Lord, by saying:

I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet. (John 1:23)

It should be noted that John was quoting Isaiah 40:3 when he affirmed himself to be the "voice" crying in the wilderness.

If one examines this verse and its context, it is found that many of the events recorded therein could be fulfilled only in our dispensation. We quote:

Comfort ye, comfort ye My people,

Saith your God.

Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,

And cry unto her,

That her time of service is accomplished

That her guilt is paid off;

That she hath received of the Lord's hand

Double for all her sins.

The voice of him that crieth:

'Prepare ye the way of the Lord

Make straight in the desert

A highway for our God.

Every valley shall be lifted up

And every mountain and hill shall be made low;

And the rugged shall be made level,

And the rough places a plain;

And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed

And all flesh shall see it together;

For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

(Isa. 40:1-5; cf. D. & C. 49:23; 133:19-25)

It is evident that Jerusalem's service is not yet accomplished, nor is her guilt paid off. Neither have the valleys been lifted up and the mountains and hills made low. Nor has the glory of the Lord been revealed. The context would seem to imply that if John the Baptist is the "voice" spoken of, his mission also included the preparing of the way of the Lord in the latter days. Moroni, in all probability, explained this to Joseph Smith and pointed out to him that he would yet receive the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood from the resurrected John the Baptist, who would thus fulfill his two-fold mission of preparing the way before the Lord. [^10] John was, of course, only one of many to prepare the way, but Malachi 3:1 could just as well refer to him as to any other individual.

Having thus explained John's mission, we can reasonably suppose that the angelic visitor would then reveal to Joseph the imminent advent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He was to come in His glory and rule for a thousand years over His saints, but before that event there should be great judgments in the earth and more especially at His appearance; [^11] consequently, He would be, as the scriptures say; "like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap." Here was a good opportunity to impress Joseph Smith with the importance of having the righteous people of the earth duly warned and prepared for the judgments to come.

Now the question arises as to whom Malachi was referring when he mentions the sons of Levi, who were to be purged as gold and silver that they might "offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." Moroni undoubtedly expounded it all to the young prophet, and we are fortunate in finding the answer to our query in the Doctrine and Covenants. Once, when in an exalted mood, the prophet wrote as follows:

Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand;

And who can abide the day of His coming,

And who can stand when He appeareth?

For He is like a refiner's fire,

And like fuller's soap;

And He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver,

And He shall purify the sons of Levi,

And purge them as gold and silver,

That they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in His holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. (D. & C. 128:24; italics ours)

The answer is clear and unmistakable, because the passage in Malachi which we have been considering is given along with it. The Latter-day Saints, as a Church and a people, are the ones who are to offer up an offering in righteousness in the Temple in the form of a book containing the records of our dead. We are now performing functions that will be required of the sons of Levi when they come into the Church. In a figurative sense we may be called sons of Levi. That this conclusion is correct is made even more certain by other references in the Doctrine and Covenants. In the Doctrine and Covenants 84:31-34, the Lord says:

Therefore, as I said concerning the sons of Moses—;for the sons of Moses and also the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering and sacrifice in the house of the Lord, which house shall be built unto the Lord in this generation, upon the consecrated spot as I have appointed—;and the sons of Moses and of Aaron shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, upon Mount Zion in the Lord's house, whose sons are ye . . . For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies. They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God. (Italics ours.)

The attention of the reader is called especially to the portions of this passage which the writer has italicized. Part of verse 31 seems to be an allusion to Malachi 3:1, in that it refers to an acceptable offering, i.e., "an offering in righteousness." A point of doctrine not generally noticed in the Church is that those who hold the Priesthood are called "the sons of Moses and of Aaron." That is to say, they are to all intents sons of Levi, since both Moses and Aaron were literal descendants of Levi [^12]. In a sermon on Priesthood, the Prophet Joseph Smith also points out that the ordinance of sacrifice as it existed before the day of Moses will be performed by the sons of Levi as a part of the acceptable offering. [^13] Those who presently hold the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods are, indeed, the sons of Levi in a certain sense and are among the ones whom Malachi apparently had in mind when he gave his great prophecy. We have no wish to exclude any of the literal descendants of Levi who may later come into the Church and perform temple work. It is possible, then, that Moroni began his explanation of temple work and of salvation for the dead in connection with the Third Chapter of Malachi rather than with the Fourth Chapter, as so many persons in the Church commonly suppose.

In the light of our explanation of Malachi 3:1-3, it would be entirely appropriate for Moroni to quote verse 4:

Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem

Be pleasant unto the Lord,

As in the days of old,

And as in the former years.

After the gathering of Israel and the restoration of the Church in the latter days, Malachi foresees that a change will come over Jacob's descendants and that their worship will be acceptable to the Lord as it was many long years before his time. And these visions of the future bring him back with a start to the sad state of his people in his own times. Again, he is forced to condemn them for their dire misdeeds.

Further Condemnation of Israel for Wrong-doing.—;The Lord in His judgment, Malachi points out, will be a swift witness against the sorcerers who become numerous among His people after the Babylonian captivity; against the adulterers, who were all too prevalent because of the influence of foreign peoples; against the false swearers or perjurers and those who hold back the pay of poor men and defraud or oppress the widow and the orphan; and, finally, against those who thrust aside the foreigner, stranger or guest and fail in other ways to fear God. These indictments through Malachi show how alert and aware the prophet must have been of social injustices among his people. Malachi knew, as did Amos, that men can not worship God acceptably and be unjust to their fellows. To find God, a man must first find his neighbors.

Malachi proceeds to rebuke further the people because they have robbed God of tithes and offerings. In ancient Israel tithes were paid to the Lord for His servants the Levites, who had been given no other inheritance. They in turn were tithed, and the proceeds were given to the priests. (Num. 18:24-29) The offerings were of several varieties such as bread and cake, (Num. 15:19, 20) the annual halfshekel, (Exo. 30:13-15) the tabernacle offerings, (Exo. 25:2, 3; 35:5, 21, 24; 36:3, 6) offerings for the second temple when first erected. (Ezra 8:25) The prophet then implies that because they rob God of these things, the blessings of the fields have been withheld from them. The teaching that there is a relationship between man's service to God and the way in which the earth yields her fruits is most interesting:

Will a man rob God?

Yet ye rob Me.

But ye say: 'Wherein have we robbed Thee?'

In tithes and offerings.

Ye are cursed with the curse,

Yet ye rob Me,

Even this whole nation.

Bring ye the whole tithe into the store-house,

And try Me now herewith,

Saith the Lord of hosts,

If I will not open you the windows of heaven, [^14]

And pour you out a blessing,

Until there is no more need.

And I will rebuke the devourer for you,

And he shall not destroy for you the fruits of the ground;

Neither shall the vine in the field miscarry for you, Saith the Lord of hosts.

And all nations shall call you happy;

For ye shall be a delightsome land,

Saith the Lord of hosts. (3:8-12)

After the prophet has disclosed why the Lord has withheld His blessings from the people, he proceeds to show them that their complaints against Him are unjust, and that in the forthcoming judgment day a clear distinction will be made between the righteous and the wicked. The wicked who mourn and fast before God and then complain that their piety has brought them no gain are contrasted with the righteous who do not believe that mere outward worship is sufficient to please Him. In respect to the righteous,

A book of remembrance [^15] was written before Him,

For them that feared the Lord,

And that thought upon His name,

And they shall be Mine, saith the Lord of hosts,

In the day that I make up My treasure;

And I will spare them, as a man spareth

His own son that serveth him.

(3:16, 17. See also D. & C. 60:4; 64:23)

When Malachi mentions those things to his people, He sees the coming of the Day of the Lord and great judgments upon the earth in the latter days. This is the time in which the Lord will make up His treasure and "discern between the righteous and the wicked." In Chapter 4 we have the prophet's description of this great period, which we shall now consider.

The Coming of Elijah Before the Great and Terrible Day of the Lord.—;In our opinion, Malachi foresaw many of the same events mentioned by Joel, Obadiah, Zephaniah, and others of the prophets. Prior to and at the coming of our Lord the world will be visited with sorrow, distress, and devastation. Malachi states this fact in the following words:

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven;

And all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble;

And the day that cometh shall burn them up,

Saith the Lord of hosts,

That it shall leave them neither root nor branch. (4:1)

When Moroni was explaining this verse to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he quoted it with a little variation from that given. The lines that were changed read as follows:

And all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble;

For they that come shall burn them. [^16]

This verse in question is alluded to in the Doctrine and Covenants at least three times, [^17] and in every instance the Lord explains it as having to do with the judgments to be poured out upon the wicked at the time of His Second Advent. Section 64:23, 24 is a good illustration:

Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming. For after today cometh the burning—is is speaking after the manner of the Lord—r verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon.

The prophet then turns from the unhappy state of the wicked and gives in somewhat figurative language a picture of the fortunate situation of the righteous.

But unto you that fear My name

Shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in its wings; [^18]

And ye shall go forth, and grow up

As calves of the stall.

And ye shall tread down the wicked; [^19]

For they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet

In the day that I shall do this,

Saith the Lord of hosts. (4:2, 3)

In the final verses of the prophecy, Malachi gives notice of a glorious event that is to precede the "coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord," which, as we have already seen, "shall burn as an oven." He makes reference to the coming of Elijah the prophet to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers." The real meaning of these verses has always eluded commentators,

and not until the Lord sent heavenly messengers to Joseph Smith and elucidated it has it been possible to clear up the difficulties. The notion was widespread in ancient times among the rabbis and fathers that Elijah the prophet, who was caught up to heaven without tasting death, would sometime reappear. Some believed him to be the individual mentioned in Malachi 3:1 as "My messenger." This was a mistake, for, as we have already seen, the "messenger" was John the Baptist. The verses in question read:

Behold, I will send you

Elijah the prophet

Before the coming

Of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children,

And the heart of the children to their fathers;

Lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. (4:5, 6)

When the Angel Moroni quoted this part of Malachi, he did so with some changes as follows:

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood,

By the hand of Elijah the prophet,

Before the coming

Of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children

The promises made to the fathers,

And the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers.

If it were not so,

The whole earth would be utterly wasted at His coming. [^20]

The above may be a paraphrase of the original text to help Joseph Smith comprehend its true significance. Otherwise, we should find it difficult to explain why the Savior in His appearance to the Nephites quoted it in accordance with the text found in the Authorized Version. (See III Nephi 25:5, 6) We do not know, of course, the exact words of Moroni to Joseph Smith explaining the mission of Elijah, but they must have been in accordance with the prophet's writings on the subject. Moroni taught the prophet at intervals for several years, and during that period Joseph must have become thoroughly grounded in the principles underlying Elijah's keys and authority. We have already discussed the work of John the Baptist, who was to prepare the way before the Lord (Malachi 3:1). A person who is set apart to do such work is known as an Elias. Hence the title spoken of by the Lord to His apostles as recorded in Matthew 17:12. In the New Testament it is not always safe to make the noun Elias equivalent to Elijah for it is both a name and a title. Speaking of the spirit of Elias, Joseph Smith says:

The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the Priesthood of Elias, or the Priesthood that Aaron was ordained unto. And when God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias, even from the early ages of the world. [^21]

On the other hand, the mission of Elijah has to do with the higher spiritual functions of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Elijah was the last prophet to hold the keys of the sealing powers of the Priesthood—at is, to seal in heaven what is bound upon the earth. The spirit of Elijah implies the power to invoke a fullness of Priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith states it in this way:

The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelation, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven. [^22]

Through the powers of the Priesthood given to Elijah, men and women may be sealed to each other in marriage for time and eternity in the temples of God. Children born of these unions may be claimed by their parents forever, since the latter are united by an everlasting covenant. The family organization thus continues beyond the grave, and one generation is thus sealed to another back to the days of Adam. Families that have passed into the spirit world without a knowledge of the Gospel, and hence without being sealed to each other, must have the work done vicariously for them in the temples of the Lord. All of the Gospel ordinances that are necessary to be performed for a living person to obtain salvation must also be performed for the dead. The Lord has made no exceptions other than for children who die under the age of eight years. That is the reason why the fathers (the dead) spoken of in Malachi 4:6 turn to their children, their living descendants, to have all the Gospel ordinances, from baptism to marriage, performed vicariously for them in the temples. If the children do not turn their hearts to their ancestors and perform this necessary work for them, it will make it impossible for the Lord to accomplish His purpose of making this earth the celestial abode of the righteous. "Blessed are the meek," said the Savior, "for they shall inherit the earth." In consequence of default in performing the ordinances required, the only course left for the Lord would be to "smite the earth with a curse."

I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you will receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah. [^23]

The sublime mission of Elijah to return and restore the keys of his power before the "great and dreadful day of the Lord" was duly fulfilled on April 3, 1836, when he appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple in Ohio. Here is their description of that notable appearance:

Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—stifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come— turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—erefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (D. & C. 110:13-16)

It is evident that the Book of Malachi, like that of Joel and others of the prophets, contains a word of warning to this generation. And to the Mormon people it must ever remain one of the most vital books of the Old Testament.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A good illustration of how even modern scholars have translated proper names is found in Amos 6:13, where Lodebhar and Karnaim, names of two cities, have been translated "a thing of nought" and "horns" respectively.
[^2] See George Adam Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Rev. Ed.) II, 325 ff.
[^3] Haggai and Zechariah, as we have seen, may be dated about 520 B. C.
[^4] Nehemiah came to Palestine about 444 B. C. Conditions prevailing in his day (cf. Neh. 3:5; 5:1-13) seem to be those mentioned by Malachi.
[^5] See III Nephi 24, 25.
[^6] Smith, op. cit.; p. 353. And, as Elder Joseph Fielding Smith has said: "Not only brains, but the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord, which every member of the Church is entitled to receive, if he righteously seeks it.
[^7] D. & C. 131:6.
[^8] D. & C. 93:36.
[^9] See Matt. 3:1, 2; 11:10 (especially important); Mark 1:2-4; Luke 3:2-6; John 1:19-23; Isa. 40:1-5.
[^10] This was fulfilled on May 15, 1829. See D. & C. 13.
[^11] See D. & C. 29:7-11, where the Lord alludes to these very things.
[^12] See I Chron. 6:1-3.
[^13] See D.H.C., IV, 210-212. See also D. & C. 124:39 where the sacrifices by the "sons of Levi" are spoken of in connection with the Temple.
[^14] The Hebrew words here translated "windows of heaven" are precisely the ones used in the story of the Flood (Gen. 7:11). The words may refer to the rain that will be poured upon the fields to make them produce. This would be in harmony with the verses that follow
[^15] In early times the "book of remembrance" was one in which inspired writings were recorded. See Moses 6:5, 6. In Persian times those who rendered service to the king had their names entered in a book with a notice of their merits, so that they might be rewarded at a future time. See Esther 6:1, 2. In the light of this custom the metaphor is readily understood.
[^16] D.H.C., I, 12.
[^17] D. & C. 29:9, 24; 133:64. The last reference mentions Malachi specifically.
[^18] 18. The Book of Mormon text, III Nephi 25:2, reads "Son of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings."
[^19] 19. The power to be given Israel over her enemies was referred to by the Savior in His discourses to the Nephites. See III Nephi 21:11-22 where he quoted Micah 5:7-15.
[^20] 20. D. & C. D.H.C. I, 12.
[^21] 21. D.H.C., VI, 250.
[^22] 22. Ibid., 251.
[^23] 23. Ibid., 252. Read also Joseph Smith's statement at the end of the chapter on Obadiah, p. 325; also D. & C. 124:26-55; 128:1-18, 24. For a detailed exposition of Elijah's mission see Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, chs. 24-26.
