For a long time I have been searching for answers to several questions. Finally, in President Gordon B. Hinckley’s message “True to the Faith,” in the September 1996 A Liahona (Portuguese), I found the answers I needed. I am grateful to Heavenly Father for our inspired prophet. By reason and by faith, I know that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is true.

Greici Christine de Assis,
Cosmopolis Ward, Mogi Mirim Brazil Stake

I am a new member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I am also an avid reader, and from the time I first read an issue of the Liahona (Spanish), I have been a devoted subscriber. The issues, especially the conference reports, are a source of light to me. They inspire me in my Church callings and other tasks.

My son and I also show the magazines to our nonmember friends. Several friends have been interested and have asked to borrow an issue to read at home. I pray that Heavenly Father will help these small gospel seeds to take root, to grow, and to flourish.

Ana Ester Parabue,
Bragado Branch, Chivilcoy Argentina District

After waiting two extra weeks for an issue of Valkeus (Finnish) to arrive, I rejoiced to see its colors, its pictures of people full of joy. I rejoiced to read its words, to think of all the places around the world it is read, and to feel the Holy Ghost testify of this unique magazine.

Jorma Kallio,
Turku First Ward, Tampere Finland Stake

In taking the missionary discussions, I learned that the Book of Mormon is revelation given to humankind. It teaches us what we should do to create a heaven on earth. As a member of the Church, I know the Book of Mormon is additional evidence of God’s interest in us. His Church brings eternal happiness.

Nadia Suzette Raméliarisoa,
Antananarivo Second Branch, Antananarivo Madagascar District

When I read the Liahona (English), I am delighted by the different articles from contributors worldwide. It seems the Lord’s Spirit works upon me as I read them. I am grateful to have the Liahona as a means of learning truth.

Louie A. Arcangel,
Lal-Lo Branch, Aparri Philippines District
