When we trust someone, we believe in him or her. We feel sure the person will do what he or she promises to do. There is Someone we can always trust. We can always trust the Lord.

Many men and women in the scriptures faced difficult choices or unusual situations. Often they needed help to know what they should do. Their lives were blessed because they trusted in the Lord and obeyed him.

In the Old Testament, Joseph’s brothers stripped him of his beautiful coat and sold him to slave traders going to Egypt (see Gen. 37). Would you know what to do if you were taken from your family as Joseph was?

Would you know what to do if you were told to consume food and drink against the Word of Wisdom? That happened to Daniel and his friends (see Dan. 1).

When these people had difficult challenges, they knew they could trust in the Lord. They knew he would direct their paths (see Prov. 3:5–6).

Joseph trusted the Lord and kept his commandments even when faced with great temptation. Later, Pharaoh made Joseph a ruler over all of Egypt (see Gen. 39–41). Rebekah trusted the Lord and married Abraham’s son Isaac because she knew that Abraham and Isaac loved and served God. She became a mother of God’s covenant people (see Gen. 24; 25:20–23; 35:9–12). Daniel trusted the Lord and obeyed his counsel to eat and drink only those things that would not harm him. He became wise and was appointed to be a ruler in Babylon (see Dan. 1; 2:48).

When we trust in the Lord, he can direct our paths. Heavenly Father loves us just as he loved Joseph, Rebekah, and Daniel. Every day as we keep the commandments, pray, and seek Heavenly Father’s direction for the choices we make, he will help us.

Complete the dot-to-dot to discover a great heroine who trusted in the Lord to direct her paths. Check the scripture reference if you need help. Write her name in the box. Color the picture.

1.  Ask some adults to tell brief, age-appropriate versions of the following stories: Nephi (1 Ne. 3–4), Rebekah (Gen. 24; Gen. 25:20–23; Gen. 35:9–12), Ruth (Ruth 1–4), Joseph in Egypt (Gen. 37–41), and Daniel (Dan. 1; Dan. 2:48). Provide pictures from the meetinghouse library or the Gospel Art Picture Kit, if possible. Help the children understand that we can be like the men and women in the scriptures when we trust in the Lord.

2.  Write out Proverbs 3:5–6 [Prov. 3:5–6] on a slip of paper and hide it before the children arrive. Tell the children there is a very important scripture they should know; it is on a slip of paper hidden somewhere in the room, and they can find it only by remaining in their seats and asking questions that you can answer with yes or no. (For example: “Is it higher than your head?” “Is it under someone’s chair?”) When they have “found” it, read it with them and talk about the times in our lives when we need someone to direct us. Share your own testimony that when we trust in Heavenly Father, he can direct our paths. Sing “Seek the Lord Early” (Children’s Songbook, 108; The Friend, March 1996, 13) or “Faith” (Children’s Songbook, 96–97; The Friend, September 1995, 6–7).
