Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

Preface

Camilla Eyring Kimball is a kindly, unassuming, intelligent, independent, sensitive, honest, hardworking, tolerant, generous, spiritual woman, worthy of her good husband.

If one characteristic had to be chosen to sum up her personality, it might be that she is intensely alive. She has said, "Some people feel that their responsibilities stifle them. I feel that fulfilling obligations is the best way to grow. Any woman should be alive to opportunities—alive to public interests, to her family, to growth from Church service. I have no patience with women who find life boring. Life is so interesting, it just worries me that I cannot get done all the things I want desperately to do."

She has been a pacesetter for all Eyring brothers and sisters and for her own children. As a refugee from Mexico, she secured an education with great determination and sacrifice. She believes that a good education is the way to rise in the world. All her life she has remained intellectually alive, curious, and studious.

"Of all the institutions I know, the family is the one that is eternal," Camilla has said, "and the home is its haven." She cooks marvelously, runs her home efficiently, and welcomes family and friends. She likewise loves the earth and works it hard to produce vegetables, fruits, and flowers in her small yard.

The central jewel in her husband's crown, she has supported and sustained him in all his illnesses and discouraging times and in his spiritual challenges, from young husband and father to prophet, seer, and revelator of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Her support has made possible his great contributions to others. But Camilla has also assumed her own leadership responsibilities in church and community, never submerged in her husband's personality. She has her own spiritual life and has come to her own understanding and application of the command to love both God and neighbor. She acts upon the motto "Never suppress a generous thought."

The chapters that follow are in great part based on Camilla's own autobiographical writings and journals, set down for her family without thought of publication.

Nelle Spillsbury Hatch, Colonia Juarez, provided the major source for the history of that village. Additional information on Camilla's married life can be found in Spencer W. Kimball (Bookcraft, 1977), the biography of her husband.

At the first suggestion that this book be written, Camilla expressed great reluctance to let go a last vestige of privacy. The notion that people might be interested in her life flattered but surprised her. She acquiesced only after she was persuaded that from her story other women might take some encouragement.
