Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

My Beloved

By President Spencer W. Kimball

In writing a few lines as a tribute to my beloved wife, Camilla Eyring Kimball, I am a little at a loss—not for things to say, but to know which things would be appropriate. It seems almost sacrilege to attempt it, so wide and deep and sacred are the memories of our long life together—more than six decades, time enough for many lights and shadows, disappointments and ecstasies.

We have traveled over the earth together. We have ridden camels near Cairo, climbed high mountains in South America, gone deep into the catacombs of Rome, and dug into the seething lava of Mount Vesuvius. We have been together in the fjords of south New Zealand and those far north in Norway. We have explored the rivers of Babylon and climbed the ziggurats of Ur. We have traversed the delta of the Amazon, rediscovered Machu Picchu, and watched killer lions and giraffes and elephants roam free in Africa. We have flown in mail planes in Norway, little transport planes in Honduras, and the largest jets over the great mountains, oceans, rivers, cities, and plains of the wide world. We have climbed ancient towers and ruins in Central America and have flown low over the Angkor Wat of Cambodia.

We have celebrated Christmas with the people of Saigon and Singapore. We have knelt together in the Garden of Gethsemane and climbed the Mount of Olives and the Mount of Transfiguration. We have read the New Testament together in the tomb and bathed our feet in the Sea of Galilee.

Camilla has been by my side in every experience. We have buried our parents and other loved ones, and have given up our own little children prematurely born. We have been in the depths and soared to the heights.

She has trembled and prayed through many hours of heart and throat and brain surgery for me, and through the hours of surgery on the legs of our youngest. She showed her character and strength through those agonizing days of wonder and fear at the hospitals and then those tiring, never-ending days and nights of uncomplaining care. For the little fellow she changed his day braces to night splints, and she rubbed and massaged his limbs and bathed and rubbed and bound them. For me she constantly helped and encouraged in every illness.

Year after year she has served and treated and blessed. Here is the true mother, the loyal wife, the perfect nurse!

We have wept together and we have laughed together. We have seen the sublime and have suffered the grotesque. Our life has been full of fun in spite of all the sad and serious things. We have danced; we have sung; we have entertained; we have loved and been loved. With a wife like Camilla Eyring, life becomes inclusive, full, and abundant.

After we returned at midnight from a dancing party at the Governor's Mansion in Salt Lake City some years ago, I said to her as I helped her from the car, "Darling, you were the most beautiful woman there. Not one could hold a candle to you." "Ah," she said, "I know that isn't true, dear, but I love to hear it from you."
