Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

1

I was born December 7, 1894, in Colonia Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, to Edward Christian Eyring and Caroline Cottam Romney. My paternal grandfather was from Germany, his wife from Basel, Switzerland. On my mother's side I inherited English blood. In each line were converts to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who made the trek across the plains as pioneers to Utah in the mid-1800s. Both my grandfathers lived in St. George, Utah, both were polygamists, and both moved to Mexico to escape the danger of arrest for violation of the federal laws that had been passed making the practice of plural marriage a crime in the territories. For this reason I was born a Mexican citizen.

The Church, wishing to establish colonies where Saints could safely maintain their polygamous households, sent families into the Mexican state of Chihuahua, just south of New Mexico Territory. They ultimately established eight colonies—Juarez, Dublan, and Diaz east of the Sierra Madres; Chuichupa, Pacheco, and Garcia in the mountains; and Morelos and Oaxaca across the mountains in Sonora. Of these Juarez and Dublan were largest.

Colonia Juarez, where my grandparents settled, nestled in the rolling foothills of the Sierra Madres. I remember that after a long dusty drive from Dublan to Juarez, through mesquite, sand, and chaparral, one rounded the last hill and descended a dugway into the compact mass of trees in a narrow valley along the Piedras Verdes River. But this was the new town; the colonists had first settled farther down in the open. After investing great effort in building homes and a dam and planting crops, they learned that the land to which they had bought title was upstream. They had to move into the canyon, less than a mile wide.

In 1885 numerous federal prosecutions for unlawful cohabitation were begun in southern Utah. Miles P. Romney, my maternal grandfather, went to Juarez from St. George, Utah, in 1885 with his wife Annie Maria Woodbury. He soon sent for his other wives, Hannah Hill and my grandmother, Catherine Jane Cottam. Grandfather was a skilled carpenter and joiner. He had served as head of all the building trades in St. George and had assisted his father, who was the chief builder of the St. George Temple. In Mexico, Grandfather Romney established a lumberyard and furnished a market for freighters who made regular trips to the sawmill in the mountains. He superintended the building of the schoolhouse, the gristmill, and other public projects as well as private homes. In his spare time he made stools, benches, school desks, tables, cupboards, and other simple furniture. He had great interest in dramatics and acted the chief role in most of the plays presented in the community. He usually led the parade that marked every celebration as grand marshal, with plumes waving and sword flashing; it was as though the occasion were created to give him opportunity to perform. His eloquence in church meetings and his patriotic oratory on Mexican national holidays always moved his audiences. He also read and recited to his family, implanting his love of the classics and reverence for the spoken word.

In 1887 Henry Eyring, my paternal grandfather, also moved to Colonia Juarez from St. George. He and Grandfather Romney were well acquainted. Among other things they had been major supporters of the library established in St. George. Elder Erastus Snow selected him to found and operate the Juarez Cooperative Mercantile Institution. "But first," Brother Snow had told him, "you should become acquainted with the Spanish language, know the Mexican people, their laws, and the technicalities of doing business in their country." To provide an opportunity for this training, Elder Snow explained, he was being called as president of the Mexican Mission. On his way to Mexico City he stayed in Colonia Juarez for several months, long enough to haul timber from the mountains to build on the new townsite the community's first log house and get his wife Deseret settled. He then continued his journey to Mexico City in July 1887.

With a small missionary force he looked after Church affairs in Mexico City until late in 1888, when he returned to Colonia Juarez to begin the business for which he had originally been appointed. During the months away he had acquired a knowledge of the Spanish language, become versed in commercial law, learned the details of doing business with Mexican officials and commercial houses, and located the merchandise with which to stock his store. He shipped his $1500 worth of goods to Colonia Juarez, where a neat frame building, equipped with shelves and warehouse space, was ready, and began the long-planned merchandising business. The Co-op operated for the public benefit, materially raising standards of living and bringing prestige to the town.

In 1890 he brought my grandmother, Mary Bommeli, from St. George to join him and Deseret.

Always prompt in meeting his obligations, habitually punctual in beginning his day's work, and painstakingly careful that his books were accurately kept in the Spanish language, he exemplified downright honesty and undeviating integrity, making a lasting impression on the lives of all who knew him. His kindliness to his employees elicited willing service from them. Once when a dishonest customer claimed to have paid the bill he owed, Grandfather simply marked it paid. One of the clerks, unwilling to see Grandfather cheated, overcharged the dishonest customer a little at a time until by careful calculation the debt had been paid, with interest. Grandfather never knew.

My father, Edward Christian Eyring, came to Juarez several years after his father. He had helped his father move, then returned to Arizona to work as a ranch hand. My mother, Caroline Cottam Romney, came with her parents when she was thirteen years old. When Father was twenty-two and Mother sixteen they met at a ranch near Juarez and were immediately attracted to one another. She soon promised to marry him, but one day when he was on holiday in Casas Grandes with a group of friends, Father had some beer and smoked a cigar. Grandfather Romney heard about it and in a fury told Caroline that she could never speak to Ed Eyring again. An obedient daughter, for two years she sorrowfully had nothing to do with the young man except to see him at dances, but she had made up her mind she would marry him, and turned away several other proposals of marriage. Finally Grandfather Romney relented, and the young couple resumed their courting. In 1893, in company with Father's sister Ida and Ida's fiance, Edward Turley, and with Grandma Eyring as chaperone, they made the long trip by horsedrawn wagon and by train to Salt Lake City, Utah, to be married in the temple there. Thus I, their first child, was born under the covenant.

I was born in a little red brick house on the east side of the Piedras Verdes River, which divided Colonia Juarez in half lengthwise. The river ran along the bottom of our lot, and the bank was very steep. Though usually a narrow stream, during the summer flood season the river often became a roaring torrent and sometimes washed through our corral. The floods always brought down quantities of driftwood, which men and boys drew out with lassos to be used for firewood.

When I was not quite three years old Father went on a mission to Germany, the land of his father's birth. He labored there twenty-seven months. He thought he had left his family provided for through money owed him. He had given a man a team on which the man was to make weekly payments to Mother, but the man disappeared with the team. The men who owed Father did not pay, so while Father was gone, Mother suffered great hardships, sometimes being both cold and hungry, but I always had enough. Mother saw to that. She did not tell Father of her problems for fear he would feel obligated to come home. She did sewing and fed four boarders. She rented out her own bed and slept on the floor, even though she was pregnant. She was determined to save enough money to send to Father to keep him on his mission. When Father had been gone about six months, my sister Mary was born. At that time I had whooping cough, and I was sent to stay with my Grandmother Eyring so the new baby would not be exposed. One of my earliest memories is running to the edge of the porch whenever I had to cough and stooping over the edge to vomit.

When Mary was about one month old I was taken home, but I didn't remember Mother, and I cried to go back with Grandmother. Father did not learn that my little sister had been born deaf until he came home when I was just past five. Mother had kept this secret too, so as not to worry him. When he returned I did not know him. I couldn't understand the great fuss Mother was making over the strange man with the beard. I asked her to please send him away. But what a joy it was to her to have Father home again.

My Romney grandparents had moved to a big farm in Dublan, eighteen miles away. Every three or four weeks we went to visit them and had a grand time. Once Father hitched a span of horses to the two-seat white-topped buggy and we made the trip of eighteen miles in three hours, a record speed.

Of necessity, the people in the colonies were self-sufficient, maintaining themselves with products from their own gardens, farmyard animals, and what manufacturing they could do themselves. Mother made her own soap, which she used to clean everything from faces to floors. Father repaired the family shoes.

Many activities of the home required cooperation of neighbors and friends. Rag bees, sewing bees, and quilting bees brought neighbors together to help and to visit. The hostess traditionally provided a hot meal. At such times old clothes were torn into strips, sewn together, and wound into balls ready to be made into carpets for the parlors. Every spring each rag carpet was taken up, placed over a clothesline, and beaten with a broom until the accumulated dust was removed. The old straw had to be removed from the floor, the floor scrubbed, and a fresh layer of wheat straw spread out. Then the carpet was stretched and tacked into place. We children had fun tromping over the spongy floor and hearing the crunch of the fresh straw.

We went to Sister McDonald's home for yeast. Mother used to put half a cup of sugar or flour in a small bucket, and we children would exchange it for a quantity of hop yeast. I could smack my lips still at the memory of that delicious yeast. The little bucket would be almost full when I left Sister McDonald's, but it was apt to be somewhat less when I reached home, for I kept sipping it along the way, hoping there would be enough left when I reached home for Mother to mix bread.

When I started to school the fall before my eighth birthday, Ada Helquist was my seatmate, and we were inseparable chums. All the seats were double, cumbersome, homemade affairs, and everyone had a seatmate. Sometimes a punishment meted out—for example, for being tardy—was to put a girl with a boy. This was enough to bring anyone to school on time. Elva Gibbons was another early school friend. We had a "post office" in a hollow log out in the school woodpile, and every morning each would deposit a letter for the other in this secret place. The letters were apt to be rather mushy.

Father was always very patient with his children—Mother had to do the disciplining. Father slapped me only once. It was a cold winter day with snow on the ground, unusual for our Mexican climate. He sent me on an errand to the next-door neighbors, the Petersons, and told me to put on a coat. I did the errand but forgot the coat. When I came back he slapped me because I had disobeyed. I took a chair, set it in the corner of the room, and sat with my face to the wall for hours, brokenhearted.

Because my grandparents all lived in plural marriage and had gone to Mexico for that reason, I should probably not have been surprised that Father might also feel impelled to make that commitment. But when, at age eight, I became aware that my father was courting my mother's younger sister Emma, I was jealous for Mother. I first sensed something was happening when I watched Father and Aunt Emma one day bringing the team up the road for our trip home from a visit to my Romney grandparents' farm; they laughed and talked like a courting couple. Later on, when Father had been away and Mother told me that Aunt Emma would be coming to live with us as Father's second wife, I was upset. But she had given her consent, believing as Father did that the only way for them to attain the highest glory in the celestial kingdom was to faithfully live by The Principle. They understood that in Mexico it was still permissible, and they were encouraged in that understanding.

When I was to set the table for dinner, I found the oldest silverware to put at Aunt Emma's place. I feel ashamed now of my petty reaction, but as a child I did not understand the great sacrifice it represented on the part of all three of them to live harmoniously in that relationship. Aunt Emma lived with us for a year until a separate house was constructed for her.

After I had been in the second grade a few months, my teacher told me I could go into the third grade. I cried and cried because I didn't want to leave my friends. Besides, the third grade teacher, Miss Butler, had a reputation for being very strict and cross, and I was afraid of her. The first morning I went into the new class, however, Miss Butler came to me and, putting her arm around me, said, "You've come to be my little girl, have you?" She won my heart at once, and I always thought her a most wonderful teacher.

Augusta Ivins was my new seatmate, and for the next four years we were inseparable bosom companions. Gusta and I used to roam over the hills together hunting pretty rocks, wild flowers, and prickly-pear apples. We confided every secret thought to each other and carved our initials on rocks and in the top branches of trees. We hid a collection of pins and hairpins on the trunk of a thick cypress tree, a secret that we shared with no one. We took turns eating Sunday dinner at each other's home. I once spilled tomato soup all over their white tablecloth and nearly died of shame.

When I went to play at Gusta's house after school, my instructions from Mother were to be home at sundown, not a minute later. Gusta lived at the foot of the hills on the other side of the village, and if I began running as soon as the sun disappeared at her house, I could just get to my home on the east side of the river by the time the sun was down there. If I missed it I got spanked.

When I was thirteen Anthony W. Ivins, our stake president, Gusta's father, was made an apostle and the Ivins family moved to Salt Lake City. This was a tragedy for me. I didn't think I could live without Gusta. How I wept, sure I would never find such a chum again. For years she and I corresponded frequently, and I saw her when I went to Provo to school, but, of course, we had grown apart—though all our lives we have exchanged Christmas cards.

In the fall of 1907 we moved to our new home on the west side of town and of the river. How we hated to move to a new neighborhood. Mother felt funereal about it, but after we settled in we liked it very much.

Among the grade school teachers I remember well was Brother Haag, a big German. He was very strict, but he surely knew how to get us to sing. He had us prepare several operettas. In one, he took the part of a schoolmaster, and at the end of the play he was bowing to the audience when the curtain came down and hit him on the back of the head. I was terribly embarrassed for him. After all of his work, it was sad to end the play in comic fashion. His false teeth didn't fit very well, and I was often afraid for him, that he would lose them.

Brother Gonzales, a native Mexican convert to the Church, who had married one of the colonists' daughters, was our Spanish teacher. We attended a class in Spanish every day all through the grades and used Spanish daily in speaking to the Mexicans who lived among us.

Father used to go to El Paso once or twice a year to buy clothes for us all. He always brought us loads of presents, and sometimes we went with him. In the fall of 1904 the family made the trip to El Paso on the train. While we were there we went to see the Barnum and Bailey Circus, the wonder of wonders. The giraffes and the trapeze performers most captured my imagination. In El Paso we stayed in an upstairs hotel room, and to get water for the washbowl we had to go down an outside stairway into a patio. The proprietress kept a wad of tobacco under her lower lip, and there were tobacco stains down the sides of her chin. It was a scandalous sight for us children to see a woman chew tobacco.

Father owned a big cattle ranch and rode the range all the time. He employed Mexican help, and members of one tenant family living near us were almost like members of our own family. The man, Chico, was faithful and friendly; he would do anything for Father or for any of us. We liked his wife, Juana, too, but Chico was our favorite.

We always had a fine herd of horses. Father had a huge black Percheron stallion that he kept for breeding purposes. I had a horse of my own, Apache, a dapple gray, and rode with Father sometimes. I had a beautiful side saddle, which father paid a big price for, and I wore a divided skirt of khaki. One day I was riding old Tom, a sorrel pony, at a swift gallop down the main street of town. He shied at a piece of paper that blew under his feet and left me in a heap in the dust, more embarrassed than hurt.

During the summers almost every day groups of young people would go up the river to the edge of town to the old swimming hole. We had never heard of swimming suits, but just wore old dresses. We changed our clothes in the bushes beside the river. Boys and girls went swimming separately. Sometimes when the river was flooded and running swiftly, we would jump in upstream, swim down with the current, and then climb out and walk back up the bank to swim down again.

The summer of 1908 we lived on the ranch eight miles up the river from town. There were a hundred range cows to be milked. Uncle Andrew Eyring made three big cheeses every morning. I helped break and work the curd. One morning when we had cooked whole wheat for breakfast, I took my bowl into the dairy room and skimmed some of the thickest cream into my bowl of wheat. I enjoyed the gorging, but later when it came back up, it wasn't so pleasant, and for years I sickened at the smell of boiling wheat.

Father's older brother, Uncle Henry Eyring, went blind when he was a young man, before I was born. He sat in an armchair near the front gate of Grandmother's house and listened to the footsteps of people passing by. He could recognize their walk and would call out their names in greeting. When I was small he liked to hold me on his lap. He gave me the little metal stars and horseshoes that came on his plug tobacco. The morning Uncle Henry died Mother came into my bedroom to tell me. I was grief stricken.

This is the first death I recall clearly. Both my grandfathers had died when I was young, but my relationship with them had been fairly formal, so my feelings were not much affected. At Grandfather Eyring's funeral my main concern was my new blue felt hat with a white pompom. As we mourners passed between parallel lines of Church members I was peeking about to see who would notice my new hat. Uncle Henry's death, on the other hand, represented the loss of a companion. I had a feeling that I had been special to him.

His death left Grandma Eyring living alone, so it was decided I should go to live with her, just four blocks away. I lived with her when I was thirteen and fourteen and in the seventh grade. I was very fond of Grandmother, but she had some decided ideas that were hard for a little girl to live up to. She was absolutely opposed to novel reading, and at that age I had an insatiable appetite for novels. In my upstairs bedroom was a cupboard full of books belonging to my cousins Theresa and Beatrice Snow, who had also lived with Grandmother. Every night I went to bed soon after supper, and by the light of a small coal-oil lamp I read until I heard Grandmother start up the stairs; then I quickly extinguished the light and went to sleep. I read all the Horatio Alger series, Louisa May Alcott's books (I related to Jo, the tomboy), and whatever else came to hand.

Grandmother was always up at daylight and went out to work in the flowers or vegetable garden. As soon as I heard her start down the stairs I would begin reading again. She would come in to call me just in time for breakfast. Often she said to me, "Camilla, I don't see how you can sleep so many hours." She never knew of the hours I had been reading.

During the time I lived with Grandmother, I suffered intensely from a fear of insanity. There was a boy in the town who was retarded, and I looked at him with horror and wondered if I would be like that. Every time Mother scolded me for forgetting something or for any other trivial mistake I said to myself, "See, I am going crazy." I was dreadfully morbid and self-conscious, and I didn't dare confide in anyone. Finally I happened to read an article in American Motherhood magazine describing this mental condition as common to adolescence. It was like a release from jail to be reassured that other youngsters had the same fears and that I was not peculiar.

Grandmother slept between two deep feather ticks, and every day she beat and plumped them up until they were two or three feet thick. For breakfast she always made either burned crust or bran "coffee" and served it with her delicious white bread and butter, which I liked to sop in it. She made the best bread imaginable. When she took it out of the oven, she wrapped it in a white flannel blanket and let it sweat, which seemed to add to its delectable flavor.

In one of her cupboard drawers she kept several bottles of tiny sugar pills. Their medicinal properties must have been very mild, for I never lost an opportunity to snitch some, and there never seemed to be any ill effects—they tasted like fine-flavored candy to me. Grandmother had a large vineyard, which she cultivated beautifully. The grapes were delicious, especially the Isabellas, dark blue grapes with slippery skins. We ate them fresh, and canned juice and jelly.

The parlor in her home was carefully closed, to be used for company, and we lived in the big kitchen.

Aunt Emma and her family lived in the house next to us, and she and Mother took turns with chores, such as caring for milk and eggs. As the eldest in both families, I was often given responsibility for the children when their mothers were away, so I had plenty of experience at baby tending. Maybe that's why I have never since wanted to tend anyone else's babies.

I helped Mother with the children and the laundry. In those days the dirty diapers were stored in a sack for a week and then washed out in one dirty tubful the night before wash day. That was always my assignment, and it still makes me almost sick to remember the nasty job. Mary, my sister just younger than I, was my special care, and since she was deaf, it was sometimes a real responsibility. Mother insisted that I should take her to parties with me. This was a trial, for many times I felt she hadn't been invited.

I had some real struggles with my brother Henry. Once when I was about twelve and Henry six, he refused to mind some instruction of mine when I was tending the family in Mother's absence, so I attempted to put him in the dark closet under the stairway. He fought desperately, for he was afraid, but I finally succeeded in forcing him in. When I let him out he said, "You fool!" In tears I told him of the punishment the Bible predicted would come to anyone who used that terrible word. We both wept for fear perdition was sure. Hell's fire seemed pretty close that time.

School played an important part in my life. The eighth grade met in the Academy building, and we felt like real grown-ups. I was the president of this eighth grade graduating class, and at the graduation exercises I was to give the welcoming address; I had such a cold I couldn't speak above a whisper. I suffered intensely, sure that everyone was laughing at me.

About this time a group we called "our crowd" developed, six girls and six boys who had good times together. We had picnics, hayrides, candy pulls, and parties. We were very exclusive and clannish. The "smart" thing to do was to have oyster suppers and serve homemade root beer. These we had quite often. I didn't like the root beer, and I had such a firm conviction that it was not quite right to drink "beer" that I would never drink it, so the others always sarcastically made me a glass of lemonade. One night we were having the supper at Elletts' home, and two of us girls went out to the kitchen to open a keg of root beer. When we loosened the cork just a little, the force of the effervescence blew the cork to the ceiling and sprayed root beer all over the kitchen.

At a candy pull at the molasses mill one night the hour was late when the molasses candy was done, so instead of waiting for it to cool, the boys poured it into a bucket of cold water and each one reached a hand in for a piece to pull. While I was trying to get my share, they poured some more boiling candy in, blistering my hand badly.

Father never did approve of the boys in this group, and I always went with them over his protest. Sometimes, when I came home later than I should have, I would take my shoes off and sneak up the stairs to bed. The stairs were sure to squeak before I could get up to the top step, and Father would wake up and scold me a bit.

The first night dance I went to, when I was fourteen years old, was a Valentine costume dance at the school, and I went decked out in a full-skirted purple crepe-paper dress I had made. I didn't do much dancing and I was devastated, but Mother tried to console me because it was the first time.

Soon afterwards a neighbor boy I liked invited me to go to a dancing party with him. I was delighted. This was my first invitation to go out as a couple. It marked my growing up. But when I asked Papa if I could go, he disapproved, saying, "I wouldn't be found dead in a turnip patch with that boy." I wept a little and said I had already accepted. Finally Papa let me go this once, with the promise there would not be a second date with the fellow. I never did understand Father's objection.

During this year I was so self-conscious about boys that I would go around the block to keep from meeting one who had taken me out.

The local Church leaders were very strict about dancing. No waltzes were allowed, and the waltz position was taboo. We just took hold of hands and pranced around. Those who were daring would clasp hands under their chins and get a rather close hold that way. Every other dance was a quadrille or square dance, interspersed with a schottische, polka, or some other. In the quadrille we used to swing so hard on the corners that I became almost too dizzy to stand. We danced the Virginia reel, too, with plenty of vim.

Basket dances were held frequently for fund raising. Each girl brought a basket lunch and would be taken home by the boy who bought it. One night when the baskets were being auctioned off, my partner, Ernest Haws, bid five dollars for mine. I was greatly flattered. At another dance my basket was bought by a boy I didn't like. When the dance was over I was supposed to let him take me home, but I didn't want to, so I went into the ladies' restroom and hid. He kept waiting in the hall until finally I climbed out the window and ran home.

My first and only automobile ride while we lived in Mexico was in a car that belonged to Uncle Henry Bowman, who lived in Dublan; I thought of him as my rich uncle. I rode several blocks up Main Street at perhaps ten miles per hour, and I stiffened with pride as I felt that the envious eyes of everyone were upon me. People came rushing from their houses to see the wonder go by.

Along with many other colonists, our family went to El Paso when President William Howard Taft came there to meet President Diaz of Mexico. It was an event of great pageantry, with bands and a parade. The meeting of these two presidents had special significance to the colonists, because it symbolized our double loyalty to the United States and to Mexico.
