Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

2

By the fall of 1910 Colonia Juarez was at a high level of prosperity and industries flourished. The Co-op had a stock of merchandise valued at ten thousand dollars. Orders were accepted by telephone and deliveries made free of charge. The shoe and harness shop and tannery, operated by the Taylor brothers, manufactured saddles and harnesses. The gristmill ground day and night, supplying a good grade of flour. Homes were well stocked with provisions: preserved fruits and vegetables in pantries, barreled pork, beans, flour, cornmeal and shorts, apples, root vegetables, and squash in cellars. The Pearson Lumber Company ten miles to the south was connected with the border city of El Paso by daily trains.

Colonia Juarez had no saloons, no pool halls, no problem with drunkenness. Smoking was rare, and the drinking of tea and coffee was discouraged. Church leaders visiting the colony were quick to recognize the high level of cultural achievement.

This is the time I started high school. During my two years of high school I took an active part in class and school activities, holding various offices. I managed straight A grades both years except for one-fourth unit in string orchestra, where I played a mandolin and got a B. During these two years I read an unconscionable number of novels. I often sat on the back seat in Guy C. Wilson's psychology class reading a novel while we were supposed to recite on psychology.

I took a course in biology under Mr. Oberhansley just at the time when the theory of evolution was a point of great concern. As most adolescent youngsters do, I swallowed the daring new theory hook, line, and sinker, and delighted in arguing with Father and Mother, insisting that I believed profoundly in evolution.

From the time I was fifteen years old I taught a Primary and a Sunday School class, the latter with Theadosia Meacham and Jennie Whipple. I got a feeling I would like to be a "real" teacher someday.

Rumbles of a revolutionary storm had been heard in the colonies for some time, but little attention was paid to them. Porfirio Diaz, the first president of Mexico to give a semblance of peace to the nation, had overstayed his term of office. Everywhere the rich people in fine clothing looked down upon the peons who lived in dire poverty. In the October 1910 election, Madero sought to be elected president of Mexico on a platform to improve the lot of the peons, but he was promptly put in prison by Diaz's men, and it was announced that Diaz had been elected for his seventh term of office.

Madero escaped from jail and promptly denounced Diaz's claim of election. He began to stir up revolution, and the state of Chihuahua, where we lived, with the city of Casas Grandes as the focal point, was the first state to revolt. In the colonies by 1911 the rebels demanded horses, saddles, and food from the colonists, paying with worthless receipts, and they stole anything they could get their hands on. Father lost dozens of head of cattle and horses. We lived in dread. The colonists tried to remain completely neutral, on advice of Elder Ivins, who came to confer with our leaders. However, conditions worsened to the extent that law broke down. Competing rebel bands threatened life and confiscated property. In July 1912 Salazar demanded that the colonists give up their arms. They were unwilling to leave their families wholly unprotected, so the stake president, my uncle Junius Romney, decided that the women and children should move temporarily to the United States for safety.

That summer we had raised lots of blackberries. On Saturday Mother, with our help, canned one hundred quarts of berries. That evening Father came home with word that our guns were to be delivered up to the rebels at the bandstand on Sunday and that the stake leaders had decided we should leave for El Paso immediately. He took up the porch floor and we stored the newly bottled berries underneath, thinking we would soon return to reclaim them. We hid valuables in all the unlikely places we could think of.

We were allowed to take just one trunk of clothes for Father's family of thirteen. I wanted so much to put in my doll and some other treasures, but there was no room. I had always been a great collector and had kept all my school papers, letters, toys—everything I had ever owned; now I had to leave them all, never to see them again.

In the morning Father drove us to Pearson in the white-topped buggy. This railroad station was about eight miles from Juarez. There were dozens of buggies and wagons and crowds of refugees waiting for the train to carry us to the safety of the United States. Grandmother Eyring had been robbed of forty dollars that morning by a rebel who invaded her house and demanded her money. A troop of rebels on horseback with guns and bayonets was drawn up in formation at the train station. As one old lady walked by, a soldier hooked his rifle through her handbag and took possession of it. She dared not protest, but went on to the train. A drunken man rode his horse at my sister Isabel, just three, and nearly trampled her, laughing at her fright.

When the last wagon had unloaded on the depot platform at Pearson, several hundred women, children, and elderly persons, assisted by a few able-bodied men, were ready to take the train for El Paso. At Dublan more people crowded on, making about one thousand refugees packed onto one train. Our family was in a third-class car with long, hard benches running lengthwise of the cars and children and baggage piled on top of one another. Buggies and wagons were left standing empty at the station. When passenger cars filled up, boxcars and even a few cattle cars were attached. Some cars were so crowded that even standing room was a premium. We all suffered intensely as the delayed train finally moved off in the stifling July heat.

The trip to the border at El Paso was only about 150 miles, but the train went at a snail's pace and stopped every few miles. We were in terror all the time lest the rebels waylay us. We traveled all day and all night. Finally, just as dawn was breaking, we crawled slowly across the Rio Grande and were greeted by the sight of the Stars and Stripes. A great shout went up from all the refugees. That sight brought a thrill that is revived in me every time I return to the United States and see the flag again. After a harrowing experience we felt safe once more.

The kind people of El Paso met us at the depot and took us in automobiles (only the second time I'd ridden in one) out to a big lumberyard, where they improvised shelter for the refugees. Hundreds had already arrived before us and hundreds were yet to come. They put us into a huge corral with dust a foot deep, flies swarming, noisy, stinking, and crowded with a mass of humanity. It was enough to make the stoutest heart sink. Those in charge tried to arrange a stall for each family, and we piled in for the night, hanging up blankets in an attempt at a little privacy. During that night five babies were born in these rude shelters.

We felt humiliated as newspaper photographers and reporters recorded our pitiful dependence and as the curious townspeople gawked and pointed at us, as they would animals in a zoo.

Mother had a little money, so the next day she scurried around to find us lodgings that were a little more private. She was expecting her ninth child in a few months. She finally took one room in a small hotel for the fourteen of us: Mother and her seven children, her younger sister Emma, who was also Father's second wife, Aunt Emma's four children, and Grandma Eyring. It was an inside room at that—no outside ventilation in that hot July weather. There was just room to spread quilts all over the floor, and we managed to be one deep at least until we were asleep. Some of us slept under Grandma's bed. In this room we ate our meals as well as slept. In the morning I took the children out to play in the fresh air.

We expected Father would come out of Mexico at any time to get us, so we stayed there about a week. We then moved to a tenement way down on Talles Street near the Rio Grande. There we had two rooms and at least some fresh air and a place to get outdoors. Families in six or eight apartments shared one kitchen, so the women took turns cooking for the crowd. The government sent men around every morning with daily rations. They brought white baker's bread, puffed wheat and rice, milk, and canned salmon. I suppose there were other things, but that is the diet I remember.

There was no furniture in the tenement. Our one trunk had a flat top, so we used it for a table, all sitting on the floor around it. During the day the bedding was rolled up around the sides of the room, and we sat on the rolls. I was embroidering a set of lingerie, so I spent many hours sitting on the rolls and doing my needlework.

I begged Mother to let me get a job. Many of the girls were going out to work in homes, and finally I persuaded her. I got work as a maid with a well-to-do family. I was the first-floor maid, with a white cap and apron; I answered the door, waited table, scoured the silver every Thursday morning, and in the afternoon took two spoiled youngsters to the park. For my services I earned four dollars a week—and was very proud of the earnings.

While we were getting settled in El Paso, affairs took a decidedly serious turn in Colonia Juarez. The looting and threats of the rebels increased, and President Romney decided that the men should leave to join their families in El Paso, since there seemed no chance of protecting their homes from looting without bloodshed. Uncle Junius went through great anguish because there was dissension about the move; a substantial minority of the people felt they might not have had to leave had matters been handled differently. Most agreed, however, that to stay might result in bloodshed, and they were willing to abandon their property, at least for a time, rather than take that chance.

In the tithing office were hidden about a hundred new guns that had not been turned over to the rebels. Rather than have them discovered and increase hostility, the leaders appointed Father and his brother-in-law, Miles Romney, to get the guns out. The rebels were camped near the building, and the two men pulled a board off the high fence and slipped the rifles, packed in cases of about six each, through the fence and onto the backs of horses. They cached the guns in a cave several miles away in an all-night effort. The men then came across the border five days by horseback, bringing with them three hundred guns and five hundred horses. They displayed a white flag to show their peaceful intentions. Across the border they were nearly fired on by Americans who thought they were rebels carrying the white flag as a ruse. Father finally joined us after we had been in El Paso about two weeks.

Father did not much like my working as a maid, and word came that we would likely be able to return to Mexico soon, so I gave up my job. The man for whom I worked was a railroad official, and he gave me a pass on the railroad back to Juarez, but I never got a chance to use it.

Disappointment came—more trouble in the colonies—and we were not allowed to return yet. I got another job in a home near the fairly decent house Father had rented for our family in Highland Park. I cared for a sick woman and her husband. I had stayed there for a few weeks when it became clear that it would be some time before we could go home, if ever.

Several times Father returned to Mexico to try to ship some of his cattle out, but he never succeeded. He finally had to abandon virtually everything we owned. It is hard to imagine the disappointment he felt in losing his ranch, cattle, horses, and homes, all left to despoilers, but he turned to the task at hand, of reestablishing himself and providing for his family of fifteen—himself, Mother and her eight children, and Aunt Emma and her four children.

The railroads offered free transportation to the refugees who wanted to seek homes away from the border. My parents and I decided that I should go, alone, to Utah to finish high school and try to make my own way.

My uncle Carl Eyring had offered me a place to stay in Provo, Utah, and I appreciated the opportunity. It meant setting out on a great adventure. At the same time I was filled with anxiety; I had been suddenly precipitated from a small, sheltered community surrounded by family into a large world offering me no security.

I was seventeen.
