Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

3

Taking advantage of the railroad's offer, Camilla left El Paso for Provo, Utah, on the first of September, 1912. Mary had been sent with friends to Ogden, Utah, to the School for the Deaf. Other people from the Colonies were also on the train, but Camilla preferred to try to make her own way without relying on them. When they left El Paso it was still very hot. As the train passed through the mountains of Colorado it began to snow and grew bitterly cold, but her coat was packed away in her trunk. She had a pair of cotton blankets in a roll that she was carrying with her, but she was too proud to wrap herself in them until it came to the point of freezing. When she finally used them, to her embarrassment she heard a woman say, "Well, she finally has sense enough to wrap up."

In Provo it was bitter cold and raining, and there was no one at the depot to meet her. She had never felt more bereft and lonely. A Sister Taylor, who also got off the train in Provo, kindly helped Camilla get to her uncle Carl Eyring's home, where she had been invited to live. The small house already held Carl and his sister Fern, who were only a few years older than Camilla, and their widowed mother, Aunt Deseret.

They were generous enough to take me in to work for my board. To begin with I felt like, and probably was, a charity ward. I scarcely dared to eat as much as I wanted. The change of climate made me ravenously hungry, and I never felt satisfied. Our diet consisted of boiled wheat flakes, served with skim milk, for breakfast; mashed potatoes thinned with water, and white beans seasoned with cooking fat, for dinner; and bread with a little milk for supper. I shared a room with Fern. They were very kind to take me in, but they were all three very set in their ways. They never went out at night, and there was no fun or life about the place. When I later started going out, I tried to meet my dates at the door and rush away. For entertainment we went dancing or to parties or walked around or sat on an old hayrack on the other side of the block. When I came in after they were all in bed, I felt censured for disturbing them, and they no doubt felt annoyed with me.

Carl was courting Fern Chipman, a popular young lady. She had difficulty choosing between him and another young man who had proposed marriage. About the first of November she told both of them that she had decided not to go out with either of them until she had made up her mind; at Thanksgiving time she would give her answer. I felt so anxious and sorry for Carl. He would go to the back of the lot and pace up and down endlessly, waiting for the time to pass. The tension built higher and higher. Finally, on Thanksgiving, Fern invited Carl to dinner with her family. There could have been no happier Thanksgiving anywhere than in his little house that day. We all rejoiced for him.

When she first arrived in Provo Camilla found work for two weeks packing peaches and earned a few dollars. She needed them, for her parents had little cash, having left everything in Mexico. Her father had a large family and no work, so the family could not support her.

To add to her sad predicament, Camilla's clothes, which her mother had so painstakingly made for her in El Paso, were all wrong. The skirts were up to her knees, and in Provo the girls and women were wearing skirts long. Her dresses were all cotton—and everyone in Provo was wearing wool during the cold winter months. Clothes meant a lot to her, so she suffered agonies over her wardrobe. At first she refused to go to Sunday School, parties, or anywhere except classes because she felt she didn't have suitable clothes. All her dresses had been made by one pattern, with only slight variations. But she soon adjusted to the situation and made the best of it.

Just before Christmas a package came from home, and Camilla opened it immediately. It was a party dress that she needed badly and had asked for, but to her sorrow it was tan, and she wanted pink or blue. And it was made by that same old pattern! Camilla was taking sewing classes in school, so she ripped the dress to pieces, remade it, trimmed it with blue fur, and finally felt she could wear it. Her mother, out of the goodness of her heart, sent Camilla little trinkets, but Camilla had no use for them and thought, "Oh, if Mother would just send me the money instead!"

Camilla's childhood chum, Augusta Ivins, came down from Salt Lake City to see her. The pleasure of the visit was diluted by the fact that Augusta dressed in the latest style; Camilla felt like a backwoods friend. She suffered so greatly with an inferiority complex that she made few friends. Her withdrawn disposition made the experience more miserable than it need have been. She did well in her studies, though, and made excellent grades, which compensated somewhat.

That Christmas Camilla went to Salt Lake City and Mary came from Ogden to join her. They spent a few days visiting their father's sister, Aunt Millie, and Aunt Millie's daughter, Beatrice. Camilla again felt like a charity case and imagined that she and Mary were not wanted, which made her miserable.

At the Brigham Young Academy the girls' organization had a roller skating party that year and Camilla went. She crept gingerly around the edge of the floor, holding tightly to the railing. About every yard her feet went out from under her and she fell, wiping a swath of the floor. Each time she dragged herself up and tried again. She was wearing her new winter coat and ripped the sleeve partly out. The next morning she was so stiff and sore that she could scarcely get out of bed. Later she had similar experiences with ice skating and with trying to learn to ride a bicycle. She concluded that she had no sense of balance when not standing on the ground.

During the summer of 1913 Camilla and Mary did not have the money to go home to Arizona, where their father had rented a farm and located his two families. Mrs. Ida Stewart Peay, an old friend of their mother and an invalid for fifteen years, offered the girls a home for the summer with free board and room. Mary was touchy and easily hurt when people laughed and did not tell her why, or failed to communicate the gist of the conversation. Camilla spent much of the time trying to calm those troubled waters. Besides providing board and room, Mrs. Peay paid Camilla two dollars and fifty cents a week for doing her washing and ironing and keeping the house clean. Camilla knew "Aunt Ida" could ill afford to pay her anything; Mr. Peay was a blacksmith and they had only enough to get by on. It was just out of the goodness of her heart that she took the girls in.

She was the grandest person I have ever known. There she lay flat on her back, but every morning she dressed herself neatly and carefully. She wore trim little black slippers and pretty print dresses, and looked like a picture as she lay on her bed. All around her bed she had bags and pockets with things she needed. She made her daughter Anna's dresses by hand, did all her darning and patching, and, when we were not there, did much of the food preparation—even mixing cakes—and then had her husband or children put the food on the stove to cook. Besides all this, she had a portable typewriter that she placed on top of herself, and she wrote stories and articles that were printed in magazines. She was always jolly and full of fun, and her home was one place in which I honestly felt welcome. I loved her devotedly.

About this time Camilla received a telegram from her father: "NO LETTER FOR WEEK. MOTHER MUCH WORRIED. IF ANYTHING WRONG WIRE IMMEDIATELY." Camilla had not written because at the moment she did not have the price of a two-cent stamp.

Besides working for the Peay family, Camilla washed for another woman and ironed for still another, so at times her total weekly income was four and a half dollars. The school year 1913-14 was to be Camilla's senior year in high school, and in addition to taking enough classes to graduate, she took several college courses in home economics, enough to major in this department. She hoped to get a job teaching home economics the next year.

Fortunately for her, the school passed a ruling that spring that the girls' graduation dresses should not cost over three dollars. Camilla was taking sewing in school, so she made a fine white dress with yards and yards of insertion and lace. She was really proud of it (and for the rest of her life kept it carefully packed away). She made herself several dresses that year in school and felt less self-conscious because now her clothes looked more like those of the other girls.

There were many firsts. At home she had never been allowed to "round dance" or take a waltz position; dance partners were permitted only to hold hands. But at the dances in Provo things were somewhat more relaxed.

The first time I went onto the dance floor in Provo and the boy put his arm around me in waltz position, I was so shocked I wasn't sure I hadn't been morally assaulted. What a sheltered life I had led! But there was always a dance manager walking the floor, and if he saw a couple getting too close together, he would tap them on the shoulder and remind them that there must always be space between them.

Walter Cottam, a cousin who lived in St. George, was a special friend of Camilla's that year, and they had many good times together, long walks and talks. One night they started to walk to the huge "Y" high on the mountainside and it was nearly morning when they got back.

Camilla saw her first motion picture in Provo.

In our childhood it was a thrill to be able to look through the glasses of a stereopticon viewer and see the pictures take depth. Father had brought many pictures from Germany when he returned from his mission, scenes of the Rhine River and the torture chamber where prisoners had been punished. I took lots of still pictures with a little box camera I had brought from Mexico, but now I saw a real moving picture, such as I had only heard of before. It was a marvel of marvels.

Her second year of school ended satisfactorily, and Camilla was elated that now she could hope to get an honest-to-goodness job! In the spring she applied for a position teaching home economics at Millard Academy in Hinckley, Utah, where her cousin Beatrice Snow had taught. Brother Stevens, the principal, wrote her to meet him in Springville, where the Academy's basketball team was scheduled to play. She was fearful at meeting a possible employer, but she landed the job and finally had the prospect of being fully independent.

Now, after two years away from her parents, she was to go home for the summer to visit and make outlines for the next winter's teaching. The family had moved to Thatcher, Arizona, and were living in an old school building. Her father had a livery stable and also carried the mail from the depot to the post office. Of the six children at home, Rose, who had been born after Camilla left El Paso, was a year and a half old, and Joseph, who had been a baby, was a little cotton-top fellow nearly four years old.

Camilla was delighted to be home. Soon after she arrived her mother insisted she go with her to visit "Grandma" Fife, and there she met Iretta and Caroline Layton. Iretta took her under her wing at once, and they became good friends. She took Camilla into her "crowd," and many of the friendships Camilla developed there were to last through the years.

Her mother, anxious for Camilla to have a good time, made arrangements with a friend for the friend's son to come and take Camilla to a dance in the cultural hall of the ward. Though Camilla remonstrated, her mother insisted, so she got ready and waited, but the boy did not show up. Finally she went to the dance with her girl friends and had a wonderful time. The boy was there also, but he did not dance with Camilla—and he never did make any explanation. She was puzzled, but not sad.

One night Iretta and Camilla went to a picture show in the old Woods showhouse. Afterwards they went to a dance and then home with Ray Killian and Bill McRae. Camilla was to stay with Iretta. Soon after they went to bed Camilla was awakened by Iretta's screams, and she felt someone grab her shoulders. Hearing the screams, "Aunt Cynthia" Layton, who was sleeping in the next room, grabbed her pistol and shot through the door at the intruder, who ran down the lane, jumped into a buggy, and drove away quickly. The girls were so frightened they did not dare go to bed again, but sat shivering with a gun ready until daylight, when they notified the sheriff. The officers made a search and questioned the girls, but could not discover who the intruder was. The girls remembered a boy who watched them closely at the show the night before, so the officers questioned him, but the investigation proved inconclusive.

The young people had many good times that summer. On July 24 they went in a buggy up to the flume at the foot of Mount Graham for a picnic. The flume carried lumber from the sawmill at the top of the mountain in a stream of water down the steep mountainside to a lumber yard. They donned overalls and sat on a board in the swift stream and careened down the flume. It seemed wickedly dangerous.

Camilla was the new girl in the community, and Bill McRae was the boy who gave all the new girls a fling. He worked in the bank and had a rubber-tired buggy and fast horse, so she felt rather flattered when he squired her around for a while. LeRoi C. Snow had a private little dance hall, and the young people had some nice parties there. For one party Camilla volunteered to make lemon pie. She had been hired as a cooking teacher and was expected to know how to cook, but the recipe she used was for lemon cake filling, and the pie turned out to be embarrassingly sticky.

Near the end of the summer Spencer Kimball, who had been working at a dairy in Globe and who was Iretta's good friend, came to Thatcher for one of the dances at Snow's before he left on a mission. They were introduced, but he didn't dance with Camilla. She felt disappointed.

When fall came she set out by train for Hinckley, Utah. It was midnight when she arrived at Oasis, the railroad station closest to Hinckley. Just the old stationmaster was at the depot, and he took her to a little old hotel across the track, led her up the stairs by the light of his lantern, and lighted a coal-oil lamp in the bedroom for her. Her imagination ran rampant, about lone, defenseless girls being waylaid, and she had had the unnerving experience at Iretta's home. That night she was so frightened she could scarcely stand up. As soon as the old man was out the door she closed it quickly and bolted it. She slept very little during what was left of the night, starting at every creak of the old building.

In the morning she rode the eight miles to Hinckley with the mailman in his buckboard and went to the Wright home, where she was to board for the winter. Her room, a small one on the north side of the second floor, had a single window, a bed, table, small stove, and dresser. She was quite comfortable but also quite lonely, starting again in a new community at age nineteen and expecting to be a teacher.

Camilla taught cooking, sewing, and embroidery. She enjoyed the association with young people, many of whom were her age. She enjoyed especially earning seventy-five dollars a month and the independence it represented. She always worried about her adequacy as a teacher, but she learned a great deal from her class preparation and from trying to teach others.

After Christmas a special friend returned from his mission and started school at the Academy. He was good looking and interesting, and he and Camilla became very close friends. They had a falling out when another fellow became flirtatious and he thought she responded a little too much to the attention, but later they patched up their differences and resumed their dating.

In the spring of 1915 Camilla decided to attend the University of California at Berkeley for a summer session. She had saved nearly enough money, and her uncle Junius Romney went with her to the Farmers and Merchants Bank, where she secured a fifty-dollar loan with his guarantee. Mary Merkley, Mae Mortensen, Charles McClelland, her uncle Thomas Romney, and she all boarded at the same home in Berkeley. The International Exposition was in full swing in San Francisco that summer, and they went several times, crossing the bay by ferry.

Camilla's sister Catherine recalls, "I received in the mail a small card, the shape and color of a cucumber, from my big sister, Camilla, when she was away studying at Berkeley. I carried it around with me for weeks, and when I married it was still among my treasures. Camilla had picked up the card, which advertised dill pickles, at the World's Fair, and she had thoughtfully sent one to each of her little sisters."

That fall Camilla returned to the Wrights', but this time she had as a roommate the new English teacher, Beth Cook. Two other teachers were also boarding at the Wright home. The four women decided to move into their own bachelor quarters. They found a small house available nearby and broke the news to Mrs. Wright, who did not like the idea of losing all four boarders, but they were determined that they could be more comfortable and live more cheaply on their own.

The young women called their new quarters "Cozy Cottage." Beth had a way with men, so the girls straightway had lots of company and many good times. Camilla's special friend was attending school in Provo, but she had many opportunities to date other young men. Then she learned that her friend was to be married to a young woman he had met on his mission. Camilla had been very fond of him and felt disappointed and angry at being jilted. He came to Hinckley one weekend to have a talk with her but she was not there—she had gone on a motorcycle to a picnic with another young man to avoid him. She figured he was coming to make an explanation, and she did not want to hear it. That was the end of that romance.

After being away from home two years, Camilla teaching in Hinckley and Mary in the School for the Deaf in Ogden, Utah, Mary and Camilla were to go home for the summer. They went on the train, which took them by way of Los Angeles. There they stayed overnight at the Rosslyn Hotel, where they had a beautiful room. But Camilla was shocked the next day when she had to pay the six-dollar bill, two or three times what she expected to pay. She had forgotten to ask the price of the room.

That summer Camilla's father bought a farm in Pima and moved the families to a two-room frame house on the mesquite-covered hill until more room could be made. Temporarily Aunt Emma's family lived in tents. Though she enjoyed the visit, Camilla did not like living with two families in such crowded, primitive conditions. The only water was a tap in the yard. But she had to endure it for only a few weeks until she was off again, this time to Logan, Utah, to attend Utah Agricultural College with money she had saved. She had a nice suit, with hat and shoes to match, to wear as she left for this new school, and this bolstered her self-confidence.

At college in the fall Carrie Leigh was assigned as her roommate, and they soon got eight girls together to rent a house. They divided into pairs and took turns with the household chores. Though they didn't always get along well together, they managed to have some good times and to entertain a great deal. They were all scraping by financially; Camilla corrected papers for twenty-five cents an hour to supplement her savings.

About midyear Camilla was pledged to Sigma Theta Phi sorority. Marguerite Cannon, whom she had known in Mexico, sponsored her. The pledge period lasted long, and Camilla had to spend considerable time at the sorority house, cleaning, darning the girls' socks, and doing other chores. The pledges had to put on a "funny-paper show" and the sorority members showered them with peanut shells. What a mess the house was in—but what a sense of belonging the girls each had! For Camilla it was especially rewarding, for she enjoyed the comradeship that membership in the sorority gave her; no one snubbed her. This helped her overcome her painful shyness.

That winter was the coldest in many years, and everyone had to travel on foot or in sleighs. The students had a wonderful time sliding down College Hill on sleds. The girls lived two blocks west of town, about a mile from campus. Every morning they would bundle up in wool caps, fur muffs, and sturdy overshoes for the hike to school, but by the time they arrived they would have icicles dangling from their caps and on their eyelashes. Many mornings they had to break the trail up the street before the snowplow came along. They might have ridden the streetcar the long way around, but they couldn't afford the five-cent fare.

In the summer of 1917 Camilla worked in Salt Lake City to earn enough money for her train ticket to Arizona, where she had a teaching position at Gila Academy for the fall. She secured a job in a home doing the cooking and general housework, at a wage of five dollars a week. She was extremely proud and did not want any of her friends to know she was a servant. Augusta Ivins did not know; when she got married that summer Camilla crocheted lovely lace inserts for a sheet and pillow slips for her. In June when her friend Iretta came to Salt Lake City to be married, Camilla painted a glowing picture of her occupation: "I am getting practical experience for my work of teaching home economics." What she said was technically true, but it was surely not the reason she worked. Iretta and her fiance took Camilla to a violin recital at the old Salt Lake Theater, which was her only commercial entertainment that summer.

Finally Camilla had enough money for her ticket, and in August she was able to go home. Her family delighted in having Camilla home at last. Except for two visits, she had been away from the family for five years. The younger siblings had always looked to her as a role model. Her going away from home to seek an education inspired the younger brothers and sisters to set their goals high for obtaining good educations and preparing for professions. Though the smallest ones scarcely remembered her, she had always been thoughtful of them and remembered their birthdays with a little letter and, if possible, a dime. Her brother Joseph shyly hid behind his mother's skirts, but Camilla coaxed him into the open and won his heart.

Her sister Rose, who was about five when Camilla returned to the farm, had rather long hair. Camilla thought she would look much better with a "Dutch bob" and offered Rose six cents if she would let it be cut. Rose was fearful of the haircut, but she could not resist the bribe. She wore bangs for the next twelve years, thanks to Camilla.

Camilla had two weeks before she began her next teaching job, this time at the Gila Academy in Thatcher, just six miles from her parents' home in Pima. She would be able to live with her family during the school year and commute by bus to Thatcher.

She hoped to marry, but she was nearly twenty-three in a time when most women married earlier, and she had no intention of marrying just anyone. She had intelligence and energy and a plan. She intended to become a hospital dietician and planned to teach only until she could save enough money to attend Johns Hopkins University, which had the reputation of being best in her field.
