Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

4

One evening soon after school began, I had stayed at school for a faculty meeting and was standing on Thatcher's Main Street, waiting for the jitney bus, when Spencer Kimball came along. He introduced himself and said he was going by bus to Pima to visit a friend. We sat together on the bus and discussed Shakespeare and similar highbrow subjects, each hoping to impress the other. I was wearing a white voile dress with blue design. I had made the dress over and wished I were wearing something nicer. He wore white socks, but I forgave him. In Pima he walked me home from the bus and asked if he might call on me sometime. That weekend he invited me to his sister Helen's birthday party, but I had to go to Duncan on a Sunday School stake board visit and couldn't go with him.

One evening a few days later, when I had my hair up in curlers and was in a kimono, getting ready to go to Layton Hall to a dance with Pima friends, here came Mr. Kimball. I had told him he could call me, but had given him no special time. I was in a pickle. I visited with him out on the porch, thinking he might stay only a short time, but it became apparent that he had come to spend the evening! I finally told him a crowd of us were going to the dance, and asked if he'd like to come along. He seemed delighted, so I rushed to get ready, and when the car arrived, I went out to ask my date if this new friend could go along. It really was a very embarrassing situation. My date was very put out, and I couldn't blame him. All the way to the dance he drove as if the devil was after him. He didn't dance with me once. I felt terribly guilty; I had played a shabby trick.

Anyway, I tried to make the most of the new friendship, and when Spencer left about two weeks later for school in Provo, I sent him my picture and he carried it in his watch. I was very much in love.

One week after he registered at Brigham Young University, he received notice from his draft board to return home for military service. He arrived home on October 14, 1917. I stayed in Thatcher that day with Jessie Bird so I could see him sooner. From that night our intensive courtship began. He had nothing special to do, just waiting for the draft call. His father and stepmother had gone east to a convention, leaving a new Chevrolet, so he took me home from school and spent every evening with me from that night until we were married. The evenings were usually rather long, lasting until one or two in the morning. Then I had to teach school all day, while he could sleep in before another evening. I wonder that I didn't lose my job, for I actually went to sleep in school sometimes. The girls in my class knew of the romance and giggled when they looked out the window and saw Spencer in his car waiting to take me home.

Camilla's family all loved Spencer. Her mother courted him with cream pies, her father approved, and the younger children were especially excited about her courtship. Once when Spencer had come to Pima to see Camilla and they were parked in the lane, Rose, young and curious, went out to investigate. Spencer invited her to get in the car with them, put her on his lap and taught her the laughing song, "I Saw a Little Elfman." Camilla was unhappy about the snooping.

They spent a lot of time down at the wooden gate at the entrance to the farm lane in happy conversation. With so many younger children in the family, it was hard to find a place where they could find relative privacy.

One weekend we went with another couple to Roosevelt Dam, a real distance to go in those days. The car could hardly make the grade over some of the hills. It was a romantic trip.

One Sunday I fixed dinner for some friends and Spencer and me. I baked chicken and brought it to the table all garnished. Then I attempted to carve it at the table. My knife was dull and the chicken not too tender, so I could hardly saw it apart. The dinner was to be a farewell party for Spencer, since he was to leave for the army, and I used little flags for decoration.

In the next day or two word came that the next contingent of the draft would not leave for some time, so our intensive courtship continued until we decided we would like to get married before Spencer left. It was a rather momentous decision to make, and I think we both sensed the responsibility. Spencer talked to Father about it. I went to the principal of my school to see if it would be all right, and he said yes, so long as it didn't interfere with my job. That meant there was not enough time to travel to Utah to be sealed in the temple, which was a great disappointment.

It was a local custom to shivaree newly married couples, and since we both disliked this custom very much, we decided to have a quiet wedding and avoid it.

The date was set for November 16. Spencer had thought his father would be home at that time, since he would be returning from an extended trip east, but his father had to go to Phoenix to a state commission meeting, so we decided to go ahead without him.

Spencer's sisters Alice and Helen had offered to give me a bridal shower, but I refused, both because in my pride I did not want anyone to feel obliged to give me anything and because we wanted to keep our marriage plans a secret.

Friday afternoon we went to Safford to get the license. We were fearful someone would see us and suspect what was happening, but they didn't. Spencer had just six dollars in his pocket and no job. The license cost two dollars and fifty cents, so he had three dollars and fifty cents left when we were married.

I went home to get ready, and he was to come with his stepmother, "Aunt Josie," and his sister Helen at seven o'clock. When I got home and began to realize the gravity of the step I was about to take, I was ready to back out. I went into the bedroom and cried and cried. I had ambitions to be a hospital dietician; Spencer had no job and was about to go off to a war from which he might not return; and I was terribly naive about sex. Yet I also loved him desperately and decided I was willing to go ahead despite my fears.

Our old house was such a wreck that I could hardly stand the thought of having Sister Kimball see it. The paper that lined the living room was ragged in places. We gathered tree branches and, in the guise of decoration, covered the worst of the holes. Mother did her best to make things attractive and pleasant, but it was November so there were no flowers. I had no bouquet. We had a piano but no music. Bishop Merrill was to perform the ceremony at eight o'clock.

Spencer told me afterwards that he was so excited that when he went to get into the tub he found he had forgotten to bring the hot water, so he had to call to "Aunt Josie" to bring him the water.

I had insisted that all the little children be put in bed. Just the two boys, Henry, sixteen, and Ed, fourteen, were allowed to remain up. As we waited, I was sitting on Spencer's lap and Henry came into the room and saw us. Flustered and embarrassed, he blurted out, "I'll be as silent as the tomb." That provided some comic relief.

Finally the hour came. We stood together in the living room, just the few family members present with my younger sisters peeking around the corner. Spencer wore his khaki uniform and I wore a pink party dress that I had made in Logan. Bishop Merrill was a very quiet, dignified man and conducted an impressive ceremony—at least it seemed so to me. And so we were married.

Mother had made a cake and cocoa and served it after the ceremony.

The memory of those first few days is as vivid as if they were just yesterday. Mother had fixed up her own bedroom for us. We spent the weekend on the farm—went for a ride in the buggy, roamed about, and enjoyed our first days of marriage together.

The local newspaper, a county weekly, reported the wedding on the front page in an article titled "Popular Young Couple Married":

Spencer W. Kimball of Thatcher and Miss Camilla Eyring of this place surprised many of their friends when they took the matrimonial oath Friday and were joined in wedlock.

The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Eyring of Pima. She is at present a member of the faculty of the Gila Academy.

Mr. Kimball is a son of President and Mrs. Andrew Kimball. He is one of the drafted boys from this county and is certified for duty in the National Army. His name appears among those called for service in the next contingent from this county.

At present the young couple are living in Thatcher.

Three weeks after the wedding Camilla's mother wrote her daughter a loving note:

My darling, sweet little girl, Camilla,

Twenty-three years ago today was the happiest day of our lives, when we received our first little jewel from heaven, and held in our arms for the first time our sweet, blue-eyed, golden-haired baby. You have been a joy and comfort to us ever since, and my wish is that you and Spencer may have as long and as happy a life as your father and I have had.

God bless and prosper you both is the wish of your devoted mother.

Camilla and Spencer were married on Friday, and Monday morning she had to return to her work. They lived in a room at the home of Spencer's father and stepmother, since Spencer expected his military orders at any time. When the weeks passed and Spencer's leaving was postponed indefinitely, they decided to rent one side of his sister Alice's house, where they hoped to have more privacy. Alice and her husband had one long room and a long screened porch across the back of the house, and they partitioned off a small portion of the room and porch with outing flannel curtains. Camilla's mother gave the newlyweds a bed and Spencer's family gave them a few odd pieces of furniture, so they were able to scrape together enough to get along. But Alice's baby had colic and cried night and day, and with just a curtain separating the couples, there really was not much privacy. Camilla taught domestic science, and it bothered her greatly to have to make-do when she had such high ideals of how a lovely home should be.

We were married just about a month when I found that I was pregnant. This was not according to our plan. I had a contractual obligation to finish out my school year, and we had hoped to wait a while for a baby. At first I was rebellious, for the situation of being pregnant so soon embarrassed me, but there was nothing to do but stand it. My health was fine and I was never nauseated, so I managed all right.

We lived on my salary and what Spencer earned doing occasional farm labor and playing piano in a dance band.

Our living quarters were so unsatisfactory that soon after the first of the year we rented Mr. Wakefield's house across from the old Thatcher hotel. We rented it furnished for fifteen dollars a month and it was pretty ramshackle, but even so it was a mansion compared to what we had had. When it appeared that Spencer would not have to go into the service, he got a fulltime job at the Citizens Bank. With the income he bought me a wedding ring, we bought a dining table and chairs and a few other odds and ends, we paid our debts, and we began to live like other folks.

In March there was an epidemic of a rather mild form of smallpox, and before the doctors realized what it was, everyone had already been exposed, so they didn't attempt to quarantine. Spencer caught the disease and was quite sick; he had 125 pocks on his face alone. I went on teaching school, and Mother came to help take care of Spencer. That was a trying time.

Fortunately, I didn't show my pregnancy at first, so I managed to finish school in May without too much embarrassment. Then I foolishly insisted on doing extension home economics work with Brother Nash through the summer. In his old Ford we bumped over the hot, dusty roads to out-of-the-way farmhouses to help young people with home projects.

As soon as my school obligation ended, Spencer and I finally were free to go to the Salt Lake Temple to be sealed before our baby was born. We used our last penny to make the trip. By this time I was big and felt ugly, and my nerves were worn to a frazzle. I hated meeting Spencer's relatives and friends for the first time, looking like I did, and I made matters worse by being irritable. I cried almost every day the first year of our marriage. I wonder now how Spencer ever stood it. He did grow calloused and would say, "Go ahead and cry. You'll feel better when you get through."

In the temple I felt quite self-conscious because of my condition and the way I looked. Of course, I was unduly sensitive. One woman tactlessly said to me, "You surely are not going through for your own endowment, are you?" I started to cry and said, "Yes, but I have been married a long time."

But the discomfort I felt was far overshadowed by the satisfaction of knowing that Spencer and I were now husband and wife for all eternity. That feeling of security helped and sustained us over many rough spots.

When we returned home I went on working again with Brother Nash until the first of August.

In August when I went into labor, three weeks earlier than we had expected, Ben Blake went to Pima for my mother, while a neighbor stayed with me. During my agony she kept calling me "Sis," which got on my nerves till I could hardly stand it. I screamed so much that the neighbors were about to have me arrested, and my throat was sore for a week. Such agony is indescribable. The doctor who attended me was just beginning his practice as an osteopath. He didn't know much about medicine, and I have always felt that I had him to blame for the many ills that resulted from that first confinement. He did the best he knew how, but he didn't know enough. The lacerations remained raw and unhealed for years, causing me untold misery.

After all the pain, our first son, Spencer LeVan, was born August 26, 1918. His head was misshapen at first and I feared he might have suffered damage, but he soon assumed a normal look and my fears subsided. He was a precious child in whom we invested great hopes.

On the third day, when my milk came, I nearly died. My breasts were so full and my nipples so tender that they bled every time the baby nursed. And the afterpains were so bad that the nurse had to hold me in bed. The doctor had a ten-month-old child who was starving because they couldn't find any food to agree with him, so that big, bony child was brought to nurse me. The minute he came in the door he would reach out his arms and bare his teeth, and I would begin to cry.

I recovered slowly, but when LeVan was ten days old, Spencer's sister Helen was to be married, and I insisted on being carried to the wedding. I had a relapse and was in bed another two weeks.

When the baby was six weeks old I was still very miserable. We went to stay at Spencer's parents' home while they were away. One Sunday afternoon a friend came to visit and kissed me. That night she came down with the flu, and three days later I went to bed with the illness in its worst form. So then they stopped bringing the doctor's child—one gain from the flu! I was desperately ill for weeks. I had one of the first cases of the terrible epidemic of 1918, and the doctors didn't know much about how to care for patients. I have marveled many times since then that I ever pulled through, for I was so weak to begin with.

LeVan grew to be a fine, husky baby. I had more milk than he could take, and I got thin while he got fat. I was never well. I did my work and went about, but felt miserable.

Even so we had fun. In July 1919, when LeVan was not quite a year old, we set out on a vacation trip to northern Arizona in two cars with some friends, the Wesley Taylors and the Bert Hoopeses.

Cars in those days had little power, and the roads were terrible. On steep hills the passengers would get out and walk. Every little hill we came to, Wes Taylor, our driver, would say, "We'll never make it to the top of this hill. I know we'll never make it." But somehow, in spite of his pessimism each time, we did make it. We could go only about forty miles a day. The second night we were caught in the forest in the rain and found refuge at a sawmill run by the Copelands. Hospitality was never more appreciated. We finally made it to St. Johns, where we stayed with friends and celebrated the 24th of July. On our return we went through the Petrified Forest. It rained and roads were quagmire. It took a whole day of pushing and groaning to go forty miles.

When we reached the Gila River at San Carlos it was late afternoon, and we expected to reach home that night. The river was in flood, and we hired some Indians to pull us across the stream. Safely over, we found the cars would not start but would have to dry out, so we camped by the side of the river. Spencer and Bert Hoopes went behind some bushes, took off their trousers, and, holding them over their heads, waded the river and went to San Carlos to get some food. Vacations were real adventures.

When LeVan was eighteen months old I had a miscarriage—a little boy—at five months. It was a terrible shock and I was grief stricken. There followed months of misery and another miscarriage at six weeks. I continued to drag around. When I became pregnant again, the doctor put me to bed until after the fifth month.

Finally the waiting was over, and on July 31, 1922, a dear baby girl came to us. We appreciated her doubly, having had such a desperate time trying to keep her. She had blue eyes and reddish hair like Spencer's mother, so her Grandfather Kimball wanted to name her Olive. We added the name Beth for good measure.

After Olive Beth's birth, for another two years I still did not recover. Finally I went to a doctor in Miami, Arizona.

When he examined me he was shocked at the condition he found and said, "My ______, woman, if you were forty I'd say you were full of cancer." Of course, I was scared to death and submitted to an operation at once. He cut off a piece of tissue about the size of the palm of one's hand and sent it to a laboratory. It was apparently not cancerous, only ulcerated. I was in the hospital two lonely weeks, and after two months at home, I returned for an examination, only to find that the catgut knots had not held and the dreadful ordeal was to be endured again. In another week I was put on a bed on the train to return home. This time the operation was successful and I felt like a new person. I felt really well for the first time in six years.
