Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

5

"A home of our own—it seemed like a palace!" That's how Camilla felt when Spencer was transferred to Safford, Arizona, in 1921 by his employer, the Citizens Bank, and they purchased a small white frame house. It had only three rooms plus bath and sleeping porch. She cooked on a wood stove and took a coal oil heater into the bathroom for winter bathing or washed the children in a galvanized tub by the stove. But the home was theirs, and that was the important thing. Camilla worked at home while Spencer worked long hours at extra jobs; she helped him fill out the reports he had to complete as stake clerk, and she used her homemaking skills to stretch every penny. They saved faithfully. Caught up in speculative fever of boom times, they bought bank and oil and mining stocks in sure-fire ventures. But these collapsed in the early 1920s; they lost every cent and had to start over.

In 1922 Spencer's stepmother, "Aunt Josie," died, so he and Camilla went to live with his father in Thatcher for about a year and rented out their own home for twenty-five dollars a month.

He was very appreciative of everything and enjoyed having LeVan tag along as he worked in the garden, but naturally he wanted things done his way, and there were many hard situations. He would get up early. We tended to stay up later and get up later than he. During the time we were there, we entertained many of the apostles who came for conference. President and Sister Grant and their daughter were among our guests.

When Andrew Kimball married Mary Connelly, a lovely woman who was editor of the Young Women's Journal, Spencer and Camilla were able to return to their own home in Safford.

Over the next few years life was full for them. Spencer was a rising young businessman and community leader. He also held positions in the Church that demanded a great deal of time—stake clerk from the time of their marriage, and counselor in the stake presidency from 1924 on. Camilla was also busy with Church responsibilities. She had been a Sunday School teacher at fourteen in Mexico and had served on the stake Sunday School board in Hinckley. Three weeks after she was married she was called to serve on the stake Primary board, and later in the presidency, service that lasted twelve years. For another seven years she was a member of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association stake presidency. The stake extended into three states—Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas—and just to make one visit to each of the wards in a year required travel of more than two thousand miles.

Their family was growing also. On March 5, 1927, their third child was born, a boy. After the repair operations, this pregnancy had gone without complications.

Spencer's father had died in 1924, and we named the baby Andrew for him and Eyring for my family. Andrew was strong and healthy and grew rapidly, but cried almost constantly night and day for seven months. We doctored him for colic but to no avail. Spencer and I had to take care of him in shifts to get any sleep at all. When he grew older and could indicate the source of his discomfort, we found that he had been suffering all these months with earache.

Though their responsibilities were heavy, the family found time for outings and for visits with friends and relatives. In 1926 they took LeVan and Olive Beth for a trip by car through northern Arizona to Grand Canyon and fished at Mormon Lake. "This was our first real vacation, and we had a grand time," Camilla recalls.

In June 1928, they bought a new Studebaker and took the family of three children to Salt Lake City for a visit with Andrew Kimball's widow, Mary. From there they traveled to Yellowstone, Seattle, and on to Victoria, British Columbia.

Because this was my first trip out of the country, I wanted to buy a souvenir and bought two pelicans in a hurry. I really didn't like them much, and when I was required to pay duty on them, I felt like throwing them away, but I could not bring myself to do it.

Camilla's brother Ed and his new wife, Evelyn, lived in San Francisco. Camilla wanted to make a good impression on her new sister-in-law, so she insisted on renting a motel outside the city to bathe the family and press their clothes. The next morning they went on into the city, where Evelyn received them graciously.

In Los Angeles they visited Spencer's brother Del, who was an auditor in City Hall. When Spencer pointed out the skyscraper as Uncle Del's office, the children were duly impressed that their uncle was so rich. Because in those days tourist cabins were unfurnished, the car was piled high with bedding, pots and pans, food, luggage, and children. Del said, "Spencer, you don't have to clean out your car; if you just open the door the clutter will fall out!"

When Spencer traveled, Camilla went with him if it was at all possible. One year early in their marriage each had gone his own way for vacations. Spencer felt he needed a rest and wanted to travel; Camilla wanted to buy some furniture and knew they could not do that and travel too. After some disagreement, Spencer went alone to visit a brother and sister in California. While Spencer was away a family friend, whose wife was out of town, invited Camilla to go to a movie with him. It was all very innocent and she did not accept the invitation, but it set her thinking how important it was that married couples stay together. When Spencer returned they discussed the situation and decided that they would never do that again.

In 1930 the family went to April conference in Salt Lake City, the centennial celebration of the organization of the Church. On their way back to Arizona by train they stopped over in Los Angeles for a few days and there they saw their first talking movie. They were so excited and proud to return home and tell everyone of this new wonder and to explain that the sound and the movement of the lips were so well synchronized that you could almost believe the characters were actually talking up there on the screen.

The first time we heard a radio broadcast, we took turns using a pair of earphones, and if we listened patiently and intently enough, once in a while we could hear a voice and distinguish an occasional word. But this was a marvel of marvels, and we talked about it for weeks. To think of sound being picked up out of the air with no wires to bring it!

Safford was just a few miles east of Thatcher and Pima, where Camilla's family lived, and she and her family made many visits back and forth. Her mother came the ten miles to Safford every week in an old buggy to see Camilla and Spencer. She brought along some fresh milk, butter, and applesauce, which often got spilled a little on the rough roads. The Eyring children loved to come along because Camilla had many more "store-bought" things than they did in Pima. Her home had a flush toilet, too, and she and Spencer traveled in the summers.

When Caroline, Camilla's sister, began teaching high school, she stayed in Safford with the Kimballs for about two years; she also helped out in Spencer's office one summer as secretary and errand girl. At their home Caroline began her courtship with Glen Miner, and Spencer and Camilla were very solicitous that she get in early.

Spencer and Camilla's family circle was completed in September 1930 with the birth of their fourth baby, whom they named Edward Lawrence—Edward for Camilla's father and Lawrence for a family friend.

It was a day of great rejoicing when we got this fine red-haired boy, for we had almost given up hope of having any more children. He was an unusually good-natured and healthy child and a constant joy.

When Eddie was just a few weeks old, Spencer's uncle, President J. Golden Kimball of the First Council of the Seventy, was to visit our stake, and Stake President Harry Payne suggested that he stay with us.

It was fall weather with cold nights. I was occupying our one good bedroom with the new baby, and we hardly dared move onto the sleeping porch with him, so for Uncle Golden we fixed as best we could the small front bedroom that we had added to the house. It had only a three-quarter-size bed. We fixed a hot water bottle for him and suggested perhaps he could lie "across corners" to make the bed long enough. We assured him that Eddie was a very good baby and never cried at night.

We were all just settled in for the night when Eddie began to cry. Spencer hastened with him into the kitchen, and for hours we did our best to keep things quiet, walking the floor with the baby.

Next morning as Uncle Golden and Spencer were driving to Thatcher to conference, he asked in his high, plaintive voice, "Spencer, why don't you take your conference visitors to the hotel where they can be comfortable?" Needless to say, that night we took him to the Olive Hotel, but at least he was anxious to eat his meals with us. He liked my cooking.

When Spencer accepted the call to serve as counselor to President Payne, that put an end to some talk about Spencer's going back to college while Camilla worked to help support the family. It did not occur to them that he should not accept the calling, even though he was only twenty-nine when it came. Camilla was the first to encourage Spencer when he had doubts about his own abilities. "Of course you can do it; you can do anything the Lord asks of you!" She provided constant support.

The Kimballs had many close friends and an active social life, with dancing and parties. Typically Spencer was at the center of the singing and joking; Camilla was at the center of the food and arrangements.

The Academy offered adult evening classes. Spencer took a music class; Camilla studied literature. She loved to read and to discuss books and ideas. Her commitment to education and to encouraging her children led her to teach LeVan to read long before he was old enough for school. He was precocious already, and she pushed him along. When he just turned six years old she took him to the principal of the Safford grade school and, by demonstrating her son's abilities, persuaded the principal to let him start in the second grade. She later had second thoughts about the social costs of having her children move too far ahead of their age group, but at the time she felt sure it was the right thing to do.

Camilla established a home, like her mother's, where Father always received the best. With her strong character there could have been friction, but she had found a man she could respect and love and support. She made the kitchen the heart of her home. There she cooked marvelous things—not fancy foods, but plain food prepared superbly: cinnamon rolls and whole wheat bread; bottled peaches, apricots, applesauce, pears, cherries, and vegetables. She made butter and cottage cheese. And she washed and ironed and sewed.

Married without a ring, she soon received a gold band, but only later an "engagement" ring. In El Paso on a stake visit she and Spencer were shopping in Kress 5-and-10-cent store when Camilla spotted a toy "diamond" ring. She said, "Oh, Spencer, I'm going to get myself an engagement ring." At dinner, a friend exclaimed, "Camilla! You've got a new diamond!" Camilla, not wanting to embarrass the woman or Spencer, accepted the comment without denial. After they returned to Safford, Spencer said, "Come on, Mama, I guess it is time we bought you an engagement ring."

In 1926 Spencer and Bishop Joseph Greenhalgh started an insurance and real estate business. The prospect of leaving the bank, with its steady salary, frightened Spencer, but Camilla had confidence in his ability to succeed in business for himself. He had grown up in the area, and through the bank and his church work he knew nearly everyone. He had intelligence and drive and a pleasing personality, Camilla reassured him.

There were lean times, particularly during the Depression. Being in business for themselves posed risks. Spencer said then, "My, wouldn't it be wonderful if we had a salary to count on." In fact, they never were worse off than they would have been with the bank job, but they could not know that. Uncertainty nagged. They left the car home and the children pulled a red wagon to the grocery store. Each month, by sacrificing all luxuries, they were able to get by and never go into debt. On the farm Camilla's parents managed to get by too, but just barely. Each family helped the other.

When cash grew scarce, business turned to barter. Many businesses had to have insurance to satisfy their mortgage conditions. Camilla, needing shoes for the children, would say, "Spencer, which shoe store owes you credit?" Rather than going where the prices were best, Camilla had to shop for groceries where the credit was. She traded milk for piano lessons. Barter meant giving up some flexibility. Camilla thought, "Oh, for the days when I could walk into a store and buy with money what I wanted!"

Being self-employed provided Spencer with flexibility for church work, whether traveling to conference or speaking or singing at funerals or visiting the sick. They plowed back into the business everything they could, both of them content to wait for the capital to grow before they would draw on it for more than necessities.

In spite of troubles around them, things seemed to go rather well for the Kimball family. The pleasant routine was jarred irreversibly, however, in September, 1933.
