Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

6

Eddie, just turning three, came home from playing at the neighbors and complained that his legs hurt. He said he had sat down hard on a block. It was apparent he had a fever, and he was vomiting. The symptoms were those common to tonsillitis, from which he often suffered. A few days later he was sitting in a chair by the front door watching the children play, and when he went to stand down, he fell to the floor. I became alarmed and took him to Dr. Butler, who examined him and said he might have a touch of rheumatism following diphtheria. The next day Dr. Butler returned and brought a colleague; they examined Eddie again. I was very much concerned and, following them to the door, asked if they thought it might be infantile paralysis—poliomyelitis. They told me emphatically that it was not. Because his leg was paralyzed, we decided to take him to Dr. Williams, a chiropractor, to see if manipulations might help. Later we were told this was the worst thing we could have done. After several treatments, the poor darling screamed the minute we came in sight of the doctor's office. Finally Dr. Williams told us that he feared polio. We were terrified. Spencer wired his brother Del in Los Angeles to make an appointment with a specialist there, and we were on our way by car. We drove through the night and arrived the next morning.

At the hospital the doctor immediately diagnosed Eddie's trouble as polio and put his legs in splints. He was furious with us because we had traveled with him across two states before the three weeks of contagion was over and had exposed numerous people. It lacked three days of the three weeks we should have been quarantined. They wired the health offices of Safford and had our family and neighbors quarantined.

On his third birthday Eddie was put in isolation for the remaining three days. He wailed as they took him away and screamed himself hoarse for us, but we could only comfort him through a crack in the door during the short visiting hours, singing and telling him stories. I could hear him hoarsely calling, "Daddy," "Mama," "I want to go home." No one who has not experienced it can know the devastating heartache I felt.

We walked back and forth on the hospital grounds powerless to do anything. We rented a room in a home across the street, where we watched and waited for the time to pass. The terror and anguish of those days remain vivid.

After Eddie was out of isolation, Spencer had to return to his business and to the family. Camilla stayed another ten long, lonely weeks in Los Angeles. She had never experienced such endless days. She thanked Spencer for a letter: "Funny how I so like to be told that you miss me and need me. . . . Tell me about everything. You know how lonesome I will be."

Spencer urged the children to write to their mother daily, as she was very much concerned about them, even though her sister Mary was staying with them and taking good care of them. Olive Beth wrote, "Andrew is like a stubborn mule. He would not come to eat supper with me at Mitchells' although he was invited." Their aunt Mary was deaf and did not hear the bickering that sometimes went on among the three children at home. Camilla wrote about where to find the Halloween masks and where LeVan's new shirts were and how Olive Beth should practice her music. "Eddie was very much distressed because I couldn't help crying while I read your letters. After I'd quit he kept saying, 'Are you going to cry anymore?' and seemed relieved that I had quit."

Sometimes Eddie's condition improved, sometimes it slid back. Camilla had the elders in Los Angeles come and administer to him again. People were kind: Andrew mailed a squeaky elephant; Aunt Catherine sent blocks; the fruit man gave him grapes and the ice man a chunk of ice and an old lady some potato chips. But Camilla had the full responsibility. "If he just weren't such a calf for his mama." A Mr. Lytthaus had said to her, "How many times a day does he say mama? I tried to count them and it's thousands." But Camilla excused "my little leech." She entertained him with songs and stories and games day after day.

November 14, 1933

My beloved husband,

The day you receive this note will mark the sixteenth anniversary of our wedding. Our first separation on that day. I wanted to tell you again as I perhaps do too often how much I love and appreciate you. Every year increases my love and respect. This separation is bitterly hard but it has made me realize more than ever before how much I have to be thankful for. The fact that never once in the time of our acquaintance have I found cause to doubt or mistrust is I consider one of the foundation stones upon which real happiness and contentment in marriage are built. The attraction of sex and other things, of course, combine to make the perfect union, but without confidence there can be nothing lasting.

I feel that our trouble has drawn us even closer together in spirit though temporarily we are separated.

My constant prayer is that God will preserve the unity of our family and that we may soon all be together again. The joy of that day will be unmeasurable.

How I long for you and the strength received from your beautiful character. There is no other so fine and so true. Your devoted wife, Camilla

Tuesday morning

My darling wife,

. . . Sixteen years is a long time for a girl to put up with one man, and especially such a poor excuse as I am, so I honor you on this anniversary. It has been an extremely happy sixteen years. We have had our ups and downs, our disappointments and our surprises, our joys and our sorrows, and it has been a wonderful period. I want you to know that I love and appreciate you. You are the finest wife in the world and I am not unmindful of it even though I do seem thoughtless at times. . . .

Affectionately,

Spencer

LeVan's letters were full of sports and church activities, reading and public speaking activities; at fifteen he earned his football letter. Olive Beth, eleven, reported she was the only student in the seventh grade to get a perfect score in arithmetic. "I played marbles with Andrew last night. He beat me all to pieces." Andrew and Olive Beth built a dog house. Andrew, six, wrote, "I have 38 marbles."

Finally, in December Camilla brought Eddie home, having learned to splint his legs and massage and heat and exercise them. For the next eight years summers involved trips to Los Angeles for Eddie's checkups and operations on his legs and feet. No one can count either the hours or the concern she expended on this beloved child.

One of their friends asked, "Why did this have to happen to you? You've always lived such a good life." But Camilla did not see illness as God's punishment, nor necessarily as a specific test of faith or strength. Perhaps those were the true explanations, but so far as she could see the Lord left a great many things to operation of natural causes—a matter of infection and too little resistance, with the Lord letting us make of experience what we can.

When Eddie started school in the fall of 1936 and walked in front of the playground slide, a boy coming down the slide struck Eddie's leg just above the ankle and broke it. Camilla grieved at what seemed to her just too much. But despite her special sympathy, she tried not to treat him in any special way. She and Spencer expected him to do chores just as the others did, and succeeded in helping him feet capable, not handicapped.

Spencer was away on church assignments a great deal, so much of the child rearing fell to Camilla, but she supported him in his positions unwaveringly. She also added Relief Society stake board to her church experience. There was always prayer in the Kimball home; they knelt at the family table night and morning, and all took their turns in offering the prayer. They held family home evenings whenever the children could catch Spencer with an evening free. Each person performed, they played games, and Camilla always provided refreshments.

Camilla worked hard in the home, bending over the washtubs, scrubbing clothes on a washboard, sweat dripping off her face. With a big hat to protect her fair skin, she planted and watered and weeded the garden. She strained the milk and skimmed the cream. Sometimes she treated herself to the thickest cream from a small crock in the refrigerator, dipping it out with a bread crust. She was a fine cook, whose meals of leftovers tasted as good the second or third time. A turkey dinner became successively casserole and chow mein or stew. She boiled the bones and skin for broth, then boiled them again for soup stock. Her father, not so generous with her mother's cooking, said, "Nothing Camilla cooks ever hurts me."

She followed the current dietary notions and kept the children from putting sugar on their cereal. Spencer might do it, and they could choose for themselves when they grew up, but current lore had it that sugar and milk together in the stomach caused fermentation.

The family traveled together often. To pay for their trips, they worked at saving in little ways. The children learned not to ask for soda pop or candy bars, and they walked to school and to church instead of using the car. When they traveled, they carried their own food instead of patronizing restaurants. To pass the time in travel, they would memorize scriptures or the Articles of Faith in English or Spanish, and they memorized hymns, each taking a turn to sing a favorite one. Or they would guess the distance to a bend in the road or a distant hill, or play word games.

On holidays and every Sunday afternoon after church the whole family drove to the Eyring grandparents' home in Pima, even the teenagers, who occasionally had to be coaxed. Spencer and the boys sometimes pulled on overalls and helped their grandfather with the chores. Grandfather had a quiet, relaxed way about him, and it was fun to visit and just dawdle along. Then there were Aunt Emma's children to play with and ride horses with. Grandfather was always willing to put the saddle on Betty the Shetland or on his big pinto. Sometimes they played in the wash down a steep incline behind the house. Always Grandmother had good fruit and bread and milk, and sometimes cookies or an occasional cream pie. There was even a certain adventure in using the outhouse, with its Sears catalog on a nail.

In 1935 Camilla and Spencer went to Mexico City, and they brought back some souvenirs: serapes, straw hats, and a guitar. Andrew and Eddie were taught some Mexican songs to sing, and Andrew learned how to strum the guitar. Camilla carted them all over the Gila Valley to perform for church groups, clubs, and parties.

When Camilla's sister Catherine turned eighteen and graduated from high school, Camilla and Spencer invited her to go with them on a trip by train to Chicago—a great adventure, for she had never been out of the state of Arizona since the family moved there in 1912. They rode in the chair car all the way and feasted on box lunches Camilla had prepared.

When the train stopped in New Orleans en route to Chicago, Spencer left for a short time and returned carrying two large brown paper bags filled to overflowing with bananas. He said, "Now you have all the bananas you can eat." Nothing could have pleased Camilla and Catherine more, because in all their lives they had never had many bananas. The three managed to eat every banana before they reached Chicago.

Camilla loved to play bridge. She belonged to a bridge club that met to play once or twice a week. She played well and often won the token prizes offered at the parties. She faithfully read the newspaper columns on bridge. In 1936 Elder Melvin J. Ballard came to the stake to hold conference and preached a sermon calling on the bridge players to give up their game. This hit hard and distressed Camilla. She could see no harm in bridge, but she had to admit that she suffered from an addiction. It consumed a great deal of her time that might have been put to better use. Considering the source of the advice, she and her friends resolved to make the sacrifice and conform.

In 1936 Spencer was called to be president of the Mount Graham Stake when it was created by division of the St. Joseph Stake, in which he had served as stake clerk or counselor, or both, since their marriage. This broadened his responsibilities and, likewise, Camilla's. People now looked to her for example even more than before. She disliked the role, but she filled it well.

In 1931 Spencer had served as president of the Safford Rotary Club. In that role he promoted a number of service activities, particularly the Boy Scout movement and free lunches for poor children. His friends urged him to run for the position of district governor; no Mormon in Arizona had held that position. Before the district convention in 1935 he campaigned hard, only to learn on arriving at the convention that the principal opponent's campaign manager had just died of a heart attack. Rather than promote a heated contest under the circumstances, Spencer, with the consent of the men who had worked for his election, stood and withdrew his candidacy and nominated his opponent. The generous gesture stunned the crowd, who afterward swarmed around to express their admiration. Spencer noted, "I became somewhat of a hero all at once without meriting it." But the next year, when he decided to run again, he had no opposition.

He and Camilla traveled throughout the state of Arizona that year, nearly wearing out a car visiting each of the twenty-three clubs at least once. Spencer felt comfortable out front in public, but Camilla disliked the limelight. However, she greatly appreciated small attentions—flowers, a token gift acknowledging her presence, a word of welcome—and she noted them all in a journal she kept. She also noted the compliments: "You seem too young to have an eighteen-year-old son!" And she wrote, as the year neared its close:

It was a very pleasant experience but I really do not crave publicity. I am satisfied to go quietly my own way. I do feel that much worthwhile development has come from the contacts through Rotary this year and I have appreciated it as an opportunity to grow. I have a real ambition to learn to be quietly at ease under any circumstances and in any company, to take my place in a dignified yet simple manner. I dislike a pompous air and I do seek to be genuinely cordial. . . . I never expect to come as near the center of the stage again.

During the year Spencer organized four new clubs in the district, a record number. In appreciation the district unexpectedly voted to pay his travel expenses to the international convention in Nice, France. He and Camilla jumped at the chance to go to Europe. They dipped into their savings and borrowed on their insurance policy for Camilla's expenses. This was the opportunity of a lifetime. They had traveled across the United States, but never dreamed they could go to Europe. Almost no one they knew had been to Europe, except on a mission.

LeVan was serving his mission in Montreal and they arranged to sail from there so they could visit him. They spent several days sightseeing before their ship left. At the wax museum they nudged one another and laughed at the guard who had fallen asleep at his post, reading a newspaper, then laughed at themselves as they realized he was wax, too.

On the ocean aboard the Duchess of Athol, they saw whales and icebergs, danced, and ate, even when the seas became rough. In France they stayed up all night sightseeing in Paris before catching a train for Nice in the morning, giddy from sleeplessness. The convention itself in Nice proved an exciting time, with camaraderie, fireworks, dancing, pageantry. The convention over, they undertook to see everything they could in south-central Europe—Italy, Switzerland, Hungary, Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, France, and England. They often traveled through the night to save hotel costs and to leave days for sightseeing. They wanted to make the trip memorable.

Italy interested them the most. Here were art treasures, Roman ruins, Vesuvius, the Vatican. Christian history came alive for them—the catacombs, the arena where early saints had been put to fight the lions, the Vatican and St. Peter's Cathedral as the seat of Roman Catholicism. They had also both read The Last Days of Pompeii and walked fascinated through the excavated streets of that city; they climbed Vesuvius and brought home a blob of lava that their guide pulled out of a fissure with an iron bar and formed around an Italian coin before it hardened.

Venice proved the most romantic place on the trip. The city, built on islands, was criss-crossed with waterways. They had a grand moonlit gondola ride, enjoying being together. But they had been gone from their children a month and had received no letters, and Camilla felt pangs of homesickness.

In Budapest they asked the hotelier to suggest an entertainment and he recommended the show at the Arizona Club. The name attracted them and they went to the nightclub. To justify seeing the show they had to buy a drink so they selected the cheapest item on the drink list and were served a thimbleful of liquor. They enjoyed the show, on a circular stage behind a water screen, but the liquor still sat there as they left; Spencer did not touch his, while Camilla only tasted hers, curious to see what liquor tasted like.

In Brussels Camilla was told to be sure to see Mannike Pis and she asked the guide to be sure they did not miss it. As they traveled about the city she several times asked for reassurance that they were not going to miss that statue and fountain and the guide said yes, yes, they would come to it. Finally he brought them to an intersection where they could see the memorial to a little boy who had been lost and then found. Camilla blushed to see that it was a statue of the boy as he had been found, naked and forever urinating into a pool. To tease Camilla, Spencer insisted that they buy a little replica of the statue.

They bought wooden shoes in Holland, climbed the Eiffel Tower, took a riverboat down the Rhine, entered the ice caves in a Swiss glacier. They traveled hard, seeing every museum, castle, and cathedral in their path, thinking this their one chance to make places and things they had only read about come to life.

But finally, in London near the end of the ten-week whirlwind tour, Camilla confided to her journal, "I am so downright homesick tonight I just had to cry a bit. I wish I could fly home. I have seen so much I have reached the saturation point. Nothing seems interesting anymore. Our expenses are so high I am quite in the dumps. . . . I shall be most happy to go home to my own little niche and let the rest of the world go by."

When they finally boarded the Berengaria Camilla went to bed exhausted and slept and slept.
