Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

7

In 1940 the Kimball family moved into a new home that they had painstakingly planned and watched step by step in the building. For years they had taken pictures, gathering ideas, of Southwestern architecture in Tucson, Phoenix, Albuquerque, El Paso, and in between. The six-room home in pueblo style was not elaborate nor expensive, but for them it was "a mansion and built of love and dreams." They planned it as a unit. The furniture was all new, much of it Monterey style purchased after long consideration at Barker Brothers in Los Angeles. Indian pictures hung on the walls. The bedspreads carried Indian design, and Camilla embroidered curtains to match. They planned and planted a garden and an orchard, had a barn with cows, chickens, and a pig—in fact, they felt they had established an estate where they could end their days.

Camilla took great pride in the new home and in the yard they planted. Along the north side of the lot was a row of oleanders, which grew as tall as the house. On either side of the long driveway they planted a cactus garden. The family went by car out into the hills to gather the cactus plants. One was a rare night-blooming cereus, and when it bloomed for one night, the air of the whole neighborhood was scented. And there were sweet peas, nasturtiums, zinnias, hollyhocks, irises, roses, and climbing vines.

From the time they were very small the children helped around the house and in the yard. The daughter helped her mother with cleaning and cooking, canning, sewing, baby tending, and so on. The sons all helped with mowing the lawn, irrigating the yard (a tedious chore during the hot, dry summers), chopping weeds, picking pecans, mending fences, scything hay or weeds, feeding and milking the cows, and shoveling the corrals. Sometimes they rebelled at the work, but their parents were determined that it was good for them.

When the children finished their chores, their parents found more things to keep them busy. Andrew at fourteen had spare time during the summer, so Spencer talked a friend who managed the local Sears Roebuck store into offering the youth some work. Andrew was legally too young to work for the store, so the manager paid him out of his own pocket.

Kimball-Greenhalgh, the family business, hired the boys to clean up vacant lots so they would sell more easily, or fix up properties left in chaos by renters, so they could be rented again. Olive Beth learned to type and to file letters accurately in her father's business, and she saw firsthand how honorable and kind he was in all his dealings. She also made enough money to see her through school.

LeVan and his father built a corral and a small barn. Neither structure cost them a cent. LeVan pulled nails out of scrap lumber from an old barn and fence posts on some property his father had bought, and he had the task of straightening the nails. Spencer and Camilla were very economical; between the fruit trees they planted alfalfa that was scythed by hand; every day they separated and sold to the creamery the cream from the milk of their cows. Camilla made and remade clothes, preserved fruit and vegetables and jams, and always shopped the sales. Thrift was more than a conscious virtue, it was a character trait.

The children were taught to be thrifty and to handle money, too. They were paid for doing chores around the house—ten cents for catching a mouse, twenty-five cents for hoeing the garden, fifty cents for doing the weekly irrigating, seventy-five cents a week for milking the cows, and so on. What each child did not need for gifts or movies or personal pleasures, their parents would encourage them to put into the family business. It was a lot of bother and did not amount to very much, but it taught them to work and save. Over the years with compound interest it helped with missions and school, and they also learned how to figure and pay their tithing on their earnings.

Sometimes LeVan would forget to milk the family cows, and he would feel sheepish when his father, without comment, went out late after his work and church meetings to do the work. That helped his memory better than a switching or scolding would have done. Andrew would pretend he was asleep when the family returned home from a picnic and the cows were bellowing to be milked. While Camilla put him to bed, Spencer milked the cows.

Birthdays were very special occasions, with a tiered cake and friends over to a big birthday party. At Christmas Santa brought most of the things the children had asked for—and even some things they had forgotten about. The parents were adroit at making the children think they did not really want those things they couldn't or shouldn't have. Santa's handwriting looked very much like Camilla's, and last-minute gifts were likely to appear under the tree in brown paper sacks. Spencer always read off the names on gifts under the tree. One year he purposely ignored the gifts placed there by Olive Beth's boyfriend. "Well, I guess that's all," he said, pretending not to see the remaining gifts. An embarrassed Olive Beth had to point them out.

Spencer teased; Camilla did not, although she was good natured about the teasing she received from Spencer and the children, including the retelling of the time a farmer named his cow after her and of the old man who, on meeting her, said, "Oh yes, you are one of the plain-faced Eyring girls." Eddie once gave his mother such a vigorous hug that he cracked her ribs.

The children occasionally needed disciplining. When Olive Beth was very small, her father came home one day to find her wearing two of his hats—on her feet! He spanked her, for the only time in her life. Another time when he asked Olive Beth to help her mother with the dishes, she answered, "Just a minute," and turned back to reading her book. Her father snatched the book, flung it across the room, and scolded her. Afterward Camilla consoled her, saying that that action was just his letting off steam from a bad day at the office.

But generally Spencer and Camilla were in complete accord. Though they disagreed at times, they never argued in front of the children.

Camilla's reaction to the misbehavior of her children could be unnerving. Her usual discipline consisted of a glare and a scolding, but when LeVan took the scissors to Olive Beth's carefully nurtured, long blonde hair and snipped off the curls, Camilla reacted with a torrent of tears. There was no whipping for him, but tears were worse. Then when he was about ten years of age, LeVan became a consignment salesman for Literary Digest. He grew to hate the task, and one week in frustration he hid his unsold copies of the magazine behind the garage and told his mother he had sold them. A week later Camilla stumbled across them. As when he cut off Olive Beth's curls, she burst into tears. When Spencer came home, LeVan was ordered to cut a willow switch from a tree, but again, all the good that punishment could do was already done by Camilla's tears.

During these years Camilla was active in the Safford Federated Women's Club. The club maintained the public library, and she spent several years as the volunteer librarian. Just as she had once read books under the covers as a child, so now she continued to keep up with the best sellers and classics. She had a great ambition to be well read, and she was eager to share her literary discoveries with others. She gave book reviews to gatherings in Safford, including some over the radio, and she encouraged her children to read good literature. In the summer she and the children would sometimes make a list of books to be read, and she would mark them off as they were completed.

Olive Beth went through a period of hating to read. Then one day she found that if she were reading, her mother would let her out of doing the dishes, so every night after supper she would pick up a book and become engrossed for a few minutes, until the dishes were done. In the process she found that she truly became interested in books.

Under the law at the time, Camilla's marriage to Spencer had given her American citizenship. Not long before that, women in the United States had been made eligible to vote. Camilla had some interest in politics and served as a poll worker during elections as a civic service.

Camilla served as first president of the Safford PTA, as president of the Safford Women's Club, and as president of the Southeastern Arizona Federation of Women's Clubs. The latter experience gave her contact with many women outside her own community and led to her being recommended as secretary of the state federation. She would have been eager to accept the position and broaden her sphere, but that was the year the Kimballs left Arizona and moved to Utah.

As the children moved into their teens, their problems changed and Camilla had to adjust. She had the patience and ability to listen to their questioning arguments. They each in turn argued radical, doubting, or antiestablishment positions with her. She would discuss at whatever length they wished to pursue the subject, reasonably, without heat. She never "won" an argument, yet somehow her values, opinions, and points of view generally became theirs. The arguments served as a means of testing and learning. She sometimes felt despair and disappointment at the expressed attitudes and opinions, but by and large she really prevailed. These discussions took place in the kitchen, the most intimate room in the home, as Camilla went about her work.

As the children started dating they had rules and regulations to follow. Olive Beth was told that if a party let out at ten, she was to be home by ten thirty; if it let out at twelve, she was to be home by twelve thirty. She managed to keep the curfew, though it was awkward on occasion. Camilla always stayed awake, reading, no matter how late, until the children were all home.

When Andrew returned home from a date with his first serious girl friend at age sixteen, his mother expressed concern the next day when she discovered lipstick on his handkerchief; she warned him of the need to be on guard.

Friends set their standards by those of the Kimballs. If the Kimball children were going to a party or movie, their friends could go; if not, then the friends could not go either. This fact added to their feeling of responsibility in regard to their standards. But they were never coerced into accepting their parents' standards; they were encouraged to work things out for themselves. Once, after Sunday dinner, the boys began to play table tennis and a prospective daughter-in-law asked Spencer how it was that they played on Sunday. He replied, "I don't do it, but they must decide for themselves."

Camilla had a philosophy about religious problems that helped her children. She said that when things troubled her, she put them on the shelf; later when she looked at them again, some were answered, some seemed no longer important, and some needed to go back on the shelf for another time. She bore her testimony in meetings less often than she would have liked, because she tended to weep and her children became embarrassed.

Olive Beth and her mother had a special mother-daughter relationship. Recalling her own trial of being at school with no proper clothes, Camilla made sure her daughter felt comfortable about her clothing. Olive Beth always had at least one outfit with matching shoes, purse, hat, and dress, and she was allowed to pick out her own dress patterns. Camilla was an excellent seamstress and made much of the family's clothing. The children never felt rich, but they never felt uncomfortable because they did not have the right things to wear.

Culture was also encouraged in their home. Each of the children had music lessons, though they did not all continue their interest in music into adulthood. LeVan had many piano lessons, but when he learned his parents hoped he might be a concert pianist, he rebelled and quit completely. Olive Beth learned to play the piano and violin well and also participated in school singing groups and later the Tabernacle Choir. Andrew and Edward followed suit with music lessons of various kinds. Camilla had to police the practicing. She regretted not having learned to play the organ well in Mexico, and determined that her children should do better. She had practiced with a novel propped on the organ and smiled when she found some of her children doing the same thing.

All of the children excelled in their school studies and activities. When Andrew graduated from junior high school, Spencer wrote, "Last night we were mighty proud of Andrew. About fifteen others were cited for being outstanding in one field or another—art, music, athletics—but Andrew topped them all. Was I proud?"

Olive Beth felt she had to do well in school because her parents expected her to, and she couldn't let them down. LeVan and Edward were also honor graduates.

While academics received the warmest response from Spencer and Camilla, they always supported any activity—musical, forensic, athletic. When Andrew was playing basketball his mother would often come to the games, but she found it distressing. She would become extremely emotional and would cheer loudly for her boy to "come through for Mother."

Threads of love were woven through the fabric of Camilla. She had great pride in and concern for each child; she motivated by encouragement, not by threats. All of the sons filled missions for the Church. LeVan was called to the Eastern Canadian Mission when he was only seventeen; he had already completed two years of college, which was the alternate requirement at that time to being twenty years of age. Andrew filled a mission after World War II in New England, and Edward went at eighteen to the Netherlands.

All of the children, as they left the family home for missions, college, and marriage, took with them the unwavering support of their parents. There was never a moment of doubting their father's and mother's complete love for them.
