Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

8

In November 1942 Camilla and Spencer observed their silver wedding anniversary. Twenty-five years had passed since they had spoken their vows at the Eyring home in Pima. To celebrate, they decided to have an open house. Though World War II was on and gas had been rationed, friends and relatives came from Phoenix, Tucson, and many other communities around, all wishing to share in the occasion. They sent 600 invitations for staggered times, beginning at two o'clock in the afternoon, but almost no one would go home, and by the evening's end their small house bulged with people happily suffering the crowding to stay and visit. They had made their niche secure, surrounded by friends and family.

On July 8, 1943, only a few months after our celebration, when all seemed comfortable in our little world, a veritable bomb struck our household. Spencer and the children came home at midday for dinner, our big meal of the day. Dinner was all ready as Spencer came in the door. The telephone rang and Eddie answered; the operator said, "Salt Lake calling for Spencer Kimball." Spencer took the phone and I could tell from the look on his face and his exclamations that something most unusual and unexpected was happening.

"Surely you can't mean me, President Clark! . . . It seems impossible. . . . Can I come to Salt Lake and talk to you?" When he finished he was pale and trembling and lay down on the floor—as he did most every day to rest a few minutes—and started to cry, exclaiming, "I could never do that!"

Then he told me that President J. Reuben Clark said they wished to call him to be one of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. At a recent conference, five Assistants to the Twelve Apostles had been sustained. It had been my idea that the next member of the Quorum would be selected from this group, so I said, "Are you sure it wasn't to be one of the Assistants?" Spencer assured me they had said one of the Twelve. The consternation that we both felt would be hard to describe. We were to tell no one, so we could only worry and cry together. Spencer kept saying, "I am not good enough, not big enough for such a job." I did my best to reassure him. All his life he had been faithfully dedicated to the Church and had been outstanding in his service. I knew he could do it if the Lord had called him. I was willing to give my support.

I had been ill for a month or so, hemorrhaging so badly the doctor had been unable to stop it. This new anxiety didn't help my condition. We had been planning to go on the train to El Paso to hold ward conference and then on up to Boulder, Colorado, to visit LeVan and his wife, Kathryn, where he was studying Japanese at the Navy language school. We decided we would proceed with the plan, and then I would stay in Boulder while Spencer went to Salt Lake City and back.

While we were in El Paso, the bishopric took us to dinner at the hotel, and as we ate, Brother Pauly kept saying, "Brother Kimball, who do you think will be the new apostle? Can you make a guess?" Spencer assured him, "I can't say." Little did they realize they were talking to the new member. It was uncommon to call a General Authority from outside Utah, though President Clark had been one such person. It was hard not to give the news away, for we were both so depressed that anyone should have guessed that something was up.

We couldn't even tell LeVan and Kathryn, and they wondered what was the matter with us. Spencer had been praying fervently for six days and I had been praying for him. While we were in Boulder he went alone into the hills and came back hours later with the assurance he had sought from the Lord. I was deeply grateful for that. It was a great relief when Spencer had his interview with the First Presidency in Salt Lake City and they decided to publish the news of his call immediately. It created a special stir to have a man from Arizona appointed.

Many adjustments had to be made, and there would be more and more as time went on. Olive Beth was working in San Francisco, and just Andrew and Eddie were at home with us. It was a real blow to my father and mother, who had always counted on our being near them in their declining years. We wondered if we would have a private life of our own.

Spencer began the difficult process of selling the business and our home. I was still very ill, and we finally decided to go to Salt Lake City in August so I could enter the hospital for medical care and so we could start the boys in school the first of September.

It was hard to leave. Arizona had been our only home together. The boys resented being uprooted. I hated leaving our dream house and my parents. But we went because we had been called.

This was war time. Housing in Salt Lake City was impossible to find. We registered at the Temple Square Hotel and then I went to the hospital, where they gave me twenty-four hours of radium treatment. This stopped the bleeding, but it also made me weak and nervous for many weeks.

We finally found a house available for rent in November. The problem was where to live until then. Housing was so scarce that we couldn't even rent a motel by the month. Finally Spencer's cousin Vi Woolley came to our rescue and very generously offered to let us live with her. She was unmarried and was living alone in the old family home with plenty of room, but it meant taking in a whole new family.

Andrew had been very rebellious about having to leave Safford, where all his friends and school ties were. It was to be his last year in high school. He was playing in football and basketball, was in line for scholastic honors, and had friends who meant more than family. Eddie hated the move also, but he was four years younger and was not so deeply affected.

Olive Beth came from San Francisco to be with us. Spencer went back to Safford to take care of his business. The boys started school, Andrew at East High and Eddie at Roosevelt Junior High. It meant a long bus ride for each of them. They were just getting somewhat adjusted when a polio epidemic broke out and all schools, churches, movies were closed—all public gatherings stopped. Here were these two active, unhappy boys penned up in a strange place. I was still weak and in my nervous condition I felt as if I were caged with two wild lions.

Camilla wrote to Spencer about the troubles with the boys and about her feelings:

Dearest Dad, . . .

It seems harder and harder for me to be reconciled to this move. You seemed to realize it from the start so much better than I. With me it is getting worse and worse the more I am brought to face it. I am so desperately homesick I am really ill from it. I can't seem to see any recompense in all the sacrifice ahead of us. . . . I am afraid I forgot to thank you for the chocolates, darling. I do appreciate them and thanks a million. I do love you so much. Troubles don't seem anything when you are with us but loom to mountains when you are away.

Spencer wrote a long letter to the children, appealing for help:

I am not complaining, but you must know that this is not easy for Mother and me. If you could have walked with us down the mental trails of anguish the past two months you would know what I mean. One sister told me last Sunday: 'I didn't realize that there could be anything in such a call but one great joy.' I have lost 18 pounds in these two sleepless months. Your mother and I have gone and are going through an unparalleled experience of our lives. I am writing this letter at 4:45 A.M. to you.

Don't misunderstand me. I am not minimizing the glory of this great call. On the contrary it is so great and glorious that I am finding it so difficult to rise to it. . . . This is such a great responsibility for such a little man. You can help me so much. I promise you I will do my best to qualify and bring you honor. . . .

We thought that maybe if Andrew could get some kind of job, he might be more content. All the time he kept insisting he was going back to Safford. I had trouble coping and could not hold him. Finally I called Spencer on the phone and told him the situation. We decided that we had better let Andrew go back to Arizona at least for a short visit. In the meantime I persuaded him to make one last try for a job. The Fetzers gave him work pouring glue in their cabinet factory, and that saved the day. School opened again in a short time, and both boys soon made a satisfactory adjustment and found fine friends.

About this time Spencer wrote to Olive Beth:

You've got the sweetest mother in the world, so I hope you will save her all you can so you will have one a long time. You can never know how much I have missed my mother—what an unquenchable yearning I have felt so often, when I was younger especially, for a mother who could understand and love and appreciate and spoil me. Don't let the sun ever go down without having thanked the Lord for such a dear mother, and let her know often, too, for parents sometimes get hungry for expressed affection. . . .

At the October conference Spencer was sustained to his new calling, and then I went with him back to Safford to make the final move. First we celebrated Mother and Father's fiftieth wedding anniversary and had a fine celebration with all the children coming home for the occasion. In the meantime we were packing, selling, and giving away our possessions, the accumulation of twenty-six years of married life. The house and most of the furniture were sold to Emil Crockett, who with others also bought the business. Many things we gave to Mother. We packed ninety-four boxes, trunks, and bundles to be shipped to Salt Lake City, among them six sets of springs and mattresses which we had bought new for our new home. Many of the boxes were filled with old letter files that Spencer's father had accumulated and that Spencer had never had time to sort fully. We really didn't have time to sort out many useless things, so we just moved them.

There was much sorrow in leaving life-long friends, my parents, who needed us so much, our many civic and church activities, all the old familiar things. We had been considered quite important members of the small community, and now we were expected to take our place in a large community, among important people. We felt very inadequate.

The Arizona stakes gave us an impressive testimonial. They gave Spencer a beautiful watch, and both of us suitcases. Many kind things were said, many goodbye parties given. We may have moved away, but we never stopped being small-town folks.

In November of 1943 we moved into the lovely Doxey home. We were very fortunate to have had this experience. It was in a lovely neighborhood, and the home was beautifully furnished with all the conveniences. It gave us a feeling of adequacy that we could not have had in poorer surroundings.

On the first Thursday of each month the wives of the General Authorities meet for a luncheon and program at the Lion House. My first experience there still leaves me trembling. All my life I had thought of these women as being a superior group, on a high pedestal, whom I looked up to from afar. Suddenly I was in the midst of them and supposed to be one of them. If I were to face a firing squad, I couldn't be more terrified than I was to face that group of women that day. Most of them were older than I and had been reared in the city, while I was an inexperienced, unsophisticated, self-conscious country child. Thank goodness that after a few years I felt quite at home with them!

Camilla was called to the stake Relief Society board as the spiritual living leader soon after she moved to Salt Lake City, which also helped her feel more at home.

In November 1943, shortly after the Kimballs moved to Salt Lake City, Grant Mack came home from his mission. He had been courting Olive Beth before he left, but she had not committed herself. Now he proposed a quick marriage, since he would be going into the Navy soon. He and Olive Beth went to her parents' bedroom at one o'clock in the morning and broke the news. Spencer had been involved in a distressing excommunication action in the Twelve the day before. As they lay sleepless "here came another shock. How could we give our only daughter in marriage?"

On December 8 Grant and Olive Beth were married in the Salt Lake Temple, and her parents held open house for them that evening at home. The family had been in Salt Lake City only a few weeks. They knew very few people, so the guest list was quite small. Even so, the guests strained the facilities of the home. As a highlight of the evening Jessie Evans Smith, wife of Joseph Fielding Smith, sang a solo. The couple had a short honeymoon before Grant went into the Navy. Olive Beth continued working in Salt Lake City until he completed his basic training. Then she joined him in San Diego until he was sent to Hawaii. She came home to live with her family until he was released when the war was over.

LeVan and Andrew also served in the Navy, LeVan as a Japanese translator and Andrew as an electronics technician. Eddie was still in high school.
