Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

9

Among the choicest opportunities that came to Camilla and Spencer by reason of his position were the many visits to the stakes and missions of the Church. Ordinarily the General Authorities traveled each week to stake conferences without their wives, but on occasion and often when they went on extended mission tours their wives accompanied them. Meeting the missionaries and the Saints was thrilling—and seeing the various countries added a bonus. They never ceased to marvel at the devotion of the Saints and at the loving attention accorded to the visitors as servants of the Lord. But Camilla was reminded that her role was primarily to support her husband when she overheard a woman say, "I don't mind the men, but why do they have to bring their wives?"

During one of their supervisory visits, to the Eastern States Mission in 1945, word came from Salt Lake City that President Heber J. Grant had died, and Spencer was directed to come home at once. The mission tour was almost completed, but he left the next day for Salt Lake City. Camilla was eager for Eddie to have the tour of Washington, D.C., they had planned, so she and Eddie remained a few days to visit the nation's capital before returning home also.

A week after President Grant's death the Council of the Twelve named George Albert Smith to preside as the eighth president of the Church. Camilla had come to know him as a gentle, kindly man who went out of his way to speak to her.

As one of his early acts, President Smith assigned Spencer to work with the Indians, opening up a new area of responsibility and experience for Camilla, too.

That year they toured the Spanish-American Mission with President and Sister Lorin Jones. Starting in Fresno, California, they met with missionaries and Spanish-speaking Saints. They traveled through California to Tijuana, across California, Arizona, New Mexico, and to the southern tip of Texas. They visited the Pueblo Indians in New Mexico. Sister Jones had worked among them doing social work. She and Brother Jones had been in their homes, teaching them to cook and can food and helping with their agricultural problems. They had a thorough schooling in Indian lore and Indian culture. Camilla took home pottery samples of the various tribes and used them many times in giving talks about the Indians, seeking to build up understanding and support for the Indian work. She saw dirt and poverty, but also beauty.

Coming into the pueblo of Taos just about sunset and seeing the village silhouetted against the evening sky was impressive. There were dozens of men in their bright-colored blankets standing on different levels of the pueblo getting the warmth from the western walls. One figure, draped in a white blanket, stood on the very top of the many-storied apartment pueblo. I wondered at first if it were a statue, he stood still for so long silhouetted against the evening sky.

Mission tours were not vacations, especially with the pace Spencer set. In 1946 Elder Matthew Cowley, suffering from heart trouble, was sent with Spencer to visit Hawaii, partly for a rest. Camilla exclaimed, "Imagine sending someone with Spencer Kimball for a rest!"

One advantage of living in Salt Lake City was the ready access to educational opportunities. Almost continuously from the time she moved to Utah Camilla took classes at the University of Utah—English, philosophy, typing, botany, history, public speaking, Bible studies, and especially literature. Other times she enrolled at the Institute of Religion. At one point she concluded that she had amassed nearly enough credits to obtain a college degree, but she discovered to her disappointment that the university considered outdated the college credits she had earned as a young woman.

Her own great interest in education helped influence her family to seek a good education at any cost. Among them the fifteen of her father's children who lived to maturity earned twenty-four college degrees, not counting Henry's additional fifteen honorary degrees. Eleven of the children had substantial experience as teachers. They tended to marry people with similar aspirations: their spouses had twenty college degrees (plus Spencer's several honorary ones), and seven of them were teachers.

Camilla's own four children earned ten college degrees among them, and three became teachers. There was always a dictionary by the kitchen table, ready for consultation when a question arose about words.

I have always had an inquiring mind. I am not satisfied just to accept things. I like to follow through and study things out. I learned early to put aside those gospel questions that I could not answer. I had a shelf of things I did not understand, but as I have grown older and studied and prayed and thought about each problem, one by one I have been able to understand them better.

A woman, to be well rounded in her personality, needs many experiences in and out of the home. She needs to be concerned with church, school, and community. If she buries herself inside four walls, she does not reach her potential. She needs to keep growing, to keep aware of the world in which her children are growing. In order to do this, she should be interested in educational advancement and worthwhile endeavors in her community.

One of her own expressions of community-mindedness was her eight years of service as a hospital volunteer, a "Pink Lady."

When Spencer divided the Mexican Mission, Camilla had opportunity to accompany him back to the nation of her birth.

Brother Joseph Bentley was to be installed as the president of the new North Mexican Mission with headquarters at Monterrey. We drove with the Pratts, starting out from El Paso at seven P.M., arriving at Chihuahua City at two A.M. after a hazardous ride. Up at seven A.M. again, we drove another long, hot, hard trip to Monterrey, arriving at eleven P.M. We spent two days holding meetings with missionaries and the two branch congregations in Monterrey.

Leaving the hotel at six A.M. on Friday, we drove with President Bowman straight through to Mexico City. The first part of the journey was through tropical jungle, and for 150 miles the road wound over a high mountain range with precipitous gorges hundreds of feet below, a perilous road to travel at high speed. We were mighty thankful to arrive at the mission home safely. (President Bowman was later killed in a car accident in Mexico.) The men held many meetings in the area around Mexico City.

Later, in Chihuahua City, Brother and Sister Pratt and Spencer took off from the airport in Brother Pratt's small plane to fly over the mountains to Matachic, a small Mexican branch high in the Sierra Madre mountains. Brother and Sister Bentley and I took off with a Mexican pilot in another small plane. Sister Bentley and I sat on the rear seats. She was terrified and clung to me as if her life depended on it. Every time the plane bounced in an air pocket as it did frequently, she closed her eyes, gasped, and clung tighter. She hadn't wanted to go but felt it her duty.

The pilot had never been over this country before, and when we came to the right valley he flew around until he spotted the Pratt's plane in a grassy field tethered to a fence. We landed on the bumpy ground and tied up beside the other plane, like horses to a hitching post.

A Mexican member was waiting for us in a truck and we took off across the country over a cow trail, up and down steep banks and through sand washes, hanging to the truck for dear life. We arrived at the church a half hour late for the meeting. A good crowd had assembled, and on the front row were about twenty-five boys and girls ten to twelve years of age. After the meeting, going back to the planes, Sister Pratt drove the truck so that the three women could sit in the seat, and the men stood up behind. She couldn't get it into high gear, so we chugged along in second.

For the flight back, the three men went in the Pratt plane and the three women went with the Mexican pilot. Big black storm clouds were gathering, but it seemed as if a clear corridor opened up for us to pass through. There was a constant prayer on my lips, and I'm sure the others were praying also. Sister Bentley continued to cling to me all through the hour and a half flight.

Despite her support for his work, there were times Camilla felt lonely and needed reassurance from Spencer. When he was traveling in Canada she poured out in a letter her mixed feelings:

. . . Sometimes I almost feel in the press of your many responsibilities that I don't matter very much any more. Anyone who thinks being the wife of one of the general authorities is a bed of roses should try it once, shouldn't they? Theoretically I realize and appreciate all the blessings and advantages, but sometimes I selfishly feel it would be nice not to have to share my husband with a million others. I do love and appreciate you, dear, and admire your sterling qualities. I wouldn't have you be one whit less valiant in the pursuit of your duty, . . . but it is comforting to be reassured once in a while that you realize I am standing by. . . .

In 1947 Spencer and Golden Buchanan began to work out a placement program for Indian children, whereby they could live with Latter-day Saint families during the school year to gain a good education, and return to their homes in the summer. Helen John, a Navajo girl who had precipitated the matter by asking for a place to stay during the school term so she could go to school, was the first one. The Buchanans took her into their home in Richfield, Utah. But when they received a call to oversee the missionary work among the Indians, Helen needed a place to stay while she finished beautician training in Salt Lake City. She came to live with the Kimballs. Camilla found her being there no special burden, since she helped at home as a family member would.

In May 1948 Spencer and Golden Buchanan were touring the Southwest Indian Mission when their car stuck in drifted sand. Spencer pushed and ran, pushed and ran, repeatedly straining to the utmost. That night in Phoenix an agonizing pain struck him down, clutching at his chest; he sweat profusely. But after a while the worst pain passed and he said nothing, intent on finishing the tour. Day after day he pushed on with the tour, not sparing himself. When he confided his problem to President Buchanan, word passed back to the Quorum of the Twelve. They sent him a message, "Slow down," but he seemed not to know how.

When the tour ended and he returned home, Camilla first learned of the problem. She was upset that Spencer had not let her know immediately, and fearful at the meaning of it all. He had always been so strong. Except for a terrible siege of boils, he had not been seriously ill in thirty years. Now Spencer suffered from extreme lethargy, wholly unlike him. She was beside herself, wanting to help, but finding him resistant to going to a doctor. She insisted on his having an examination; he felt so weak that he agreed, and the electrocardiogram documented serious damage done by the heart attack. The doctor prescribed a month of rest, but despite Camilla's protestations Spencer resolved to say nothing to other Church leaders and just go on about his business, being careful. He was sure he could get by. His next stake conference assignment, in Idaho, found him feeling heavy with pain and frightened, wishing he had followed the doctor's advice. This time when he returned home he went to bed and stayed there even though he felt relatively well. After four days, in the middle of the night, he awoke with the severe pains of another heart attack. He woke Camilla but resisted her urging that she call an ambulance. She could do little but worry. When the worst passed he spent the remaining hours of the night discussing with her funeral plans and family finances, in case he should die.

When dawn broke, the brightness of a new day gave them hope. It appeared he would not die, at least not just yet. After a few days more, however, Spencer sank into depression over his condition. He already felt inadequate, and now he could not begin to carry his share of the load. Camilla tended him continually, encouraging him, cheering him, and making him comfortable.

When he had recovered somewhat, after seven weeks, Spencer went alone to the Navajo reservation for convalescence of two weeks in the high pines. When he returned he immediately began to work again and in a few days the heavy pains returned. Camilla hurriedly packed their suitcases and they caught a train for Long Beach, where they sought out a quiet apartment facing the ocean. There on some days they went through the physical and psychological torture of hours of unrelieved pain and concern that death might be imminent. They went over plans for funeral and family arrangements and handling of property and so on. At other times Spencer felt much better. Camilla took care of shopping, cooking, cleaning, running errands, waiting on Spencer "hand and foot." Pains recurred but were not linked to any particular exertion, so it was difficult to know what to do. Weeks passed and Camilla struggled with Spencer. He was difficult to deal with, fretting at the inactivity, worried about the work left to others, but she knew he had to be patient.

Finally he insisted on returning to Salt Lake City and gradually to work; soon he was pushing full speed ahead again. A year after his first heart attack, Spencer set out on another tour of the Southwest Indian Mission. Camilla wrote him: "Dearest, I can count off two days of the thirty you will be gone! That isn't much and I am not looking forward without some dread of the long, lonesome time. I do miss you, so very much. I can't quite get over the terror that you are reenacting the tragedy of a year ago, and while I know I shouldn't suggest the possibility of a repetition, I do hope you will exercise judgment and not take chances. You are so recreant about caring for yourself."

Heart pains came back in 1949, severe enough to force Spencer to leave the city, since if he stayed he could not well avoid interviews and involvement with people's problems. On December 30 Camilla and Spencer drove south to Pima. At the Eyring farm Spencer lounged for two weeks in pajamas or old clothes. Some nights he lay in his bed starkly awake through hour upon hour of agony; there was nothing Camilla could do to help, so she just suffered along with him.

She had not spent so much time with her parents in thirty years, she enjoyed visiting with them. They had grown old. Her father was eighty, her mother seventy-five, but they were still much the same. Her father was a quiet, kindly person, always gentle and unassuming, easy to be with. Her mother was a busy person, anxious that everything possible should be done for their comfort. Camilla gathered strength and support from them in this time of stress.

Spencer underwent more tests and they looked for a doctor who could offer relief; it proved a long, frustrating convalescence. Camilla suffered vicariously all the pains and had her own worries about how to keep Spencer from being depressed about his condition and how to keep him from overtaxing himself.

As though to tax her endurance and Spencer's, in 1950 Spencer's voice became hoarse and the hoarseness hung on and deepened. Finally Dr. Cowan diagnosed the new problem as possible cancer of the vocal cords. Keeping their worries to themselves, Spencer and Camilla did not tell even their children. They would not breathe the dread word cancer until they had to. Spencer submitted to a painful biopsy; analysis of the slides showed that it was not cancer, but an infection which needed cauterization. He received a priesthood blessing and put off the operation. The infection then healed without treatment and his voice regained its strength. They felt especially grateful for this blessing—Spencer's voice seemed so essential to his work.

Camilla's mother became ill with stomach cancer early in 1954. Camilla brought her from Arizona to Salt Lake City by airplane for treatment, and she stayed for some time with her sisters Rose and Caroline. When it appeared no treatment could help, Camilla took her mother into her home and put her in the master bedroom. Though she suffered intense nausea and had great discomfort, Camilla's mother never complained, but kept up a cheerful manner. She was nearly eighty and sensed that she would die soon. She said to one of the children, "I'm glad Papa and Emma will have some time by themselves. Anyway, I guess I'm glad." When it appeared that nothing more could be done for her, she simply stopped eating. Camilla and the rest of the family agreed that it would be cruel to try to prolong her life by heroic means. She suffered and lost strength but not her composure. The last night, as she was cared for in Camilla's home, the doctor came to check on her. He asked, "How are you today, Sister Eyring?" She roused herself through the pain and drugs to say, weakly, "I'm fine, just fine." The doctor said to the family, "She knows she is going to die, yet she is always cheerful and uncomplaining."

I cannot think of Mother without remembering her complete unselfishness. When she fixed a meal, the best must be for Papa, all others must be cared for, and then whatever seemed least desired by others or what was left over was the portion she wanted for herself. The poverty of her youth made her extremely thrifty. To see any least thing wasted was abhorrent to her. Her life was one long service to others. She was completely loyal to family, community, church, and church leaders. Faultfinding was a sin in her eyes, and she refused to listen to gossip or scandal. Having sacrificed so much and worked so hard all her life, she had little patience with those who seemed to complain, when by comparison they had so much. She couldn't help being impatient with anyone slow or lazy. I never remember seeing her sit down to rest without something in her hands to do, and speed was a virtue to her.

Mother never complained about her situation, but I sensed it was hard for her to share her husband. In some ways it was easier and in other ways harder to share him with her sister. She could not turn to her own parents for any sympathy, but on the other hand the sisters loved one another and shared values and background. When Spencer and I came to visit Mother we always stopped in to see Aunt Emma, but Mother would sometimes say, a little plaintively, "Don't stay very long."

I have nothing but admiration for people such as Father, Mother, and Aunt Emma, who are able to put aside their selfishness to live a demanding principle like plural marriage. Father's practice was strict equality, providing alike for his two families. At the end of the week he would pack his bag and move, no matter what. Of course, for most of the time the families lived side by side, so he was involved with them continually.

I know that plural marriage was a great trial to my mother, though she said little about it. No one was kinder to me than Aunt Emma. Her children were my brothers and sisters too, yet I never knew them quite as well as my own mother's children. Of course, Tony, the oldest of Aunt Emma's children to survive, was only six when I left home, so I did not have the long, close association with them that I would have had if I had not gone away at seventeen.

Three of Camilla's brothers and sisters had died in infancy, but this was the first death in her family for nearly fifty years. She felt a great loss. She and her mother had always been close. Caroline Eyring was a loving, understanding person, whose complete unselfishness Camilla came to appreciate more and more as time passed.

In December 1956 Camilla went with Spencer to a stake conference in Thatcher, Arizona.

As we reached the Kaibab Forest in northern Arizona we found snow and the roads icy in stretches. About four miles south of Jacob's Lake we came to the top of a sharp decline and saw ahead a diesel truck stalled on the road. It couldn't make the upgrade because of the ice. The driver was out throwing gravel under his wheels. We began the descent slowly, hoping we could pass the truck safely, but just before we came upon it, we began to skid, and it was apparent we would hit. We were going so slowly that we didn't anticipate real disaster. Like the proverbial ostrich, I closed my eyes and braced for the collision. It came with a bang, throwing me to the floor of the car. I must have been thrown with my back against the door handles. It knocked my breath out, and I felt sure I was dying; I gasped a breath and then blacked out a second and third time, each time having that sinking, crushing feeling of oblivion. I remembered reading that there is less danger if one stays with the car in case of accident, so I was hanging tenaciously to the seat as I sat crumpled on the floor. I had the sensation of falling through space, though I had not seen the car cross the highway and make a nose-dive down a fifty-foot embankment to come to rest against a tree at the bottom of the canyon. The pain was terrific, and it was impossible to get a real breath. Spencer thought I was screaming for fear, and said, "Well, Mama, I guess we are all right," and I answered, "No, I am dying." He wanted to lift me up onto the seat, but I was sure it would be the end of me if I were moved, for I felt crushed in the middle.

A group of eight men quickly gathered, and after prying the front bumper off the wheel, they were finally able to push the car along the side of the canyon onto an old road. I was fearful we were going to tip over and go down the canyon to finish our destruction.

Spencer and one of the men succeeded in lifting me onto the seat, and I was grateful to find that my legs were not broken. With the help of a road grader, we were pulled up onto the side of the main road, out of the way. Someone notified the Arizona Highway Patrol, and Spencer asked them to send for an ambulance and doctor from Kanab. He and one of the men who had stopped to help prayed for me. Every breath was excruciating pain, and I didn't suffer in silence.

While we waited for help to come, Spencer found some aspirin in the bag and gave me a couple of tablets and some snow to satisfy my intense thirst. We waited one and a half hours until the patrol finally came and took record of the accident, but they didn't offer any help. Then Spencer decided to see if we could cripple up to Jacob's Lake. The brake was clamped on and the fender was dragging the wheel, but we finally made it to the service station, only to find that no one was interested in helping. There was no ambulance in Kanab, and no doctor was coming, so we limped along the thirty more miles to Kanab and the hospital there. They brought a wheelchair and I managed to get onto it. Examination indicated that I no doubt had broken ribs, although there was nothing critical.

This all happened on Camilla's sixty-second birthday. She reminded Spencer what an unusual birthday party he was giving her. She also insisted that he should go on to his conference in St. Joseph Stake, which he could do by taking a bus at three A.M. The local stake president came to the hospital, and he and Spencer administered to her.

I was fairly comfortable with the help of sedatives except when I tried to move. I screamed plenty. I am sorry for the nurses and the other patients, for I really made a fuss.

While she was in the hospital many local Church leaders and others came to comfort her, and telegrams, telephone calls, and letters began to pour in. Spencer phoned every day he was gone. On December 13, just a week after they had left home, Camilla began the journey back to Salt Lake City in a station wagon that their son-in-law, Grant, brought. They made a bed in the back for Camilla, but the trip home was still arduous for her.

In the X rays taken at the LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City doctors found four breaks in her ribs on the right side and an accumulation of fluid in her punctured lung.

Four days later she was released from the hospital. Olive Beth, who always came to her rescue, arrived the next day to finish Camilla's Christmas shopping, though she was to deliver her sixth child soon. She brought Stephen, who was just getting over Bright's disease, and her youngest, eighteen months old. Spencer, who was working at home and looking after Camilla, took full responsibility for the two little children that day. He had not done that for a long time. At 7:30, when Olive Beth returned, she was in labor. Camilla provided her with a nightgown and toiletries and Spencer took her directly to the hospital. The baby arrived less than thirty minutes after they arrived. When Grant called Camilla to find out whether she knew where his wife and children were, he learned that he had a new son.

Over the next few days, despite ribs that hurt at every move, Camilla helped care for Olive Beth's three youngest children, made Christmas candy, and managed with some help to feed twenty-three of her descendants at her home for Christmas and New Year celebrations.
