Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

10

After Camilla's mother died, her father and Aunt Emma moved to Mesa to be near the Arizona Temple. He had grown too old for farming and she for her work in the post office, and they wanted to do ordinance work for their deceased relatives. In April Father Eyring wrote to his son Henry: "We are still ailing very badly. Emma is suffering so badly with her back she has a steel brace now but still the pain goes on. Can't complain, no pain, plenty to eat, and good sleep. What more do I want?"

A few days later he died, almost ninety years old. His large family gathered to pay this gentle patriarch tribute before he was buried beside his wife Caroline in the Pima cemetery, where he was joined a few months later by his second wife, Emma. These three exemplified throughout their lives a deep commitment to the marriage they had undertaken. Vernon Romney, brother to Caroline and Emma, once said that he loved all his sisters very much; these strong-willed Romney women were wonderful people, but he wouldn't be married to one of them for anything. And he marveled at Ed Eyring's courage in marrying two of them.

That Caroline and Emma were willing to share Ed Eyring as a husband said a great deal for him, and that the three of them maintained their harmonious marriage, with the dedication and self-sacrifice that entailed, said a great deal for them all.

Even before her father's death, Camilla had become worried about Spencer's throat. His voice became hoarse again after about five years in remission. When the hoarseness grew worse, Dr. Cowan ordered another biopsy of tissue from the vocal cord. This time the biopsy, which itself took away Spencer's voice for weeks, showed malignancy that required surgery. The specialist prescribed removal of all the vocal cords, but Spencer deemed his voice essential to his work, and after consultation with President McKay and Elder Harold B. Lee, he persuaded the surgeon to leave a part of one cord so that there might be hope of a little sound.

As with the heart attacks, Camilla's role was to stand by and suffer vicariously, to give encouragement when Spencer felt depressed, to nurse him in his recovery, and to be there, always be there. Spencer wrote to a friend, "I have had two hectic weeks, rugged ones. . . . Camilla has been an angel through it all." He knew he had someone special for a companion.

Earlier, at a missionary meeting, he said he had brought his wife for the missionaries to meet because she represented a mark the young men could aim for. He told the elders, "Marry someone better than you are. I would never be in the Council of the Twelve today if I had married some of the girls that I have known. Sister Kimball kept me growing and never let me be satisfied with mediocrity." In his journal he wrote, "How glad I was to have her . . . by my side! She is so strong and splendid! How I love her!" And again, "She is very pretty and looks very well in red. She is a lovely lady and she adds so much to my peace and well being."

She sustained his spirits through the long, silent weeks and rejoiced with him when, with great difficulty, he developed a new voice and resumed his work.

In late 1960 Spencer received an assignment to visit missions and stakes in Australia and New Zealand along with a delegation of officers of the general Church auxiliaries. Between the numerous conferences the group had a chance to see some of the country.

Perhaps the most unusual bit of sightseeing was our visit to Waitomo Caves. As we started down the steep steps to the mouth of the glowworm cave, I slipped on the stair and injured my leg painfully. I was determined not to miss this sight, for my brother Henry had been so impressed by it, so I crawled down the rest of the stairs and into the boat. We floated quietly around the cave on the lake, which fills the large grotto. On the ceiling are thousands of glow worms with their lights shining in the darkness. They look like tiny stars or electric lights.

Despite her painful leg, Spencer and Camilla decided to travel on around the world. From Australia they flew to Singapore, where Spencer visited government officials concerning the possibility of sending missionaries there.

We walked down the bank of the Singapore River for many blocks. The river is full of Chinese junks carrying cargo. It is an open sewer and filthy beyond description. This was Christmas Eve, but no outward semblance of the Christian celebration was evident.

On Christmas Day they flew to Saigon, Vietnam, arriving there around noon.

The costume of the Vietnamese women consists of long trousers with wide legs if they are from the south, and narrow legs if from the north of the country. Over the trousers flows a dress with high neck and long sleeves usually made of sheer material, and the skirt is slit on each side clear to the waist so that it billows in the breeze. Their hats are cone-shaped straw. I purchased a nice one for one dollar. There were some Christmas decorations in the hotel lobby, but it was hard to get the Christmas spirit. I read the Christmas story from Luke and from Third Nephi before going to bed.

On New Year's Day Camilla wrote in Calcutta, India:

The scene from our hotel window is a most distressing one, even though it is in the best part of the city center. A family has set up living on the sidewalk across a narrow back street. They slept all night in filthy rags. This morning I saw a tiny baby push its head out from under the rags by the mother's head. There is a constant flow of poverty-stricken humanity. Many two-wheeled carts pulled by running men serve for transportation. People were washing themselves and drinking from a street hydrant. It began to rain and drizzled all afternoon. People tried to find shelter in doorways. We fasted and spent the day mostly in our room reading and resting.

January 2. We took a guided tour of the city. The sacred cows roam the streets leaving their droppings, which are quickly salvaged and pasted by hand on walls and tree trunks and, when dried, sold for fuel. To treat cows so seems a senseless custom to us who are of other faiths and cultures.

January 3. On our way to breakfast we passed through a patio and a big fat rat ran directly across our way. It was a shock. In the afternoon we flew to Benares, where we stayed at the Clark Hotel, eighty years old, but a nice resort type. Our beds were fitted with net canopies to keep out mosquitoes and other bugs. We rode in a boat up the Ganges River and saw the human bodies pushed off the platform into the sacred river to be devoured by the fish—saints, children under five, lepers, and smallpox victims thus buried—and saw people drinking the water. Why don't they die? The guide said it was because the water was sacred. As we passed through the throng of filthy beggars, sick, lame, and starving, and the weeping widows hopelessly wailing in their lone dwellings, I began to cry, completely overcome. It took all my will power to keep from having hysterics.

Camilla's leg continued to pain her, but she had no intention of letting it interfere with seeing these new places.

Their journey onward included Pakistan, Syria, Iran, Egypt, Israel, Greece, Italy, and Spain. Where they could, they contacted members of the Church, who always gave them a warm welcome. People who lived so far from Church headquarters seemed especially appreciative of their visit.

Of all the places they went, the one that moved Camilla most was the Garden Tomb, where Christ may have been laid. In this quiet place few people came that winter day to disturb their meditations. They sat, wrapped in scarves against the chill but warmed by the January sun, reading the scriptures to one another. They stayed and stayed and knelt together in solemn prayer of gratitude that they knew the Lord and were beneficiaries of his atonement.

In Rome distances between points of interest were too near to justify a taxi and too far to walk, but walk they did—miles and miles, despite Camilla's painful leg. She did it from choice, to save the money.

The year 1967 marked fifty years of marriage. Looking back, it all seemed to have passed so quickly. Their four children were all well settled. LeVan (called Spence now) was professor of law at the University of Michigan; Olive Beth had started to teach school in Salt Lake City because of her husband's failing eyesight; Andrew planned international marketing for General Electric at its New York headquarters; Edward was professor of law at the University of Wisconsin. Each was happily married. Among them they provided Camilla and Spencer with twenty-seven grandchildren.

Camilla and Spencer wanted to do something spectacular for this fiftieth wedding anniversary. Even with only four children it had been twenty years since all had been together at once. They invited the four children with their spouses to join them in a summer trip to Mexico, where for ten days they explored the ruins, feasted, swam in the Pacific, and spent more time in relaxed visiting than they had ever been able to do before. Then near Christmas time the children responded by bringing together thirty-six of the thirty-nine family members for a more formal celebration of the golden wedding anniversary. Spencer wrote in his journal that the children "seem to like to come home. We are getting paid well now for any sacrifice we made."

Camilla had over the years proven a faithful correspondent. Children away from home could expect a weekly letter, usually written on Sunday, telling of family news and reiterating her love. She remembered with a note and a gift all the birthdays of all the family members.

When the children left home she released them gracefully, having reared them to be independent like herself. She loved them, but did not need them to keep her life full.

Camilla managed to keep from interfering with her married children's decisions and even refrained from expressing strong opinions, though she often had to bite her lip. But when Grant proposed that he and Olive Beth might move to Alaska, Camilla came to the breaking point. She said, with restraint but strong feeling, "Make awfully sure this is the right thing to do. Surely you wouldn't want to do that to me!" To have her only daughter move so far away seemed just too much.

Camilla kept her ties with her children tight by her unfailing loyalty. They could almost always count on her to be there when they performed in plays or concerts, football or basketball games. And she liked to support her grandchildren the same way. She cheered her grandsons in all sports but wrestling. She watched one wrestling match and was so sure her grandson was going to be permanently injured that she could not stand to watch any more.

When a granddaughter had responsibility for a fund-raising activity for a new chapel, Camilla agreed to give a book review for a dollar a ticket. Another time she substituted for a sick granddaughter in giving a Relief Society lesson.

Camilla and Spencer took many of their grandchildren with them on train trips before the youngsters turned old enough to require a ticket. And the grandchildren sometimes joined them on vacations. In 1971 two of them helped Camilla pick wild blackberries near Santa Cruz, California, and make jam. Then, when it was time to leave, Camilla had them help clean the apartment until it was cleaner than when they had rented it.

She took great satisfaction in all her children's and grandchildren's accomplishments, but especially in their Church activities. It gave her particular pleasure that her children and most of her grandchildren married in the temple and many of them filled missions and otherwise gave service in the Church. The inactivity of some of her family caused her deep grief, but it did not diminish her love. One letter to her reflected awareness of her feelings; reporting an academic honor, it said, a bit apologetically, "I know you'd much rather that I'd been made president of the elders quorum."

Camilla had church, friends, books, handwork, and gardening to keep her days busy. She did beautiful handwork—embroidering, crocheting, needlepoint, tatting, and cutwork, and covered dozens of benches, chairs, and footstools with her needlepoint. She made many gifts of cutwork water lily embroidered sheet and pillow slip sets, painstaking in their workmanship.

She also genuinely loved gardening. In her city lot vegetables grew among the roses, beans climbed to the roof of her porch, and fruit trees shaded her yard. Canning the produce extended the satisfaction she had in living from the labor of her own hands. Lilacs, delphiniums, tulips, petunias, and especially roses grew in joyful profusion from spring to fall. She wore a broad hat to keep her fair skin from burning, and poured her sweat into digging and weeding and trimming.

The fiftieth anniversary provided occasion for major celebration, but on their next anniversary Spencer wrote in his journal, "Today is our fifty-first wedding anniversary . . . both of us forgot." He reflected on their "fifty-one years of glorious married life, and how grateful I am for a companion of such stature and strength and kindness and affection."

When in 1968 Spencer received an assignment to the Juarez Stake conference in northern Mexico, he invited Camilla, their daughter, Olive Beth, and Camilla's sister Mary to accompany him. Camilla and Mary had not been back to Colonia Juarez since they left in 1912.

As soon as we were settled, we set out on a walking tour of the little town. The little house where Mary and I were born is still standing, a small red brick home with a porch across the front. Memories came rushing back. What fun it was to relive my childhood experiences!

Grandma Eyring's house was gone. The old church and schoolhouse had been remodeled, and there were other major changes, but many landmarks remained.

Sister Brown, the stake president's wife, took us over the old dusty road to Pearson, where we had taken the train fifty-six years before as refugees. A train passed through while we were there, making the memories even more vivid.
