Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

11

Camilla had had many worries and heartaches over Spencer's health, starting with smallpox the first year of their marriage and continuing through boils, heart attacks, and throat cancer. In 1971 matters came to a crisis again. For some time Spencer had become progressively weaker. It got to the point that he could not walk a block without resting. He was so unutterably fatigued that each time he exerted himself Camilla feared disaster. Tests showed that a defective heart valve and nearly clogged cardiac arteries threatened total heart failure at any time. He needed open heart surgery and any delay meant increasing the risk. But at the same time Dr. Cowan discovered a new cancerous spot on Spencer's poor remnant of a vocal cord. This double blow seemed as if it might be the beginning of the end.

With this discouraging prospect, they sought a priesthood blessing. Camilla received comfort from a blessing under the hands of President Harold B. Lee.

It gave me more feeling of strength and peace than I had had for a long time. I realized that I had given up hope and was allowing myself to be morbid and defeated. I tried doubly hard to be cheerful and hopeful, though I continued to have my dark moments when the tears and anguish found vent.

The first step was to treat the cancer, since there seemed no point in the heart surgery unless the cancer could be removed by surgery or radiation. Further surgery on his larynx could mean only silence, so Spencer and Camilla opted for six weeks of radiation treatment. Though the twenty-four cobalt treatments reduced his voice to a whisper for a time, the radiation finally proved successful in destroying the cancer. They then faced the prospect of a surgeon's opening the chest cavity, prying the ribs apart, and invading the heart to install a metal and plastic mechanical valve as well as to shunt the blood past two obstructions in arteries. The alternative was progressive decline and death. The operation had been performed on so few men of Spencer's age that estimating his chances of survival constituted only rough guesswork, but Dr. Russell Nelson, who would perform the surgery, thought it might be seventy-five percent. Spencer insisted on postponing the operation until after April general conference, so he could get his affairs in order and not miss conference.

As the time approached, Camilla felt under great tension. She worried to herself about the outcome, but the reality of God and the efficacy of prayer and faith and priesthood administration sustained and comforted her. "How else could I have carried on?"

The decision to proceed had been made only in consultation with the First Presidency, and in preparation for the operation Spencer received a special administration from his brethren in the temple. Camilla also received another blessing from Elder Marion G. Romney.

The operation began early in the morning. Camilla, with two of her children, waited through the four and a half hours of suspense.

I was surprised that I took it as calmly as I did. I shed only a few tears. Somehow after the blessing at the temple I felt all would be well. We had a long vigil, but fortunately Dr. Homer Ellsworth went into the operating room periodically and kept us posted. The crucial point was when the heart took over on its own after the repair work was done. The heart had not been functioning for one hour and fifty-five minutes.

Then came the period of slow recovery. No time in Spencer's life had been as miserable as the following weeks, more from the excruciating pain in his tortured ribs, with every breath, than from the heart operation itself. While he was in intensive care, Camilla stayed by his side as much as she was allowed. Then when he was moved to a separate room she slept in the room with him, on a cot, where she would be constantly available. As he lay in bed, often groggy with medication, he liked to have Camilla hold his hand. "It is hard to see him suffer," she noted. Worst of all was the coughing that therapists forced in order to keep his lungs clear. One day Olive Beth stayed with him while Camilla rushed out to fulfill a commitment to give a book review. Camilla wrote:

For five days of his suffering I have managed to keep quite calm, but when I see him so weak and miserable, nauseated and with cold hands as he is today, I can't seem to hold my courage so well. He vomited and was white and clammy. The doctor said this often happens. Nothing seems to surprise the doctors. . . .

Tuesday, April 18. Up at 6:00. Spencer seemed to feel some better. I went home at 6:30. Had a bath, made some phone calls, and went back to the hospital at 8:00. I parked the car on 7th Avenue, locked it, and suddenly realized that in my haste I had locked the keys inside with the lights on and windshield wipers operating, for it was snowing hard. A young woman came driving by and I hailed her. She took me down to the Conoco station on South Temple where a good friend of Spencer's, Brother Belliston, is the operator. He and one of his employees brought me to the hospital, opened the car, and took the car to be inspected and serviced; they later brought it back and returned the keys. I have seldom been so frustrated and embarrassed to do such a stupid thing. I couldn't help crying a little when I had to ask for help.

Spencer ate a fair breakfast but has been feeling very depressed and frustrated. He ate very little for lunch. It is so hard to get any rest in a hospital. Someone comes in every few minutes for some reason or for no reason at all.

Camilla tried tactfully to limit the visits from family and friends. One time Spencer said to her with tears in his eyes, "No matter how much I love people, visiting with them takes all my strength."

In a few hours at a time at home she did the washing, put up strawberry preserves, and checked the mail and paid the bills. Finally, after thirteen days she was allowed to take Spencer home for convalescence.

The General Authorities visited faithfully.

About 5:30 President and Sister Lee came and visited quite a little while. Spencer asked Brother Lee about the advisability of having frequent blessings from the brethren. Brother Lee's answer was that he had said to the authorities he felt "Spencer lives from blessing to blessing." So he gave Spencer a blessing, reassuring him of the love of Heavenly Father and of the brethren and of his feeling that the Lord has a mission for Spencer yet to fulfill. One of Spencer's greatest enemies is the feeling of discouragement and fear that plagues him because of the weakness and pain he continues to suffer. We have reread the blessing Brother Lee gave Spencer in the temple before he went into the hospital and have taken renewed courage from it.

After nearly a month Spencer for the first time enjoyed a few minutes at a time of freedom from pain. And though the recovery was slow, he began to regain strength and felt a renewed zest for life. So did Camilla.

They went to Laguna Beach, California, to convalesce, staying in the home the Church owned. While they were there, President and Sister Lee came to stay with them for two nights. Even though Camilla had known President Lee for thirty years, she wrote:

I was worried about fixing the right food, but they were very appreciative. Sister Lee insisted on helping with the dishes and all. This was a great honor to have a counselor in the First Presidency stay with us.

Two weeks later, in July 1972, President Joseph Fielding Smith died quietly, suddenly, and Harold B. Lee succeeded him as president of the Church; Spencer became president of the Council of the Twelve. Though he still lacked strength, Spencer began increasing the amount of work he insisted on doing. Camilla scolded a little, but she knew he had to feel he was giving his best to the important calling.

Then a few months later the tables turned. Camilla felt chagrined at finding herself a hospital patient for the first time in fifty years, losing her appendix at age seventy-seven.

I went to the clinic and the white cell count had risen to 11,000, so Dr. Wilkinson directed me to LDS Hospital at once. I already had my bag in the car, because I thought I might need it. I did not want to disturb Spencer yet, so in spite of the pain I drove to the hospital, parked in the parking lot, and walked alone to the emergency entrance, where I was admitted. They then called Spencer, who was in meeting, and told him that I was going into an emergency operation for appendicitis.

The most traumatic aspect was that I was to give the Relief Society spiritual living lesson on November 1, the day I was admitted to the hospital. There was nothing I could do but just drop it in the lap of Sister Conover, the Relief Society president. She called Sister Haglund, who gives the lesson in the First Ward, and she carried on. Everyone has said how very well she did. I didn't get one bit of consolation that I was missed at all. It is good for one to be reminded that she is not indispensable. This whole experience has taken good care of that. The world has gone smoothly on its way with no concern that I haven't been on the job.

The appendix had perforated, so the operation was a true emergency. When the day arrived for her to go home from the hospital, her doctor noticed pus and drainage from Camilla's wound, but he allowed her to go home anyway, thinking she would recover just as well there. Later on in the day, all alone, she became very worried over new pain and drainage, so when the president of the ward Relief Society called, Camilla tearfully asked for help. The president and her counselor, a nurse, came immediately and reassured her that the condition was not unusual and that she would live. Then Spencer came home and her worst fears vanished.

Spencer has been most kind and thoughtful. This has not been easy for him, added to his own problems of health and responsibility.

The doctor started Camilla on a week-long course of antibiotics. It was a long, discouraging week because she feared that a new operation might be needed. She questioned the doctor's judgment a little, feeling that maybe she would not survive the waiting game he was playing.

When I was so discouraged, Spencer asked President Marion G. Romney if he would come in the evening and give me a special blessing. He did, and as he prayed, one statement impressed me indelibly: "I bless you with the gift to be healed." It was as if those words were imprinted on a banner before me. The lesson I had spent so much time in preparing and could not give had been on "gifts of the Spirit."

As I continued to contemplate this blessing, it was borne in upon me with greater and greater clarity that I had had a special blessing given at a time of greatest need and that it was up to me to claim that blessing. It was up to me to take courage, to determine to do everything in my power that I might have the gift to be healed. I bear my testimony to this spiritual experience and feel a great responsibility to claim this blessing.
