Caroline Eyring Miner, Edward L. Kimball, Camilla, a Biography of Camilla Eyring Kimball ( 1980)

13

Camilla traveled a great deal with Spencer to area conferences and building dedications in far places. But they did not travel as tourists any more. Only occasionally did she see much more than airports, hotels, chapels or rented meeting places, and whatever happened to lie on the path between. In 1975 they attended area conference in Sao Paulo, where Spencer made the exciting announcement of a temple to be built there. Flying to Paraguay, they passed over the spectacular Iguazu Falls, two and a half miles wide. Later that year they flew to Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and Korea. In Korea they went to a museum to see some recently discovered engraven gold plates, linked together; to Camilla they seemed strongly reminiscent of the Book of Mormon plates.

In California Camilla and Spencer visited a camp of Vietnamese refugees and met with the small group of Latter-day Saints among them. Her heart went out to them. She also had been a refugee alien in a foreign land at age seventeen, though she knew that differences in language and culture made their adjustment much more difficult than hers had been.

She sometimes made cultural mistakes. On an earlier visit to the Orient two Korean women presented her with an antique vase they spent all day selecting for her. She kissed them in appreciation, and they stiffened as though they had been struck. She asked the mission president what she had done wrong, and he explained that among Orientals it was thought inappropriate to kiss or touch in such a situation. A little later, in Japan, Camilla hugged some younger women after a meeting, without reaction, and then hugged an older woman—who reacted with shock. Camilla then remembered what she had been told in Korea. "I don't learn very fast," she said, though she tried hard to adopt the culturally accepted ways of expressing her affection.

In 1976 nine area conferences were scheduled in the Pacific. Spencer and Camilla and other Church leaders went first to Hawaii for groundbreaking of a new building on the BYU-Hawaii campus. Spencer drove the Caterpillar to move the first dirt and then several others, including Camilla, dug in with shovels. A Chinese man standing behind her said, "You're a farm girl." She felt a touch of pride in that recognition that she could handle a shovel.

They flew to American Samoa for conference first, then Western Samoa. Suddenly she and Spencer both fell ill, with temperatures of 104, nausea, coughing, and total misery. They needed help to board the airplane for New Zealand, but they insisted on going. Spencer had a television interview and a meeting with the Prime Minister scheduled immediately upon arrival, and the conference sessions had to go forward.

During the long hours of flight they slept, and then woke as they were about to land, fever broken. Spencer buttoned the collar of his damp shirt, pulled up his tie, and asked Camilla to brush his hair. She had enough sense of humor left to ask, "Which one?"

When they left the plane, they greeted the enthusiastic crowd there to welcome them, showing nothing of their illness. After the television interview and just as the luncheon with Prime Minister Muldoon was ending, Spencer's fever returned after a two-hour remission and he went immediately to bed.

In Hamilton, New Zealand, Spencer asked President N. Eldon Tanner to represent him at the cultural program planned for Saturday evening, hoping to conserve his strength for the Sunday conference sessions. But in the evening, he awakened with a start and asked Dr. Russell Nelson, who sat watching over him, "Brother Nelson, what time was that program to begin this evening?"

"At seven o'clock, President Kimball."

"What time is it now?"

"It is almost seven."

Spencer was soaked with perspiration. His fever had broken again. He said, "Tell Sister Kimball we're going."

Camilla got out of bed, and they both hurriedly dressed and then drove the short distance to the stadium where the program had just convened. President Tanner had explained at the beginning of the meeting that they were too sick to attend. In the opening prayer a young New Zealander petitioned fervently, "We three thousand New Zealand youth have gathered here prepared to sing and to dance for thy prophet. Wilt thou heal him and deliver him here." As the prayer ended, the car carrying Spencer and Camilla entered and the stadium erupted in a spontaneous, deafening shout at the answer to their prayer.

From New Zealand they flew to Fiji for the next conference. Camilla spent the day in bed. In Tonga the temperature in the auditorium was over 100 degrees and she was really very ill, yet she sat on the stand in the front row without complaint, in tangible support of her husband and the cause. She never missed a meeting in Sydney, Melbourne, or Brisbane, where the tour ended. Upon their return home, chest X rays and tests showed that they both still had viral pneumonia. The doctor prescribed medicine and rest.

The country celebrated the bicentennial of the signing of the Declaration of Independence in July, and J. Willard Marriott had arranged the Bicentennial Extravaganza at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. The Tabernacle Choir performed and Spencer and Camilla sat with President and Mrs. Gerald Ford in their box, as they had on a similar occasion in 1971. Camilla found the Fords gracious hosts. The next day, Sunday, July 4, 26,000 people attended the Church commemoration of the bicentennial in Washington.

That summer proved a particularly busy one. They traveled to England and back and later to France, Finland, Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany, and Switzerland, covering tens of thousands of miles in the interests of the Church.

Spencer sometimes traveled without Camilla, but she rarely traveled anywhere without him. In 1977, however, she took a trip with her son Ed and his wife to Colonia Juarez to show them the scenes of her childhood. It proved a rewarding, sentimental journey, but she worried the whole three days she was away from Spencer.

Camilla and Spencer attended a series of area conferences in Latin America. In Guatemala, part of the cultural evening involved a dance in which one dancer carried on his head a frame representing a bull.

The frame was filled with firecrackers which boomed all over the place. One singed Sister Kennedy's eyebrow and another Sister Wilkinson's hair. I was really frightened that all of us on the front row would catch fire. One burst went off between Brother Perry's feet.

The next morning at the airport she was stuck with fourteen members of their party in an elevator for a hilarious twenty minutes. That evening in Costa Rica she found herself stuck in an elevator for the second time the same day.

When they met with public officials there was always picture taking. Camilla wrote, "I dread this. I freeze a smile on my face and stand stiffly." She concealed her discomfort well.

In Panama, as elsewhere in Latin America, Camilla read her talk to the women's meeting in Spanish.

The local women seemed to appreciate my efforts, though I know I made many mistakes. Crowds of women and children came up to kiss me. The security men finally whisked me away to a private room. I would really prefer staying with the women, but on advice of a nurse from the embassy the security people were concerned about my exposure to hepatitis.

The crowds of Saints who were determined to reach and greet Spencer posed even greater problems.

In Peru, after the meeting they sang "God Be with You Till We Meet Again" and waved handkerchiefs and shed tears. Crowds lined the way out. Sometimes the crowd pressure is almost overpowering and I worry for Spencer. After we were in the bus they kept handing babies up to the window for Spencer to kiss them through the glass. The people scrambled any possible way to get to touch his hand or greet him in any way. Crowds waved as long as the bus was in sight. The love and respect the members show for the prophet touches me deeply. It is very humbling to get the reflected glory.

In Bogota, Colombia, Camilla noted with satisfaction that one of the prayers at the conference was offered by an Indian district president from Ecuador whose hair was in a braid down his back and who was wearing white linen trousers and sandals. It seemed especially fitting when Spencer spoke on the Savior's disapproval of class distinctions.

In 1977 at the BYU Women's Conference, Camilla received the first Exemplary Woman award and a small statue. She thanked the students for their thoughtfulness, but said seriously that she did not feel she deserved the award—she would have preferred just to be present with them in the crowd, coming to learn. She gave an address setting out some of her deeply felt beliefs.

She spoke of the balance between humility and conviction:

Sometimes Mormons are considered boastful in declaring that they belong to the only true church. But we say it not in pride, but in gratitude, considering ourselves blessed to have been born members of the Church or to have had favorable opportunity to hear the gospel preached so that we would understand and accept it. . . . We are not so arrogant as to assert that the Church program is perfect, for it continues to add programs to meet the changing times, nor would we say that its members are perfect. We have a long way to go before we have become all that the Lord wants us to be. But we do say to all who will listen, "Here is more truth than can be found anywhere else in this world, because God has established his church to teach his children as much as is within their present capacity to learn. Come, share it with us!"

Concerning woman's responsibility in the home she remarked:

So far as we know, the Church organization may not be found in heaven, but families will be. We are in a period when the great propaganda machines are telling us that for a woman to choose a career in home and family is somehow demeaning and that self-respect demands she pursue a profession of law or medicine or business. But rather than directing both marriage partners away from the home, we need to encourage both to make the strengthening of the family their primary concern. There is challenge, accomplishment, and satisfaction enough for anyone in this greatest educational endeavor—the home.

Then she told the women her philosophy on education:

The pursuit of knowledge is part of the gospel plan for men and women. My feeling is that each of us has the potential for special accomplishment in some field. The opportunities for women to excel are greater than ever before. We should all be resourceful and ambitious, expanding our interests. Forget self-pity, and look for mountains to climb. Everyone has problems. The challenge is to cope with those problems and get our full measure of joy from life. The Lord expects men and women to grow in spirituality—that is, to worship him, to gain understanding of the kind of being he is and wants us to become, to develop deep, abiding faith, and to live by divine principles of conduct.

On other occasions she dwelt on other themes. A favorite was love of God and love of neighbor as oneself. She taught that everyone should love himself—having self-respect because of a clean life, development of talents, hard work, kind deeds. Love of others would then follow, and service to others is service to God. She tried to follow her own advice and largely succeeded, but she knew it was not easy. She related once, with exasperation, her own struggles.

You know, in all my life I really disliked only one person. It was a woman I could hardly stand to speak to. She was so sickly sweet, yet so self-centered. She had nothing to talk about except her husband and her children's great accomplishments. She had no life of her own and had such vanity in the reflected glory. I find I cannot recall her without distaste. May the Lord forgive me.

For years Camilla suffered painful arthritis and rheumatism in her hands and knees. Uncomplaining, she used mild painkillers only when the discomfort became too great. A fall on the ice injured her right shoulder, so that even with cortisone shots her shoulder thereafter rarely stopped hurting. Sometimes she could not raise her arm to comb her hair, but she bore pain stoically, not wanting Spencer or others to have to worry about her.

Several times she had minor operations for removal of superficial cancers, but remembering the concern her appendectomy had caused her family, she did not tell even her children until afterward.

With their various ailments, it seemed to her as though both she and Spencer were wearing out. She had one overshadowing fear—not death, but disability. She insisted that she would not live with her children, but should be placed in a nursing home when the time came that she could not care for herself. If she had to be dependent, it would be better with strangers. She also feared the day when Spencer might feel he was no longer useful. She knew that would cast a dark cloud over both their lives. But he seemed to have great resilience.

Life was not all responsibility and problems. Spencer and Camilla had good times. Friends took them fishing in a private stocked pond. Camilla was unwilling to bait her own hook, so Hack Miller did that and cast for her, but when a trout took the bait and she pulled the good-sized fish in, she squealed in excitement. It was "great fun." And when she and Spencer visited the Church ranch in Florida several times, they both, in their mid-eighties, went horseback riding and fishing. Camilla caught several fish, "the largest bass of anyone." They watched an extemporaneous rodeo and rode through the Florida waterways on an air boat. There was something irrepressible in their spirits. For the 24th of July parade in Salt Lake City Spencer wore a Stetson and she a pioneer dress. And when an ice show came to town and they received some complimentary tickets, they rounded up a group of grandchildren to take with them.

She liked the animated bears at Disney World and the water show at Cypress Gardens, Florida; the art show at American Fork, Utah; Shakespeare at BYU; a professional baseball game in Kansas City. She took a lesson in Japanese flower arranging and walked barefoot along the beach. She and Spencer occasionally played Mah Jongg or Rook with friends or family. When the family gathered they sang and reminisced.

In August 1977 they went to Switzerland to install a new temple presidency and to Poland to meet with government officials. Because they had several days between these appointments, Spencer asked for meetings to be arranged in other places in Europe. They held meetings in Vienna, Milan, Venice, Rome, Sicily, at St. Albans, at the temple, and in London, England. Along the way they saw the great cathedral and daVinci's Last Supper in Milan; rode a boat through the Grand Canal of Venice to San Marco Square; drove past the Coliseum and the Forum in Rome; suffered a multitude of mosquito bites in Sicily; and visited in London with their son Andrew, who was returning from a business trip to South Africa. From England they flew to Poland to confer with the Minister of Religion, seeking official recognition for the Church in that country. The minister, a Communist, offered them every hospitality and carefully refrained from smoking or drinking in their presence. He entertained them and arranged a trip to several cities to see places of historic importance, a museum, a monastery, public buildings, and the Orthodox Church in Warsaw for a concert.

After the concert the archbishop invited us to his home next door. I thought it was just another building to look at, and when I saw the long flight of stairs to climb I felt I could not manage with my painful knees. I asked to be excused and said I would just wait downstairs.

The priest who was with us rushed upstairs and in a moment returned with a chair for me, and three other priests to help him carry me. I was alarmed and refused vigorously; I was not going to let them carry me around. You've never seen me move so fast as I did climbing those stairs, sore knees or not. When I got upstairs I found they had a table set with refreshments and I was doubly embarrassed at the fuss I had stirred up.

Early the next morning a small group of Saints gathered in a nearby park and Spencer dedicated the land of Poland for the preaching of the gospel.

They traveled from Warsaw by way of Berlin to Dresden, arriving late for the meeting.

We found a great crowd gathered at the lovely chapel. Every inch of space was taken. Because they live in East Germany, the members' contact with the Church is severely limited. They even have little Church literature. This was the first time a president of the Church had been there since President Grant. They had a fine choir and the congregation sang with great gusto. There were many young people. It was a thrilling sight to see these faithful Saints. I was glad I had the opportunity to speak to them. I could hardly keep back the tears.

After the meeting we headed for West Berlin. We passed through the central part of Dresden, which is still a mass of black bombed-out buildings, never restored since the war thirty-two years ago. War is a dreadful crime against humanity; everyone loses.

It was a busy day with the dedicatory service in Warsaw at 7:00 A.M., a meeting in Dresden at 2:00 P.M., and another in Berlin at 8:00 P.M. The next morning Spencer and Camilla met with the missionaries before their flight home.

At general conference in April 1978 Spencer and Camilla again had to move to an apartment in the Hotel Utah that the Church maintained for the president. This time concern for their security arose from the ongoing trial of followers of Ervil LeBaron for the murder of Dr. Rulon Allred, leader of a polygamous group. Camilla wrote, "The apartment is beautiful, but I still feel that I am in prison."

One of the trials of Camilla's life was for people to assume she must have advance knowledge of any new development in the Church. But because of Spencer's careful maintenance of confidentiality, she knew most things only by public announcement. And, she noted, since Spencer could not always remember which matters were public and which still confidential, "He never tells me anything."

In spring 1978 she knew something weighed heavily on Spencer's mind. He was distracted, working at some problem. He fasted a great deal and spent long hours in the temple over a period of weeks. She could only speculate; she thought that perhaps one of the Church leaders was in some great difficulty. She worried over Spencer and prayed for him. She noted that in their prayers together he asked for revelation of the Lord's will more directly than she had ever heard before.

One day as she was working in the garden the telephone rang and she answered. Olive Beth asked, excitedly, "Have you heard the news?"

"What news?"

"About the revelation that all worthy men can receive the priesthood!"

Camilla turned from the telephone to her bedroom and knelt to pray, with tears of gratitude for the revelation, for the extension of blessings to more people, and for the relief that should come to her husband now that he had his answer. On her calendar she marked the day of announcement, June 8, 1978, "Red Letter Day!"

Later in 1978 they took a strenuous trip to South Africa and South America. They went first to the Washington, D.C., temple and then to London. They flew on the supersonic Concorde, a marvel that crossed the Atlantic in three and a half hours. The plane lacked the comfort of other jets, but made up for that in speed. A day later they flew to South Africa, leaving England at 6:00 P.M. and arriving in Johannesburg at 10:00 A.M. There they began almost immediately three days of meetings. Among the more than three thousand persons present, one group came from Rhodesia in a caravan, armed with guns because of the war conditions in their country. The conference met in a huge tent, which was swelteringly hot.

The Church leaders flew to Cape Town and then Buenos Aires, nine hours' flying time away. A few hours later they flew on to Montevideo, where after two days in travel they were able to bathe and clean up.

Spencer's legs pained him and he did not feel well.

I was very worried and prayed constantly that the Lord would make him equal to the day. He had a press conference first, then a visit with the president of Uruguay, so he was a little late for the first conference meeting. He spoke well at the morning meeting. Then he conducted the afternoon meeting and spoke well as the last speaker. I was so very grateful and much relieved. He spoke again at the priesthood meeting. At the close they almost had a riot with men competing to get to him for a greeting. The mothers and daughters meeting was held at the same time. I gave a twenty-five-minute talk, reading it in Spanish. The women seemed pleased and with their children greeted me with a kiss on the cheek. One little girl got to me three times through the crowd.

The next area conference convened in Buenos Aires; then they flew to Sao Paulo for the dedication of the new temple, the first to be completed of the new temples Spencer had announced. Camilla was moved by the beauty of the temple, the fine hand-carved furniture that graced it, and the thousands of great personal sacrifices its construction required. Ten separate dedicatory services allowed all who wished and had recommends to participate. On the following weekend an area conference in Sao Paulo ended the two-and-a-half-week trip.

At the close of the conference the congregation sang "God Be with You Till We Meet Again." Then they stood and waved white handkerchiefs in an emotional farewell.

With plane changes, it took Spencer and Camilla and others of their party nearly twenty-four hours to return home, tired but grateful for the successful conferences and temple dedication.

We ate little of the dinner on the plane. I put the steaks in a bag to take home. After we changed planes we had a meal on the next plane. I salvaged the sliced sandwich meat and we had meat at home for most of the week.

She did the same thing at a hotel banquet where she and Spencer were guests of honor. At first she felt some reluctance to ask the waiter for a bag to wrap the meat in, but on second thought she did ask. The leftover steak furnished several meals, eventually as stew. Her family always said that her meals of leftovers tasted as good as new.

Windfall fruit always had to be put up, lest it waste. Olive Beth finally resorted to throwing the worst of the fruit over the back fence to save her mother from feeling it had to be used somehow. Camilla made juice from apricots, jam from the pulp, then added the sweet pits to the jam. One day she worked from 5:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. bottling juice from windfall apples, leaving her completely exhausted.

Camilla bought her clothes on sale—with one exception. For a formal reception she bought a long pink dress with sequined collar at full price, and felt wickedly extravagant. She wore it ten years and later shortened it for an afternoon dress. Even when she came to the point where she did not need to economize so much, she found great satisfaction in shopping the clothing sales. In grocery shopping she would go from store to store, purchasing the sale items, carefully mapping her route so as not to spend more on gasoline than she saved on the sales.

One time she found that she had received ten cents too much change from the market. She got in her car and drove back to return the money. Despite her unquestioned honesty, however, one situation offered special challenge. Whenever she received a letter on which the stamp had not been cancelled, it took conscious struggle to throw away "the perfectly good stamp." She had to think through carefully that the stamp merely established that the postage had been paid.

For many years a nonmember family lived next door. The relationship was friendly but not close. When the husband fell ill, Camilla and Spencer provided a ready resource for help. And after the woman, Pauline, was widowed, Camilla offered a sympathetic ear. Feeling that women, no less than men, have a responsibility to share the gospel, she talked to Pauline about the Church and offered to teach her or arrange for teaching, but found no interest. Camilla regretted that Pauline missed the comfort she might have had after her husband's death through an understanding of the gospel.

One day, as she was taking some cake next door, Camilla received no answer to her knock. Sensing something amiss, she tried telephoning and then called on another neighbor who had a key to the house. Pauline lay in the hallway, having died of a heart attack.

For twenty-five years, from the time of their mother's death, Camilla's deaf sister, Mary, lived in her home. Much as Camilla loved her, she found it hard to have another person in the house, especially one sometimes difficult to deal with, but Camilla willingly accepted care of Mary as her responsibility. When Mary had a cancer operation, Camilla, who was eighty-four, felt taxed beyond her limit and her sisters helped by taking Mary for two weeks each while she recovered. Neither Mary nor Camilla could negotiate the stairs to her bedroom easily. Mary recovered well and returned to live with Camilla, but a few months later, in 1979, she died quietly in her sleep of a heart attack while staying overnight with her sister Caroline.

I nearly had hysterics when Caroline called me. Rationally I am grateful Mary passed away so peacefully, but emotionally I felt that after all these years I had abandoned her at the last, that I should have been with her when she died, that my home was her home. She had been my special charge ever since we were children, and I felt very close to her.

We made arrangements for her funeral in the ward for the deaf, where she had so many friends. A large crowd of relatives and friends, including the First Presidency and several other General Authorities, gathered to pay Mary honor. Some of the participants used sign language and others spoke aloud; each was translated for the other group. I was well satisfied with the service. We laid her to rest near Grandmother Romney; Mary would be pleased.

In the summer of 1979 Camilla and Spencer visited the Church ranch in Florida again. When they went horseback riding this time she needed a ladder to mount. As they rode through the pastures and groves on the ranch, they saw deer and wild hogs. She enjoyed being out-of-doors, but she always wore a broad hat to protect her fair skin.

Camilla returned to find that her garden had suffered and the hot wind had cost her half her petunias. Mary was no longer there to keep the yard watered when they were away. Camilla bottled eleven quarts of cherries that her sister Rose brought her and also made raspberry jam.

In July they went to California for a convention of the Church-owned Beneficial Life Company. Shortly before Spencer was to speak he suddenly felt dizzy. Camilla motioned to Dr. Taylor, who checked Spencer briefly and then, when he insisted on speaking, helped him to the lectern. When he examined Spencer more carefully later, the doctor thought it not a stroke but perhaps a precursor to a stroke. She wrote, "It was a tense time. I was very worried. I have great anxiety about the possibility of this dread calamity. I slept little through the night."

As soon as they returned to Salt Lake City they went directly to the hospital for examination. Spencer had slight impairment on his left side, but was showing quick improvement. Dr. Nelson concluded that likely the problem was shedding of Dacron fibers from the artificial heart valve that had been installed seven years before. These fibers clogged tiny blood vessels, and if it happened in the hand it might produce numbness, or if in the brain, dizziness. After a few days' monitoring in the hospital, Spencer was able to return home, but he suffered a continuing oppressive weariness. Then another similar episode occurred; this time, though the recurrence was unsettling since it suggested a whole series of such attacks, he did not go to the hospital and the effects passed away in a few days.

Camilla took care of Spencer devotedly, but she had trouble dealing with his feeling depressed about his condition. In Toronto when he experienced difficulty, he turned his talk over to his secretary, Arthur Haycock, to read. The problem was partly with his eyes; glaucoma and cataracts interfered with his reading, and he had to have his talks typed in large print. Even that was sometimes not enough. At other times it seemed that his eyesight improved and he could manage even ordinary print.

At BYU to give a devotional address to 25,000 in the Marriott Center, Spencer again had to ask President Dallin Oaks to finish reading his talk. The next day he had difficulty walking. Camilla wrote, "Spencer has not been even as well as usual. I am worried." His brother-in-law George Nelson died in Brigham City and he and Camilla drove there the next day to visit his sister Alice, the only other surviving member of his family. Spencer was so weak that he required help to dress himself, and in Brigham City he had to be helped in walking, though he acted cheerful in company.

Before they returned to Salt Lake City Arthur Haycock telephoned the doctor and arranged for Spencer to be taken directly for examination. Dr. Wilkinson then had him driven to the hospital, and testing began. Within a few hours Dr. Bruce Sorensen, a neurologist, concluded that Spencer had a subdural hematoma, a collection of blood and fluid between the skull and the brain, pressing on the brain and disrupting his motor functions. The prospect without operation was death.

The operation took place at once. At one in the morning Dr. Sorensen drilled a pencil-size hole in the skull and opened the brain covering. The pressure was so great that fluid spurted out two feet. Camilla sat tensely awaiting word. The doctors gave a hopeful report. If all went well, Spencer should recover completely. He might even be able to appear at general conference, a month away, though he could not expect to participate much. Such a hematoma usually occurs from some sort of blow to the head that starts hemorrhaging inside the skull, but neither of them could recall any sharp blows. Sometimes the bleeding and increase in fluid pressure is very slow, only discovered when fluids have built up substantially. The surgeon removed three-fourths of a cup of fluid.

Camilla spent what time she was allowed beside Spencer's bed in the intensive care unit, a noisy, distressing place where several patients struggled for life. She had to deal with Spencer's sequence of nightmares and hallucinations and discomfort and depression, "so unlike him." Soon he was transferred to a regular hospital room, and she could go home for a few hours at a time to pick the beans and tomatoes to give to her neighbors or freeze or bottle. She also put up pears and peaches. Spencer insisted that most of the flowers he received should be distributed to other patients in the hospital.

While Spencer remained hospitalized, Camilla attended the Churchwide conference for women and read Spencer's message to them. "I felt it a real privilege," she said.

At home she baked six loaves of bread and pickled beets from her yard. "I hope it will be a long time before either of us has to come to the hospital again."

After two weeks Spencer returned home. A security man was stationed inside the house at all times to help him if needed. A few days later their grandson Tom Mack married. Spencer attended the sealing ceremony but did not feel equal to attending the wedding reception. Camilla went without him. When she went to receptions with Spencer she willingly went to the head of the line, if invited to do so, knowing that otherwise Spencer would be unable to attend at all. But since she was not with him that evening she stood in the long line, visiting with people, despite urgings from other guests and from usher-grandsons that she go ahead.

Spencer soon insisted on going to his office. Camilla always worried about his overextending himself, but she had long since learned that her protests would have little effect. At conference time he said, "I am determined to give leadership to the conference," and he not only attended, he also spoke five times. He spoke more briefly than usual and did so with difficulty, yet he would not be deterred. She worried, but she admired his determination.

They had assumed that a scheduled trip to Israel to dedicate the Orson Hyde Memorial Garden would have to be delegated to others, but as the time approached they decided to go. Just a few days after general conference they flew to London and Athens and boarded a ship that sailed through the Greek isles and to Egypt. The ship carried a BYU tour group. Camilla loved the shipboard lectures on art and history and religion. She and Spencer watched movies and visited. Some nights they rested well; other times Spencer tossed restlessly. In Egypt they drove through the delta and watched farmers working in the age-old primitive ways and women doing their washing in the canals.

The ship sailed on to Israel, and they toured again through the Holy Land, seeing sights they had seen before. They felt a special poignancy this time, however, since it seemed likely they would not come again. They thoroughly enjoyed the trip, but Camilla noted:

We have walked up and down so many stairs and hills my knees are "worn to the bone." Spencer's legs hurt; my miserable knees get more painful every day. People have been very kind to help the "old folks" get around. I am so grateful Spencer was well enough to make this historic trip. He has stood the trip well and is definitely better than when we left.

The dedication itself capped their visit. Civic leaders, Church leaders, and about two thousand persons crowded the Orson Hyde Memorial Garden for the dedicatory service. Spencer's prayer recalled the occasion of Orson Hyde's dedication of the land for the gathering of Abraham's scattered children and prayed for the protection of the garden as a place of peace.

They flew from Israel to Switzerland, where Spencer met with the temple presidency. Camilla remarked of the countryside, from where her grandmother Eyring had come:

The landscape was beautiful beyond description—green fields, lush gardens, wooded areas ablaze with fall colors, despite a chilly fog. Many things are old, but everything seems very clean and in perfect repair. Every inch of ground is frugally used.

November 16, their sixty-second wedding anniversary, proved to be "a sad day." Numbness in Spencer's left hand and arm signified trouble, and a new brain scan confirmed that fluid had collected again inside the skull in the same area as before. Another operation, entering through the already-drilled hole, removed the fluid. He had gone into the operation in good spirits, joking, "I hope they don't start without me," which Camilla found comforting, but seeing her husband struggle even more than the first time through the distressing days of intensive care and slow recovery was almost more than she could bear. She noted: "This is the most traumatic experience of my life. I have been crying my eyes out. I hope and pray I will be privileged to take care of my darling as long as he lives."

Camilla slept on a pallet beside his bed.

He went to bed after medication. At nine in the morning I roused him and asked if he would like to hear the Tabernacle Choir. He sat up in a chair but immediately went to sleep and could not be aroused. The physiotherapist came to give him exercises but could not rouse him enough to get a response. I became increasingly concerned. He acted as if he had been drugged. I knelt by his bed with his hand in mine pleading with the Lord and weeping endlessly. Olive Beth came after the choir broadcast and I was in tears. I began to feel he was going to just sink away. At my request the nurse called Dr. Wilkinson, and when he came and investigated, he found that Spencer had been given a sedative rather than a blood pressure pill. It was a great relief to know that "this, too, would pass." By evening he began to come out of it. I could not have been more distraught if he had really gone.

Spencer seemed quite himself again by the next day, and he walked a bit through the halls. A week later he was able to return home. He seemed stronger than after the first brain surgery.

It takes more than a little will power for me to keep cheerful when Spencer is melancholy. The arthritis in my knees gets increasingly worse and my shoulder is more painful all the time. At home I am nurse, housekeeper, cook, and hostess, which I am not always equal to. Sometimes I wonder how long I can keep up. I try hard not to let Spencer know how miserable I sometimes feel.

After a week at home Spencer went to the office for the first time and Camilla attended a luncheon.

I had a holiday, the first time I had been in company for three weeks. I had my hair done. It needed it badly and it gave me a lift to look respectable again. I also met with the general Primary board. I gave my talk, which was well received. They called me up with two of the board members who were having December birthdays also. The group sang "Happy Birthday" to the three of us. I appreciated it. This was one of the most special days I have had in years. I really felt exhilarated after my long siege of anxiety with Spencer's illness.

The next day she noted:

This is my eighty-fifth birthday. I spent it cleaning house. Olive Beth brought me a supply of frozen orange juice, which I have stopped buying because it is more than twice as expensive as it was before inflation.

Then a few days later Spencer had to return to the hospital for the fourth time since July with a problem of blood imbalance. The doctors' task was to keep it thin enough so it would not clot and cause a stroke, yet thick enough to avoid yet another hemorrhage. For some reason Spencer had the hiccups for four days. He received the blood medication by continuous intravenous injection, so he was tied to a bottle of saline solution by tubes. When he walked through the hallway for exercise there was a great procession—Spencer, a rolling stand with the apparatus connected to him, a nurse, a security man, and Camilla, with people standing by watching the parade. Everyone wanted to greet them.

In five days Spencer returned home once more and Camilla could turn her attention to preparations for the Christmas celebration. The love people had for them and the respect for their position resulted in a shower of gifts of food and flowers. The most striking was a forty-three-pound turkey that Camilla cooked for seventeen hours in preparation for Christmas dinner. She prepared dinner for thirty family members who gathered in her home to celebrate not only the birth of Christ but also their gratitude for the miracle of survival.

It was wonderful to have our loved ones gathered around us. They are a comfort and blessing. I get great pleasure from watching them move ahead with their lives, developing physically, mentally, and spiritually. Next to our relationship with the Lord, they are the most important thing in our lives. Being with them offers a foretaste of heaven.
