# EXODUS

### EXODUS
Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Commentary on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City 1993)
 
 

EXODUS

Exodus tells how the Lord saved the Israelites from death in Egypt to prepare them for their life and mission in the promised land. Since through the seed of Abraham all nations are to be blessed (TG, "Israel, Mission of"), Israel needed rescue from spiritual and physical destruction in Egypt. The Lord's purpose was made evident when he said to Pharaoh through Moses: "Israel is my son, even my firstborn: . . . Let my son go, that he may serve me" (Ex. 4:22-23). The nature of Israel's relationship with the Lord was also clarified: "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people; for all the earth is mine; And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Ex. 19:5-6). The Israelite people did not attain to consecration or broad priestly service, but a start was made. The rest of the Old Testament recounts Israel's efforts, successes, and failures. It also shows how the prophets tried to correct the people's faults and engender growth and goodness.

Various other scriptures allude to Exodus. Psalms 105 and 106 poetically overview the highlights; Nephi tells why the chosen people had not inherited the land generations earlier but were permitted to enter after the Exodus (1 Ne. 17:33-35; Gen. 15:13-16). Other scriptures reiterate and elucidate the eternal principles and doctrines recorded in revelations to Moses (TG, "Israel, Mission of"; "Law of Moses").

Commentary

1:1-5 the children of Israel, which came into Egypt

The names of the twelve sons of Jacob who brought their families into Egypt are listed; "besides Jacob's sons' wives," seventy members of the extended family of Israel who entered Egypt were named previously in Genesis 46:3-27. Considering all the wives of all the sons and the husbands of all the daughters, as well as their children and grandchildren and spouses, the total of Israel's clan could have been hundreds (cf. 1 Chr. 4-8). Thus, in the fourth generation from Jacob (Gen. 15:16; Ex. 6:16-26), the Israelites could have been numerous enough to be called "a great nation" of those times (Gen. 46:3; Ex. 1:7).

Regarding the time that the children of Israel spent in Egypt, the apostle Paul evidently understood that there were four hundred thirty years from the time of Abraham's receiving the promise until the giving of the Mosaic law; this would make the "sojourn" in Egypt about two hundred fifteen years (Gen. 15:13; Gal. 3:16-17; Ex. 12:40-41 in the Greek Old Testament; confirmed by Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 2:15:2; BD, "Chronological Tables"). Because Israel lived there in peace for seventy-one years of Joseph's life, one hundred forty-four years would have remained, some of them under Pharaohs of the favorable dynasty before the dynasty arose "which knew not Joseph" (Ex. 1:8; BD, "Egypt"; "Exodus"; "Pharaoh").

1:6-14 Israel . . . waxed exceeding mighty. . . . Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them

Several reasons are given for Israel's bondage: they became numerous, grew mighty, and became a potential military danger to Egypt; and a new king arose with no memory of Joseph and no reason to favor his people any longer (possibly the dynasty that replaced the Hyksos, about 1540 B.C.).

The name of one of the "treasure cities" of the time was Raamses (Ex. 1:11); this name has been cited as evidence that the Pharaoh of the bondage of Israel was Rameses II (commentary on Gen. 47:11; BD, "Rameses").

1:12 the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew

It is plausible that the Israelites could suffer under bondage and oppression for a long time and yet grow ever stronger, in view of what has happened to modern Israelites, the Jews, during centuries of persecution and oppression. Until the Holocaust of the 1940s, they had become numerous in many lands.

1:15-22 midwives feared God, . . . saved the . . . children

Israelites who had knowledge of God and regard for the right are exemplified by the two courageous midwives who did not kill the male babies as they had been ordered, because they revered the heavenly King more than they feared the earthly one (Ex. 1:17, 21). The frustrated Pharaoh ordered "all his people" to kill the Hebrew babies; but God "dealt well with the midwives." "He made them houses" is a biblical phrase that can mean He blessed them with families; a similar expression is used later in a promise to David (Ex. 1:20-22 and fn.).

1:19 the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women . . . and are delivered ere the midwives come

The testimony of the midwives is quite credible about the contrast between some of the hardy Hebrew working women and some delicate Egyptian court women. Such a contrast is evident in pictures from ancient Egyptian tombs.

2:1-10 she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children

Moses was born under Pharaoh's decree of death for male Hebrew babies (Ex. 1:16, 22); but with courage and ingenuity, his parents kept him safe for a time and then put him in a reed basket on the river where his sister could watch until he was found by Pharaoh's own daughter. Compassionately she saved him, though she knew he was a Hebrew baby. It is likely that the Spirit of the Lord moved her to do so and also to accept "a nurse of the Hebrew women," although she must have known the "nurse" was the baby's mother. The name she gave him had appropriate meaning in both languages (Ex. 2:10a-b).

Some of Moses' education was doubtless given by his mother-nurse; for he later knew he was a Hebrew and he was concerned about his people. He was also "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians" (Ex. 2:11a; Acts 7:22; Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 2:9:7).

2:11-15 when Moses was grown, . . . he went out unto his brethren

Moses was very distressed when he saw a fellow Hebrew being smitten by an Egyptian, and his hour of decision came. As he looked upon their suffering and perceived the crisis, he rose up and "slew" the Egyptian who was "smiting" the Hebrew. The same Hebrew verb translated smiting in verse 11 is translated slew in verse 12; it is a verb used to describe what soldiers do in battle. Thus Moses did to the Egyptian what he was doing to the Hebrew. His action destroyed a life but was in defense of a life. He "looked this way and that" (Ex. 2:12) before doing so; for he knew his action would not be condoned by any Egyptian.

Next day, however, when he tried to settle a conflict between two Hebrews, he was rebuffed with words that let him know his previous act was known, and he had to flee. In the New Testament, Stephen had information that caused him to say of Moses, "he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood not" (Acts 7:25).

Soon, Pharaoh "sought to slay Moses," and he fled to "the land of Midian" (Ex. 2:15), in the Sinai peninsula. This, too, proved to be a providential move.

2:16-22 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters

In Midian Moses was blessed to find refuge with a true high priest of God, Reuel, or Jethro (Ex. 2:18; 3:1; 4:18; BD, "Jethro"). Through him Moses received the Melchizedek Priesthood, which had been transmitted through several generations from the time of Abraham (D&C 84:6-16). Recall that Abraham and Keturah had a son named Midian (Gen. 25:1-4).

Moses received Zipporah, a daughter of Jethro, as his wife, and she bore him children, the first of whom was named Gershom (Ex. 2:22b). There is no record of children by an earlier wife, an Ethiopian princess he is said to have married—a deed for which his brother and sister later found fault with him (Num. 12:1; Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 2:10:2).

2:23-25 God remembered his covenant with Abraham

The time had arrived for Israel's redemption from bondage. The Pharaoh of Egypt who inaugurated Israel's enslavement had died, but the Israelites still suffered and cried unto God for relief. God chose this time to implement the next phase of his covenant with the seed of Abraham, so that they might implement their mission (Ex. 2:24b, 25a).

3:1-6 the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush

In the course of history, the presence of God has been shown by several phenomena: a mighty wind, a still small voice, a great thundering, a bright light, a flame of fire (see TG, "God, Privilege of Seeing"). A "flame of fire" in a bush manifested to Moses the presence of the Lord. After Moses' attention was thus focused, the Lord spoke and Moses heard the words from the flaming bush (Ex. 3:2a-c). Removing his shoes at that holy place was a way of showing reverence; it is still practiced in some holy places.

3:7-12 I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt

The Lord is aware of the suffering and the prayers of people and He brings the relief that circumstances warrant. At the time Israel was in urgent need of a homeland, the occupants of Canaan were ripe in iniquity, and so the land could be made available to the Israelites if they could make themselves worthy of God's help (Gen. 15:16; Lev. 18:24-29; 1 Ne. 17:32-35).

The Lord's call required Moses to undertake a mission for which he humbly felt unqualified, but the Lord reassured him, saying, "Because I shall be with thee, this shall be a sign to thee that I have sent thee" (Ex. 3:12, translation mine).

The place where Moses was with his flocks, at "the backside of the desert" near "the mountain of God, . . . Horeb" (Ex. 3:1), was appointed by the Lord as the place to assemble the people, saying, "Ye shall serve God upon this mountain" (Ex. 3:12).

3:13-15 say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you. . . . The Lord God of your fathers . . . sent me

No doubt concerned about his rejection by the Israelites, who had asked him, "Who made thee a prince and a judge over us?" (Ex. 2:14), Moses asked the Lord how he should answer if they should ask for the name of Him who sent him. The Lord then revealed the sacred name I AM and JHVH, now traditionally pronounced "Jehovah" but shown in English Bibles by the substitute word Lord. Such pronunciations as "Ya-hoveh," "Yaweh," or "Yaveh" have been suggested. The name can mean "He who Is" and "He who causes to be." To Moses he identified himself in first person as "I AM THAT I AM" and bade Moses tell Israel, "I AM hath sent me unto you."

This revelation actually restored and explicated the divine name, for JHVH is found in Hebrew from the beginning of Genesis. In the days of Seth and Enos, the people began to "call upon the name of the Lord"; and the forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob all used that divine name (Gen. 4:26; Abr. 1:16; Gen. 22:14; 27:7; 28:13; commentary on Gen. 2:4).

3:16-22 I have surely . . . seen that which is done to you in Egypt; And . . . I will bring you up out of . . . affliction

The Lord knew, of course, about Israel's suffering, their need of leaders, the nature of the Pharaoh, the way to persuade him to let Israel go, and how Israel could be partly compensated for her years of servitude (Ex. 3:22a-b).

The "elders of Israel" (Ex. 3:16) were the patriarchal heads of the extended families, or clans, and were the natural leaders through whom Moses and the Lord could work. Though the Lord knew Pharaoh would not let Israel go into the wilderness to offer sacrifice, He allowed Pharaoh his agency to respond to Moses' request.

4:1-9 if they will not believe thee, neither . . . the first sign, . . . they will believe . . . the latter sign

Signs are used at times to teach and give proof, but miracles more often occur in compassionate service (BD, "Miracles"; TG, "Miracle"; "God, Manifestations of"; "Sign"; "Sign Seekers"). For the faithful, miracles are usually a reward of faith, to fulfill some urgent need (Mosiah 8:18; D&C 63:9-10).

4:10-17 I am not eloquent, . . . but I am slow of speech

The Lord, who "made man's mouth" was able to teach Moses what he should say (Ex. 4:11-12). He was not pleased with Moses' excuses and reluctance, but He still authorized Aaron to become Moses' spokesman. A spokesman for God is a prophet of God, and Aaron would be a prophet for Moses, who would "be to him instead of God" in conveying messages (Ex. 4:16a-c). This was the beginning of the "call of Aaron," and more about his call, ordination, and mode of service follows (Ex. 7:1-2; Lev. 8; Num. 3; Heb. 5:4).

4:18-20 Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace. And the Lord said, . . . Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead which sought thy life

Moses asked leave of Jethro, his employer and father-in-law, and he departed with Jethro's blessing, going under the Lord's direction.

A change of rulers had occurred in Egypt sometime during Moses' forty years with Jethro (BD, "Pharaoh").

The second of Moses' three periods of life, each forty years in length, was now finished (Ex. 7:7; Deut. 31:2; 34:7; Acts 7:23, 30).

4:21 but I will harden his heart, that he will not let the people go

This enigmatic statement is only "the word of God as far as it is translated correctly" (A of F 8; see the correction cited in Ex. 4:21c).

Harden is an English word used in the account of Moses' missions to translate three different Hebrew verbs. It is used as if the translators understood that God had planned and staged a dramatic sequence to demonstrate his powers, but that idea is not likely. One of those verbs is khazaq, in a form meaning "to make strong" or "to show to be strong" (Ex. 4:21; 8:15; 9:12; 9:35; 10:20). Another verb used is kabad, in forms meaning "to make heavy, weighty, important" (Ex. 8:32; 9:34; 10:1). The third is qashah, "to make harsh or hard" (Ex. 7:3). The translations are corrected in the Joseph Smith Translation (see fn. to the various passages cited above).

Incidentally, though there are many instances of the "hardening" of hearts recorded in the Book of Mormon, it is never said there that the Lord hardened anyone's heart. People made their own hearts hard, or Satan hardened them, but God did not do it.

4:22-23 Israel is my son, even my firstborn: . . . Let my son go, that he may serve me

This statement of the Lord shows his prime intent in saving Israel. "Firstborn" is here used figuratively; the firstborn in any family was customarily the one who bore the responsibilities of conserving the family's inheritance and perpetuating its way of life. The way of life to be perpetuated and the mission inheritance to be conserved by Israel, as Abraham's seed, has been frequently cited in the commentary above (TG, "Abrahamic Covenant"; "Israel, Mission of"; BD, "Abraham, Covenant of").

4:20, 24-26 the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. . . . Surely a bloody husband art thou to me

As Moses and his family journeyed toward Egypt, something went wrong, but the words used here do not tell what it was. Surely if the Lord "sought to kill" a man He would not fail to do so. The inspired revision provides a better understanding of the matter. The phrase "bloody husband" is used later to translate a similar idiom that designated a recipient of the covenant of circumcision. Doubtless Moses, as a previous recipient, should have performed the rite on his son; Joseph Smith's inspired translation indicates that Moses was ashamed that he had not done so (Ex. 4:24a-c, 25b). After the operation, Zipporah returned with the children to the home of her father, Jethro, until Moses' rescue mission was over and the Israelites were encamped at Sinai (Ex. 18:1-6).

4:27-28 the Lord said to Aaron . . . , Go . . . to meet Moses

Aaron was personally "called of God" to begin his mission (Ex. 4:14-16, 27; Heb. 5:4). He accordingly went to the "mount of God" (Sinai) to meet Moses and be instructed.

4:29-31 gathered together all the elders . . . And . . . spake all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Moses

Moses and Aaron instructed the Israelite elders and performed the miracles as they had been authorized (see commentary on Ex. 3:16). The grateful people believed, "bowed their heads and worshipped" (Ex. 4:31). As mentioned before, there are legitimate reasons for miracles, even though there are dangers in a doubter's "seeking for a sign" (BD, "Miracles"; TG, "Sign Seekers").

5:1-9 Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go

Pharaoh responded as anticipated (Ex. 3:19; 4:21-23). He asked a question, the answer to which he and many others have had to learn by hard experience. Many, like Pharaoh, who do not know the Lord, seem unwilling to learn about Him. Pharaoh even became vindictive, increasing the burdens, the beatings, and the demands made of his Israelite slaves.

5:10-23 neither hast thou delivered thy people at all

Disappointed and embittered because their suffering had increased instead of being ended, the Israelites complained to Moses, who complained to the Lord.

6:1-8 but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them[?]

If a question mark were added (as bracketed above), the Lord's words would affirm what was noted before (3:13-15 above); for, ever since man's beginnings, His sacred name has been known. It was used throughout the epochs told of in Genesis. The Joseph Smith Translation confirms that fact (Ex. 6:3c).

In patience and mercy the Lord responded to Moses' urgent query and complaint: He had heard the "groaning" of Israel; he was remembering his covenant and would redeem them "with a stretched out arm" (meaning a manifestation of his identity and power). He would respond "with great judgments," implying there would be justifiable punishments for the oppressors.

6:9-13, 28-30 I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?

Moses dutifully repeated the divine promises to the suffering people, but they did not respond as he had hoped, and he was disappointed. He felt even more doubtful that the Egyptian leaders would listen, and lacked confidence in his ability as a communicator (Ex. 6:12a, 30a). But the Lord would yet turn

Moses' humility and weakness into strength, and he would become a man "mighty in words and in deeds" (Acts 7:22; Ether 12:27).

6:14-27 These be the heads of their fathers' houses

The family history recorded here might well have been given in Exodus 1, but apparently it was placed here to further identify "Aaron and Moses, to whom the Lord said, Bring out the children of Israel" (Ex. 6:26). This history tells of four generations in Egypt as had been promised to Abraham: "in the fourth generation they shall come hither again" (Gen. 15:16).

7:1-6 I have made thee a god to Pharaoh

"See, I have set thee in God's stead to Pharaoh" (Jewish Publication Society translation) is more correct and, incidentally, more in harmony with the Joseph Smith Translation (Ex. 7:1b-c; 7:2; cf. 4:15-16): a prophet is basically a spokesman.

7:7 Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old

The comment on their ages seems to be a supplement to the family history inserted earlier (Ex. 6:14-27). Compare their ages to those of several Latter-day Saint General Authorities.

7:8-13 Shew a miracle for you

An alternate statement (Ex. 7:9a) clarifies the intent of Exodus 7:8-13. Pharaoh launched a contest between his miracle workers and Moses, and when his magicians won the first round, he "hardened his heart." Ungodly powers make possible such wonders as the magicians produced (Ex. 7:11-12; Matt. 7:22-23; 2 Cor. 11:13-14; D&C 50:1-3). It was thus necessary, over a period of time, to show Pharaoh many facets of God's omnipotence before he would finally recognize the unseen God, Jehovah (Ex. 9:13-17; 10:3).

7:14-25 the waters . . . in the river . . . shall be turned to blood

The first plague was announced, its purpose made clear, and it was performed; but Pharaoh was still impressed with the power of his own magicians and obdurate against the Lord's repeated commands.

Observe, as the account proceeds, that nine of the plagues occurred in three cycles of three, after which there was one final plague. The first in each cycle was announced to Pharaoh at the river in the morning, and when he did not yield, the plague came. The second plague in each cycle was announced with a warning, and when it came, Pharaoh supplicated for relief; but when respite was granted, he hardened his heart once again. The third plague in each cycle was inflicted without warning and Pharaoh's response was only a hardened heart.

8:1-15 Let my people go, that they may serve me. And if thou refuse . . . I will smite all thy borders with frogs

The second plague of the first cycle was announced and Pharaoh was warned; when he did not respond, the plague came. Although Pharaoh's magicians imitated it, he asked for relief and made his first promise to let Israel go. Yet, though Moses repeated the purpose of the plague and removed it, Pharaoh refused to keep his promise.

8:16-19 smite the dust . . . that it may become lice

The third plague then was sent without warning. The Egyptian magicians could not duplicate it nor counteract it, and they identified it as a manifestation of "the finger of God" (Ex. 8:19a); but Pharaoh remained obdurate.

8:20-32 if thou wilt not . . . I will send swarms of flies

The fourth plague began the second cycle: Moses met Pharaoh at the waters in the morning and announced the next plague, which would afflict the Egyptians but not the Israelites. Then the plague came. The suffering prompted Pharaoh to seek relief and concede that Israel could perform a sacrifice "in the land." Moses explained that a sacrifice in that place would be an "abomination" to Egyptians (probably because it would involve cattle, which were sacred in Egypt). So Pharaoh further conceded that Israel could go out but "not go very far away," and humbly asked, "Intreat for me." Moses warned against duplicity again and removed the plague, but again Pharaoh recanted.

9:1-7 if thou refuse . . . and wilt hold them still . . . there shall be a very grievous murrain

The fifth plague, second in the second cycle, came after an announcement and a warning. Pharaoh saw that only the cattle of the Egyptians were afflicted, whereas those of the Israelites were not; but he made no concession.

9:8-12 a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt

The sixth plague came as had the third, without warning. Even the magicians suffered, but Pharaoh was stubborn and made no concession (Ex. 9:12a).

9:13-35 I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail. . . . Send therefore now and gather thy cattle

The seventh plague was announced at the river in the morning, as had the first and the fourth. Pharaoh was specifically warned about exalting himself still (Ex. 9:17), and a general warning was given to the Egyptians. It saved those "that feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh" (Ex. 9:20-21). Goshen, the land where the Israelites lived, was spared again. Pharaoh confessed his sin and asked again for intercession with the Lord, but his pride soon overcame his humility, for he "sinned yet more, and hardened his heart" (Ex. 9:34).

To understand Exodus 9:16 better, note that the words cause and in are in italics, meaning that they are added in the English translation and their equivalent is not in the Hebrew original. Leaving out those italicized words makes the meaning more like it was in Hebrew (Ex. 9:16 and fn.).

10:1-20 How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me. Else, if thou refuse . . . , tomorrow will I bring the locusts

The eighth plague, second in the third cycle, was preceded as usual by a warning, and the purpose of the plague was made clear. Once again Pharaoh responded inadequately, and the plague came. Pharaoh's heart was hardened again but not by the Lord (Ex. 10:1a).

The Lord intended that such accounts as this be kept in the scriptures to teach generations of his children about the evils of bondage and tyrants and the value of the divine gift of freedom (Ex. 10:2).

Even though the king's servants pleaded with him not to defy the God of Israel further, he could not humble himself to do so. For the second time, when the suffering became too great, he confessed sinning, asked forgiveness, and got relief, only to resume his hard-heartedness afterward.

10:21-29 darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt

The ninth plague, ending the third cycle, came in the usual pattern without warning. Compare the darkness described here to that in the Book of Mormon at the time of the Crucifixion (Ex. 10:21-23; 3 Ne. 8:20-23). Pharaoh proposed to let the Israelites go, but without their livestock; when that offer was rejected, he resumed his hard, resentful stance. Banned from seeing Pharaoh again, Moses gave a foreboding response: "Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more" (Ex. 10:29).

11:1-10 Yet will I bring one plague more . . . afterwards he will let you go

Moses received a revelation about a final plague and delivered the message while still in Pharaoh's presence.

Israel's asking for valuable things from the Egyptians could have been a means of some compensation for years of service in slavery (commentary on Ex. 3:16-22). When Pharaoh did not respond to the warning about the imminent death of Egypt's firstborn, Moses "went out from Pharaoh in a great anger" (Ex. 11:8).

A brief summary reviews the whole campaign for freedom and Pharaoh's responses (Ex. 11:1 and fn.).

12:1-14 Your lamb shall be without blemish . . . ; eat the flesh in that night . . . , and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs

The Passover month became the "head," or chief, month of the year; but it is not the annual new year's day of the Jewish calendar, for the Jewish new year begins with the new moon nearest the autumnal equinox, whereas Passover is two weeks after the new moon following the spring equinox.

A yearling male lamb without blemish was to be chosen by each extended family; its blood on each doorpost and over the doorway would symbolize faith in the Lord's promise of liberation. Its flesh was to be roasted, not boiled, and eaten; none was to be wasted. All of this symbolized not only God's gift of earthly freedom but also his ultimate gift of eternal freedom from bondage, sin, and death (Ex. 12:14 and fn.; Isa. 53:4-7; 1 Pet. 1:18-21; TG, "Jesus Christ, Lamb of God"). Jesus turned the broken bread and wine of the Passover into symbols of his atoning sacrifice (Matt. 26:18, 26-29; Mark 14:12, 22-25; Luke 22:15, 19-20), thus perpetuating the significance of these emblems forever.

The day following the evening feast of Passover became a special Sabbath called "an high day" (John 19:31). That special Sabbath was one of the three days when Jesus' body lay in the tomb, while in the spirit world he "preached also to them that are dead" about redemption from sin and death (1 Pet. 3:18-20; 4:6; D&C 138:18-37). Through Him came an eternal Passover, the passing of sin and death.

12:15-20 Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread

Unleavened bread was to be eaten each day, starting with the night of the slaughter of the lamb on the fourteenth day of the month of Aviv and continuing until the twenty-first. Both of those days became special Sabbaths every year. In later times, when Jews have lived in lands using other calendars (such as the Roman calendar we use), those Sabbaths are celebrated on whatever day of the week they occur, in addition to the regular Sabbath on Saturday (BD, "Feasts," for more about the Passover).

12:21-28 when your children shall say . . . , What mean ye by this service? . . . say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord's passover

The Israelites sacrificed the lamb as Moses instructed them and marked their doorposts with its blood. Though generally this practice has ceased, many Jewish families still observe some of the annual Passover rites, and they teach their children as they have been commanded to do, that they may know the meaning of liberty and value the freedom God has given. Christians too should value these gifts, as Paul suggested (1 Cor. 10:1-6; Gal. 5:1; 2 Ne. 2:26-27).

12:29-36 Rise up, and get you forth . . . ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the Lord. . . . Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also

Finally, after the last terrible plague had struck the Egyptian people, Pharaoh gave up his former posture of "I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go" (Ex. 5:2; 12:31-32).

The Israelites asked for valuables, and the Egyptians let them have such things as they required. A considerable amount was involved, for the word spoiled is used to translate the Hebrew natzal, meaning "stripped." Note later the consecration of some of the precious things for use in adorning the tabernacle (Ex. 25).

12:37-51 Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were men. . . . And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds

It was a great host of people and animals that set out on the long, long journey toward the promised land. For four hundred thirty years, Abraham's descendants had been strangers or temporary sojourners in Canaan and Egypt (Ex. 12:40; commentary on Ex. 1:1-5).

By undergoing the initiatory ordinance of circumcision, those of the mixed multitude, including servants (Ex. 12:43-49), could convert and properly participate in the Passover, with "one law" for both "homeborn" and sojourner.

13:1-16 Sanctify unto me all the firstborn

A review of the purposes of the Passover and a command to perpetuate its lessons was given along with a command to sanctify all the firstborn of animals and people to the Lord. Three purposes of this dedication of the firstborn were to memorialize the deliverance from Egypt, to remember the ransom suffered by the firstborn of Egypt, and to provide personnel for divine service. The nature of that service and the redeeming of the firstborn by substituting the tribe of Levi for them is described later (Num. 3).

13:17-22 God led the people . . . through the . . . wilderness of the Red sea. . . . And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud . . . and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light

To travel "through the way . . . of the land of the Philistines," the coastal route, would have been short, but that was not the way God chose to lead Israel (Ex. 13:17a, 18c).

Note that Joseph's last request was fulfilled.

14:1-9 the Egyptians pursued after . . . and overtook them

Possible locations of some places on the route of the Exodus are known, but many can only be guessed at (Bible Map 3). No one now knows the exact place of Israel's crossing the Red Sea (Heb., lit., "Sea of Reeds"; the Greek Septuagint Bible, like earlier Greek geographers, called it the "Red Sea"). The crossing could have been through any of the lakes and swamps of Suez or through the northern tip of the Gulf of Suez itself. It would have been miraculous for such a multitude of people and livestock to get through anywhere.

Tragically, Pharaoh hardened his heart yet again (Ex. 14:4a-d; 8a-b). Doubtless the economic problems in Egypt caused by the loss of their slave labor were part of the concern (Ex. 14:5). A formidable army with chariots therefore pursued and overtook the terrified Israelites to return them to bondage.

14:10-18 Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord

Pressed between the Egyptian army and the sea, the Israelites quite naturally grew frightened and then vituperative and sarcastic, but Moses stood firm in faith to strengthen them. Sometimes, when people can of themselves do nothing more, they must learn to "stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord." 

14:19-31 the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land and the waters were divided

Both natural and supernatural forces responded to the Lord's commands as he led the former Israelite slaves out of reach of Pharaoh's army. The pillar of cloud caused darkness for the Egyptians but light for Israel (Ex. 14:20). The Egyptian armies perished as the waters returned.

Nephi wrote a helpful summary of the Lord's motives and methods, both miraculous and natural, in freeing Israel and guiding them through the wilderness and into the promised land (1 Ne. 17:23-35; Ps. 106:7-11).

15:1-21 The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation

A poetic song of praise and thanksgiving commemorated their triumphant exodus with the help of the Lord, who provided freedom and salvation. Typically, throughout the Old Testament, intense emotions were expressed in poetry: urgent supplications, blessings, praises, prophecy, or thanksgiving, and even (as in many of the Psalms) in outcries for vengeance. Thus the thoughts expressed may be noble and beautiful or strident and exultant, as seen in this song. One common feature of Hebrew poetry is parallelism, consisting typically of two complementary statements. Such parallel clauses may be similar in meaning, opposite to each other, progressive in building a concept, or bear some other matched relationship. Poetic diction, alliteration, and a rhythm pattern in words or syllables are also common, but these are not usually preserved by a translator. Other examples of poetry appear before this song of Moses in the biblical record (Gen. 4:23; 9:12-16; 27:27-29; 48:15-16; 49:1-27). Poetry is frequently used in prophecy in the Old Testament and predominates in Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon.

The elderly Miriam, sister of Moses and his guardian when he was a baby on the river (Ex. 2:4-8), led out in the festive song and dance (Ex. 15:20-21).

15:22-27 And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?

After the singing and dancing were ended, the people's normal human needs became urgent, and their voices turned soon to murmuring. It would have been more reasonable to have lifted up their voices in supplication, with faith that they would receive God's help again, but the Lord heard them patiently and sweetened the bitter water of Marah; then he guided the hosts of Israel to the lovely oasis at Elim, with its dozen wells and scores of trees.

16:1-8 Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger

All that God has done does not teach people readily to trust in him for that which needs doing! The Israelites' pessimism, which returned soon after they left Elim, led them to prefer certainty of sustenance with slavery over freedom with responsibility. They had been six weeks in the desert, and their supplies had run out.

Moses tried to teach the people that both blessings and suffering can come from the Lord, and murmuring was not wise.

16:9-36 Manna . . . was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey

The Lord provided food miraculously, for in the desert there could not have been sufficient natural food for such a multitude. It is useless to guess what the "manna" was; even the name they called it means "what is it?" (Ex. 16:15a). The quails seem not to have been provided constantly, but they were provided again at a later crisis (Ex. 16:13a).

The instructions for keeping the Sabbath are the first recorded in the Old Testament since the beginning (Ex. 16:22-31; Gen. 2:1-3). Some did not follow the instructions and had to learn obedience by experience.

17:1-7 Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin . . . pitched in Rephidim: and there was no water for the people to drink

Sin here is a Hebrew word, not English, and is related to the name Sinai; the word probably refers to the series of valleys between the mountains southeastward from the coastal oasis Elim and inland to Rephidim and Sinai (Bible Map 3). In need of water, the people chided Moses again, and again they put the Lord to the test (Ex. 17:2a-b). They were not yet confident that their migration was directed by the Lord and that he would stay with them.

In the mountains of "Horeb" the Lord stood before Moses on a rock, which he struck "in the sight of the elders" and provided water miraculously. Moses named the place to commemorate their chiding, testing, and complaining (Ex. 17:7a-c).

17:8-13 Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim. . . . And Joshua discomfited Amalek

In their first war the Israelite warriors lacked confidence that the Lord would help them. Only when they could see Moses on the hilltop with the "rod of God" uplifted did they fight with courage and prevail. Aaron and Hur had to hold up Moses' hands. The young leader Joshua eventually became Moses' successor.

17:14-18 the Lord said unto Moses, Write this . . . in a book

Here is another statement that Moses wrote down an account of events and revelations in his time (Ex. 17:14a). And he erected a memorial altar (v. 15a).

18:1-12 Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the Lord had done to Israel

Moses was reunited with his wife and family after their long separation (Ex. 18:2-3; 4:20, 24-26) and with his wife's father, the high priest Jethro. Jethro offered a sacrifice to give thanks for the Lord's deliverance of Israel and ate a ceremonial meal with Moses and Aaron and with Israel's elders.

Note the names of the children of Moses and Zipporah; they commemorate something of their status and the hopes their parents had for them. Very little is written about them and their descendants, except for their names in family history lists (Ex. 18:3-4 and fn.).

18:13-27 Moses sat to judge the people . . . from the morning unto the evening. . . . And Moses' father in law said, . . . Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people

Jethro suggested some valuable organizational changes and wisely recommended that Moses implement them if "God command thee so" (Ex. 18:19-23). Moses showed commendable humility and wisdom in accepting advice. The organization of people into groups with chief leaders and subordinate leaders was efficient; it has been used also in later times (Ex. 18:21 and fn.).

19:1-6 ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me . . . : a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation

Arriving at Sinai "in the third month" after being freed from Egypt, Israel was called anew to the mission of Abraham's seed (Ex. 19:5 and fn.). Moses was to prepare his followers to be a "peculiar treasure" (Heb., segullah, the personal treasury whereby a king operates, defends, and extends his kingdom). As a "kingdom of priests," the Israelites would be servants of the Lord with divine authority, "an holy nation" dedicated and committed to teach and serve. More instructions on the way of life they should live were given them from time to time.

19:7-13 Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. . . . the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people

If the people of Israel could have qualified for all the privileges offered them, they could have received the greatest of all revelations at Mount Sinai (Ex. 19:9b, 11a). Their preparation included cleanliness, commitment, and spiritual dedication.

19:14-25 Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish

Despite their attempts to prepare, the people trembled in anticipation and awe when a trumpet sounded "exceeding long." They apparently were not fully ready for the Lord to "come down in the sight of all the people," for he sent Moses to warn them (Ex. 19:11-12, 21). Some of their failings are given later (Ex. 20:18-19, 22; D&C 84:21-25; Deut. 4:10, 12, 33, 36; 5:22-26).

Even though they could not enter the Lord's presence, they did hear him speaking the Ten Commandments. It is well known, of course, that the Ten Commandments were later given to Moses on tablets of stone.

20:1-6 And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God. . . . Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image

The first two commandments are essentially one. The Lord declared his identity as the One who freed them and forbade worship or acknowledgment of any other force, entity, or idea as a "god." The phrase "before me" is used here to translate the Hebrew al-panai ("against my face"); it permits no other deity whatsoever—neither in addition to, subordinate to, nor in contrast to the only true and living God. Anything else that people "worship" is forbidden in our time as urgently as it was in theirs (TG, "Idolatry, Idol").

Contrary to some interpretations, however, the law against making idols did not forbid the making of figures, statues, or motifs as decorations not for worship; it forbade making a pesel, which means specifically an idol. Thus, instructions were later given for making artistic and symbolic items for the ark of the covenant, for the tabernacle, and for the priestly garments (Ex. 25-26; 28). Later, adornments for the temple of Solomon were also made (1 Kgs. 5-6).

The word jealous now carries connotations not implied in the original word (Ex. 20:5b).

The Lord does not punish children for the sins of their parents, but parental wrongs may affect their children's inheritance—socially, physically, materially, intellectually, spiritually, or otherwise—under his system of freedom, agency, and responsibility. Moreover, if children follow in the footsteps of parents in sinfulness or in hate and opposition to the Lord's way, the results are "visited" upon them. Nevertheless, when any sinner—or descendant of sinners—repents and keeps His commandments, God will show mercy and give help.

We believe we will be punished at the Judgment Day for our sins of which we have not repented and not for those of anyone else (Ex. 20:5f; Deut. 24:16; Ezek. 18; D&C 124:50; A of F 2).

20:7 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain

The third commandment forbids swearing, profaning, or invoking the names of God for any false or vain purpose. It may also be understood to forbid using a name of the true God as a name for anything else.

Profanity is a common violation of this commandment. The prophets and Jesus admonished against it or any other inappropriate use of the divine names (Ex. 20:7a-d; Hosea 4:2; Matt. 5:33-37; D&C 63:61-64; 112:26; TG, "Profanity").

Furthermore, to make a covenant or promise in the name of the Lord and then break it is a way of taking his name in vain by our acts (TG, "Hypocrisy, Hypocrite").

20:8-11 Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy

The fourth commandment admonishes God's children to rest on one day in seven and sanctify the day, commemorative of what he did after six periods of creation. The way to sanctify a day is to let the day sanctify us, and sanctify means "to dedicate to good and divine purposes," as the Lord did when he dedicated our world to good and divine ends (TG, "Earth, Purpose of"; "Man, Potential to Become like Heavenly Father").

This commandment we ought to obey gladly, with gratitude to God that he made a Sabbath for us to lay aside mundane things and learn to enjoy eternal things unencumbered by worldly concerns (TG, "Sabbath").

The principles underlying all of the first four commandments are embraced in one "first and great commandment" quoted by Jesus (Matt. 22:36-38; Deut. 6:5).

20:12 Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee

The fifth commandment affirms that the home is the place where the good life is taught and learned. If parents teach children by precept and example, and if proper relationships are maintained between parents and children (TG, "Family, Children, Duties of"; "Family, Children, Responsibilities toward"), then every succeeding generation will honor their parents by living honorable lives, preserving and passing on the best of their heritage. In this way all may be preserved in the land and in eternity. When a rising generation rebels against the ways of God taught by good parents and chooses evil ways, then the character of the people and their culture deteriorate.

The commandment to honor one's parents is transitional between the commandments that govern human relationships with God (Ex. 20:2-11) and those that govern relationships with other human beings (Ex. 10:13-17).

20:13 Thou shalt not kill

The principles behind the last five commandments underlie the "second" great commandment quoted by Jesus (Matt. 22:39-40; Lev. 19:17, 33-34); no one who really loves a neighbor would do an act forbidden by these five commandments.

The fifth commandment forbids murder specifically (Ex. 20:13a). The evils of murder had been known since the beginning, when Cain slew Abel (Gen. 4:8-15). The sanctity of life was taught in the dispensation of Noah, and capital punishment for murder was prescribed (Gen. 9:5-6). Israel's sons knew that it was wrong to put Joseph to death (Gen. 37:17-22; 42:21-23). The revelation to Moses on Mount Sinai reiterated a known law.

Jesus reiterated it also and warned against either being angry or inciting anger, for anger might lead to violence and murder. Modern revelation reiterates the law and the punishment (D&C 42:18-19; TG, "Murder").

Shedding innocent blood by anyone who has received the new and everlasting covenant is an unpardonable sin (D&C 132:27).

Participation in warfare is not murder in defensive circumstances (Ex. 17:8-16; Alma 43:47; D&C 98:33-37).

Unnecessary slaughter of animals is a related matter but is not murder (D&C 49:21a; JST Gen. 9:11).

20:14 Thou shalt not commit adultery

The seventh commandment prohibits abuse of God's system for procreation of human bodies for his children's earth life, even as the sixth commandment prohibits usurpation of God's prerogative for terminating life. It is the privilege and responsibility of a properly married man and woman to participate in procreative processes. If the organs and processes of procreation are misused or prostituted, it is, as Joseph said, a "great wickedness, and sin against God" (Gen. 39:7-9). We must avoid this sin and "anything like unto it" (D&C 59:6; Ex. 20:14a). It is punishable on earth and in heaven, but complete repentance can bring forgiveness (D&C 42:24-26).

20:15 Thou shalt not steal

The eighth commandment forbids taking the property of someone else without permission. Stealing includes robbery, burglary, shoplifting, plagiarism, embezzlement, cheating, or any other form of self-aggrandizement at the expense of others. This law is essential for a secure and peaceful society; the punishment for those who steal and do not repent may occur both in this life and in life after death (TG, "Fraud"; "Rob"; "Stealing, Stolen"; "Thief").

20:16 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour

The ninth commandment specifically forbids false testimony, but it is expanded in other scriptures to include all forms of lying, misrepresentation, or falsehood (TG, "Lying, Liar, Lie").

For liars who do not repent, the prognosis at the judgment bar of God is bad, for they are listed with the "abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters," who "shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone" (Rev. 21:8; 22:15).

20:17 Thou shalt not covet

The tenth commandment forbids taking illicit delight in, or feeling an improper desire for, another's wife, property, status, or position. This commandment warns against desiring that which cannot be legally and morally acquired, and is thus a safeguard against committing other sins, such as adultery, lying, or stealing (Ex. 20:17a-b).

20:18-23 they removed, and stood afar off. And they said unto Moses . . . let not God speak with us, lest we die. . . . And the Lord said . . . Ye have seen that I have talked with you

The people were already awestruck by spiritual experiences at the beginning of the great revelation at Mount Sinai (commentary on Ex. 19:14-25), and at the end they moved "afar off," overwhelmed by the voice of the Lord as he spoke the commandments (Ex. 20:22; Deut. 4:33-36; 5:2-5, 22-30). It was an unusual revelation for a great assembly of people, and Moses comforted them. He explained that God's purpose was to "prove" them and to increase their reverence and their defense against sin (Ex. 20:20 and fn.). He again warned them against making any images of Him (Ex. 20:23a; Deut. 4:15-16).

20:24-26 An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon

The Israelites were to honor the Lord in their way of life and offer their sacrifices only in the places where his name should be uttered—that is, places where the tabernacle would be set up as a portable temple with its holy place (Ex. 25-27).

Improper exposure of priests ascending steps to the great altar was to be avoided by the use of a ramp (Ex. 20:26a-b).

21:1-11 If thou buy an Hebrew servant

A poor person might contract to serve another person as a way to earn the necessities of life or to get out of debt. The regulations of such an agreement concern Hebrew servants—men, their wives, and families. They include provisions for protection of young women, for termination of service, and for liberation under certain circumstances, such as the sabbatical year.

21:12-27 He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death. . . . Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot

Equal retributive justice, with proper punishment for a number of types of abuses, was specified to prevent excessive punishment. Punishment for causing death and for abusing or cursing parents was very severe; however, people were also taught to do good to offenders and not merely to exact retribution (Ex. 23:4-5).

The retributive law most commonly cited in our time, supposedly to characterize the Mosaic law, is "an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth." But retributive law should have prevented undue punishments; it would be unfair to say it exemplifies the whole "law of Moses."

21:28-36 If an ox gore a man or a woman

Some instructions were given regarding responsibility for hazards connected with one's property, animals, or premises; they include principles good for any society.

22:1-15 If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep

Several examples of restoration of stolen property clarify responsibilities in borrowing and lending.

22:16-20 And if a man . . .

A number of moral and religious laws are given here, each related to one or more of the Ten Commandments. One involves a woman's rights if she is seduced. Another concerns a "witch," which was anyone who practiced sorcery or communion with evil spirits, but a Joseph Smith Translation emendation (Ex. 22:18a) makes it pertain to murder. The sexual offense of bestiality was not tolerated. Sacrificing to another god would, of course, break the first commandment.

22:21-31 Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt

The rule for treating strangers in the way Israelites would like to have been treated, as with other Mosaic laws, commended qualities of tolerance, kindness, consideration, honesty, mercy, gratitude, respect, and dedication.

23:1-9 If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him

Here are more of the principles and practices taught in Moses' revelations to prevent cheating, getting involved in rash mob activity, or abetting evil causes (Ex. 23:1-3 and fn.).

To do good to an enemy ("him that hateth thee") is what Jesus taught (Matt. 5:43-48; Ex. 23:4-5); it was naturally part of our Lord's teachings for Moses' dispensation also. See again the essence of the Golden Rule (Ex. 23:9; 22:21).

23:10-13 six years thou shalt sow thy land . . . but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still

Sabbatical years of "rest" for the land allowed it to lie fallow to renew itself even as it provided food for the poor, who could harvest volunteer crops that grew.

Sabbath days should indeed "refresh" all working people and their animals. On the Sabbath, as at all times, only the true Giver of all things good should be credited with them.

23:14-19 Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year

These were three feasts of thanksgiving: the Feast of Passover commemorating liberation; the Feast of Harvest of the Firstfruits (Shevuot, "Feast of Weeks"), showing gratitude for the grains and other crops harvested early; the Feast of Ingathering, or late harvest (Sukkoth, "booths" or "tabernacles"), a week of thanksgiving for all crops and blessings.

The rule forbidding the cooking of a young goat in its mother's milk was intended to prevent a fertility cult practice (Ex. 23:19b). This rule, with many extensions, became a basic tenet in the kashrut, or "proper" (kosher), dietary practices of Judaism. To this day Jews who observe this rule keep dairy foods and meat foods strictly separated, neither preparing both in the same utensils nor serving them both at the same meal.

Practical reasons and spiritual purposes behind the strict statutes, ordinances, and performances are given in the Book of Mormon (Mosiah 13:28-32).

23:20-33 I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared

The promise of a guiding and guardian angel is quite analogous to the New Testament gift of the Holy Ghost—to guide, prompt, and comfort the faithful (TG, "Holy Ghost").

The divine help given the people of Israel in their preparation and return to the promised land was in accordance with the Lord's principle of blessing the worthy and letting the wicked suffer the fruits of their evil ways (1 Ne. 17:25-43).

Reasons were given for the Israelites' avoiding integration with the Canaanite peoples, their ways, and their worship (Ex. 23:32, 33a; Lev. 18).

24:1-8 he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient

Moses prepared the people so that he might be absent from them to commune with the Lord for forty days. He taught them the words of the Lord and also wrote them down. He built an altar and offered sacrifices, read all the words of the covenant to the people, and heard their promise to be obedient. He sprinkled the blood of the sacrifices upon the people to commit them to keeping the covenant (Ex. 24:1-8 and fn.). Nevertheless, they still were not strong enough to behave according to their promises, as will be seen (Ex. 32).

24:9-11 And they saw the God of Israel: . . . they saw God, and did eat and drink

The privilege of seeing God was granted to Moses, the Aaronic priesthood leaders, and seventy of the patriarchal elders of Israel. It was a personal experience during which they "did eat and drink" together in a covenant-making ceremony (TG, "God, Privilege of Seeing"). This is certainly one of the impressive Old Testament testimonies about the reality of God.

24:12-18 Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them

Leaving the group of special witnesses with Aaron and Hur appointed to deal with matters that might arise, Moses and Joshua, "his minister" (that is, servant or assistant), ascended the mount. Joshua remained somewhere nearby (Ex. 32:15-18; 24:13), while Moses communed with God for a long period—"forty days and forty nights."

The fiery manifestation of the glory of the Lord on top of the mountain must have been an awesome sight for the people (Ex. 24:15-18); it should have kept them from the apostate revelry in which they soon involved themselves (Ex. 32).

25:1-9 Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly . . . gold, and silver, and brass, And blue, and purple . . . and fine linen

The first thing revealed on the mount concerned a sanctuary for worship and divine communication. The people would be given the opportunity to contribute precious things they had brought from Egypt (Ex. 25:3-7; 11:1-2; 12:35-36) to adorn the sanctuary. The pattern of the structure was soon to be revealed (Ex. 25:9).

25:10-22 make an ark of shittim wood . . . and thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee

Specifications were given Moses for making a sacred box, using a desert acacia wood called shittim, overlaying it with gold, and placing on its golden cover two guardian cherubim whose wings would touch over the center (BD, "Cherubim"). Thus adorned, the top would be called "the mercy seat," and fromit the Lord's communications to Moses would come. In the sa-cred box, or ark, the revealed laws, instructions, and other "testimonies" of the Lord would be kept (BD, "Ark of the Covenant").

25:23-30 Thou shalt also make a table. . . . And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway

An acacia wood table overlaid with gold and equipped with rings and staves for carrying would provide a place for sacred shewbread (Heb., lit., "bread of presence"; Ex. 25:30a; BD, "Shewbread"). The religious significance and use of this bread is recorded later (Lev. 24:5-9).

25:31-40 thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold. . . . And six branches shall come out of the sides of it

The article described in this passage is the seven-branched menorah, or lamp fixture. It was not a candlestick as we understand that term; it had seven cups for oil with wicks for burning (BD, "Candlestick"). Many varieties of the menorah have been crafted from ancient times to the present, and it is one of the best known symbols in Judaism. An ancient carved image of it, as it was taken from Jerusalem by the Romans, may still be seen on the arch of Titus in Rome.

Note the emphasis that things be made according to the revealed "pattern, which was shewed thee in the mount" (Ex. 25:40).

26:1-30 Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle

Specifications for making the tabernacle (Heb., mishkan, "dwelling") were then given to Moses. It would function as a portable temple. From the measurements for all of the curtains, boards, and so on, it can be calculated that the courtyard would be about seventy-five feet wide and one hundred fifty feet long; the tabernacle, fifteen by fifteen by forty-five feet, with the innermost, holiest place being a fifteen-foot cube. For a visual representation of all the posts, pillars, boards, curtains, and adornment, see any illustrated biblical encyclopedia.

26:31-37 the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy

The first room was a holy place, but the innermost room was most holy (Heb., lit., "holy of holies"), and a beautifully colored "vail" divided them. The place of the sacred box, or "ark of the testimony," was in the inner room; other items were specified for the next room and for the outer court.

27:1-8 And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood

These are the specifications for making a portable wooden altar, overlaid with brass and provided with brass grates, pans, and other accessories. The altar was to be seven and one-half feet square and four and one-half feet high with rings and poles for carrying it. The "horns" were symbolic extrusions of the four corners. Its use for burnt offerings is described later.

27:9-19 And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle

The courtyard surrounding the tabernacle was to be enclosed by a fence with sockets holding upright pillars to support panels of fabric. The court was accessible to all worthy members of the congregation of Israel (BD, "Tabernacle").

27:20-21 command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always

The Aaronic priests were to keep the menorah (seven-

branched lamp) burning perpetually and keep everything in order in the tabernacle, or "tent of meeting" (Ex. 27:21a).

28:1-4 and they shall make holy garments for Aaron . . . and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office

Aaron and his sons were to wear special clothing, holy garments "for glory and for beauty." Aaron's special garments included a breastplate, apron (Heb., ephod), inner garment and outer robe, a bound cap, and a sash. Those who were to make the sacred clothing would be specially endowed with a "spirit of wisdom"; some spiritual gifts in Moses' time are comparable to those of New Testament times (Ex. 28:3; 1 Cor. 12:7-11).

28:5-29 And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen

Specifications were given concerning materials and modes of making all the items of clothing, including the beautifully adorned breastplate, which was to have two precious stones engraven with the names of the tribes of Israel (Ex. 28:9-12). A pocket in the breastplate over Aaron's heart was for the Urim and Thummim. This breastplate had some similarities to the Nephite breastplate but was of cloth rather than rigid materials (Ex. 28:15-30; JS-H 1:35, 59; D&C 17:1; BD, "Breastplate").

28:30 And thou shalt put in the breastplate . . . the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart

The Urim and Thummim (Heb., lit., "light and perfection") enlightened the mind of the prophet and gave him assurance of fulfillment (perfection) of covenant promises, according to some rabbinic commentaries. It was to help Aaron wisely judge the conflicts of the people and aid him in many other ways (TG and BD, "Breastplate"; "Urim and Thummim").

Abraham received revelations concerning the universe through such an instrument; also, an instrument called "interpreters" in the Book of Mormon and "Urim and Thummim" by Joseph Smith, assisted in translating unknown languages and in receiving other revelations. Their exact appearance and the nature of their operation is not known by anyone except the seers who are divinely appointed to use them.

28:31-35 thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue

The sleeveless "robe of the ephod" slipped over the head and reached to the floor; the ephod, or apron, covered it in front, the ribbon of which was tied in the back, around the robe at the waist, according to rabbinic commentaries. Golden bells attached to the hem of the robe, interspersed with decorative pomegranates, would be heard by the worshippers as the priest performed his sacred services in the holy places.

28:36-43 Holiness to the Lord

The words on Aaron's cap would remind both the priest and the people that they were consecrated to the Lord by ordinances of the temple; the Hebrew word meaning "holiness" is qodesh, a noun formed from a root word meaning "dedicated," "sacred." Indeed, all the priestly garments "for glory and for beauty" should have helped people be reverent and dedicated in their temple worship.

29:1-9 And this . . . thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest's office

The ordinances prescribed for the priests who would officiate at the tabernacle (a temporary temple) included sacrificial offerings; washing and anointing; and clothing with the tunic, robe, ephod (apron), girdle (sash), and bonnet (cap). Thus Aaron and his sons were to be equipped (Heb., milleh yad, "fill the hand of"), or endowed, with the priesthood authority necessary to perform their sacred services.

29:10-46 Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock. And thou shalt kill the bullock

Procedures were given for certain meat offerings, portions of which were to be eaten by the priests and other portions dedicated as burnt offerings. The laying of the priests' hands upon the head of the sacrificial animal symbolically conveyed to it the sins of the worshippers, anticipating that a divine Redeemer would eventually take upon himself the sins of his followers (Moses 5:5-9). Part of the blood of the animals offered was also used symbolically, some of it being sprinkled on the worshippers to impute to them the benefits of the vicarious sacrifice offered on their behalf. A bit of the blood was put upon the ear, thumb, and toe of the high priest (Ex. 29:20). Perhaps it was to remind him to teach the people to listen to the Lord's commandments, to do them, and to walk in all his ways.

Daily offerings of one lamb in the morning and one in the evening would provide daily communication and renewal.

If the priests, properly ordained and consecrated, would do their work faithfully and all Israel would respond faithfully and keep the commandments of the Lord, then he would "dwell among the children of Israel, and . . . be their God" (Ex. 29:44-45). That promise also applies in this latter-day dispensation.

30:1-10 And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon

The altar of incense was to stand in front of the veil that separated the holy place from the holy of holies, where the sweet odor could symbolize pleasing communications from man to God (Ex. 30:7-9 and fn.; Rev. 5:8; 8:3-4).

30:11-16 then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord

A half-shekel "atonement" offering was required of everyone (Ex. 30:15-16). Remember that all these performances were only types and symbols of the divine redemption to come and did not of themselves bring salvation; they served to teach the people principles of repentance and redemption, commit them to faithful living, and strengthen their bonds with God. Sacrifice is an exercise in giving up something of worldly value in order to gain in heavenly values; it anticipates and embraces the blessings of the Atonement (Alma 25:15-16).

30:17-21 Thou shalt also make a laver of brass. . . . Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat

The laver, or wash basin, was to be in the courtyard between the altar of burnt offering and the entrance to the holy place, so that the priests could cleanse themselves ceremonially before entering the tabernacle to minister in the other ordinances.

30:22-38 Take thou . . . principal spices . . . and of olive oil

Aromatic oil for anointing the tabernacle, its furniture, and the priests was to be prepared, as well as spice to be set before the ark of the covenant (Ex. 30:34-37). Things of pleasing sight and smell symbolized things of spiritual goodness, for they were "holy for the Lord" (Ex. 30:37).

31:1-11 I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and . . . workmanship

The gifts of the Spirit described here are like some in other dispensations (Ex. 31:3a-c). With them, Bezaleel would become chief artisan; he and his assistant would supervise all the "wise hearted" who would make all that had been commanded.

31:12-17 my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you . . . that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you

Sabbath observance is not only for rest, worship, renewing covenants, and remembering blessings; it is also a demonstration that there is a sanctifying covenant between God and man. It is a symbol to identify a worshipper of the true God.

31:18 And he gave unto Moses . . . two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God

Delivery of the stone tablets, with all the covenants divinely inscribed on them, came at the climax of forty days of divine instruction for Moses on the mount (Ex. 31:18a).

32:1-6 when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down . . . , the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron and said . . . Up, make us gods

Growing impatient and hopeless concerning Moses' return, the Israelites desired divine images to "go before" them (Ex. 32:1). The idea of a calf may have arisen from their memory of some gods in Egypt, such as the Hathor cow and the Apis bull. Ironically, after Aaron had fashioned the "molten calf" (Ex. 32:3-4), he sought to preserve the idea that it was a "feast to the Lord" (Ex. 32:5) that they would celebrate by their offerings, their eating and drinking, and their "play" before the calf.

32:7-9 the Lord said . . . thy people . . . have corrupted themselves

They corrupted (Heb., lit., "debased") themselves through idolatrous worship, whereas worship of the true God would exalt them. Similar effects come still from certain worldly acts, in contrast to the value from true heavenly ordinances.

The Israelites did not make the golden calf in ignorance but in "mischief" (Ex. 32:22), for they had been taught the Ten Commandments and had promised to do "all the words which the Lord hath said" (Ex. 20; 24:3-4).

32:10-14 that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation

Moses declined the Lord's offer to substitute him and his seed for the apostate Israelites. If this offer was a test, Moses passed it humbly, pleading with God for mercy for his erring people. As for the Lord wanting to "consume" them and then "repenting," the Joseph Smith Translation clarifies what He really said (Ex. 32:14a-b).

32:15-18 the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: . . . written on both their sides . . . And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God

These divinely created tables bore the testimony and witness of God to Israel that by living his laws they could fulfill a glorious mission and attain glorious rewards, but such high and holy covenants were too much for them at that time.

32:19-20 Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount

In spite of Moses' plea for the Israelites (Ex. 32:11-13), he perceived by their actions that they were not worthy of God's holy covenants. He demonstrated his disappointment and their great loss by breaking the divinely engraven tablets. Then he destroyed their idol and obliged the people to drink the ashes of it, strewn on water, demonstrating the idol's lack of any power.

32:21-24 Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?

Aaron had failed his duty by acceding to the people's rash demands. He excused his action as arising from "mischief" of the people and told the story as if it were a miracle, asserting, "there came out this calf" (Ex. 32:22, 24).

32:25 Moses saw that the people were naked

Naked may mean either "bare, uncovered," and exposed in their guilt before God; or "riotous, let loose" (Ex. 32:25a-b). The Israelites were evidently guilty of both. They had expressly committed themselves to keeping the Lord's covenants and commandments (Ex. 24:3-7) but had broken them anyway.

32:26-29 Then Moses . . . said, Who is on the Lord's side? . . . And all the sons of Levi gathered . . . unto him

Moses let any who were faithful to God identify themselves by coming unto him, and he charged them to execute the unfaithful. Their idolatrous apostasy was dangerous enough to Israel to warrant capital punishment (Deut. 13:6-9; Matt. 10:28).

32:30-35 Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the Lord; peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin

Even though they had sinned so grievously, Moses again pleaded for forgiveness for the people, humbly taking responsibility for their failings. The Lord's reply was based on the principle that a person shall be punished only for his own sins (Ex. 32:33a-c). Moses was innocent of the Israelites' sin, because he had instructed them and committed them to obedience before leaving them (Ex. 24:3-4) and had left a leader over them. Atonement was available through the Lord's mercy, however, and He promised that His angel would again guide them. Nevertheless, the unrepentant guilty were plagued, because indeed "they made the calf, which Aaron made" (Ex. 32:35).

33:1-6 Depart, and go up hence, . . . I will send an angel before thee; . . . for I will not go up in the midst of thee

The children of Israel were still called to their mission in the land of promise and would still be blessed with divine guidance. Nevertheless, many people had demonstrated by their actions at the time the commandments were spoken on Sinai and at the time of their presentation on tablets of stone that they did not have the capacity to "endure his presence" and to keep his commandments (Ex. 20:18-21; Ex. 32; D&C 84:22-26). They had forfeited the privilege of having the Lord "in the midst" of them (Ex. 33:5b).

33:7-10 And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp

Moses accordingly moved the tent of meeting, or "tabernacle of the congregation" (not yet the special tabernacle of testimony prescribed in Ex. 25-27 and built later, as recorded in Ex. 35-40), some distance outside the camp. The people watched in awe as the cloudy pillars descended, and Moses communed with the Lord.

33:11-23 the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, . . . And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory

Moses asked that the Lord would still be with Israel and would show him the way to go. That request was granted (Ex. 33:14, 17), but his request to see the Lord in His glory was not.

There is a difference between seeing God face to face with one's spiritual eyes under the protective Spirit of God and having the power to behold all His glory. Thus it is not inconsistent that Moses talked with the Lord "as a man speaketh unto his friend" in previous revelations but yet was denied the request "Shew me thy glory." Note the privilege he did have, however (Ex. 33:11, 18-23 and fn.; Moses 1:2, 5, 9-11, 13-15; Ether 3:6-13).

34:1-9 the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon these

Moses prepared the new stone tables as instructed and returned to the mount for a restoration of part of what had previously been given. Some privileges and powers of the higher priesthood and ordinances were not restored (Ex. 34:1a-e; D&C 84:19-27).

The Lord's name and something of his nature and ways of working with humankind were stated again. Important words are missing at the end of verse 7, and the word generation has been supplied in italics by the translators to replace the missing material (Ex. 34:7; Ex. 20:4-6, fn. and commentary). Moses accepted the revised covenant humbly and reverently.

34:10-17 Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done

Moses had pleaded that the Lord would remain with Israel on the journey and consider them still his special people (as stated in Ex. 19:5-6), forgiving their obstinacy, iniquity, and sinfulness. In response, the Lord promised to help Israel take an inheritance from the idolatrous people in Canaan (Gen. 15:13-16; 17:7-9;

1 Ne. 17:23-35); however, they had to keep their covenants and take to heart the "terrible" (awesome) things he would do with them. They were neither to marry nor worship with the idolaters, lest they be corrupted (Ex. 34:13-16 and fn.).

34:18-26 The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep

Instructions on some festivals and Sabbath observances are reiterated (Ex. 34:18-26 and fn.). The special dietary law about meat and milk was also reiterated (commentary on Ex. 23:19).

34:27-28 the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words

Moses wrote the items reviewed (such as Ex. 34:10-26), but the Lord must have written upon the new stone tables the new covenant as promised (Ex. 34:1); thus "he" in the last sentence of 34:28 must refer to the Lord, not to Moses.

34:29-35 when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony . . . Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone

Moses' prolonged fast and his experience in the Lord's presence was unique in many respects, but radiation has been seen in other cases (Ex. 34:29d; Acts 2:1-3).

The word shone is used to translate the Hebrew verb qaran, which is from a noun meaning "horn." It here depicts radial beams of light, like the "horns" of morning—the rays seen over the horizon before sunrise. (A mistranslation in the Latin Bible of Michelangelo's time caused him to put horns on the head of his heroic statue of Moses!)

35:1-3 And Moses . . . said unto them, These are the words which the Lord hath commanded, that ye should do them

Moses gathered the congregation and further delineated the Sabbath commandments. Orthodox Jewish worshippers still observe the restriction on lighting fires and related acts.

35:4-9 whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it

All were invited to make voluntary contributions of valuable materials and precious stones for construction and embellishment of the tabernacle. The importance of exercising one's agency in making offerings is noted from time to time (Ex. 35:5a; Lev. 1:3). The contributions would have been from the jewels and precious things received by the Israelites before they left Egypt (Ex. 11:2-3; 12:35-36).

35:10-29 And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the Lord hath commanded

Success in the sacred work depended on the willing hearted and wise hearted coming forth to perform it. Spiritual influences make people willing and wise (Ex. 35:21; 36:1-2). The people responded generously, both men and women, giving freely of their talents and material goods. This is a bright spot in Israel's history.

35:30-35 See, the Lord hath called by name Bezaleel

People who were called by the Lord and filled with the Spirit, as were Bezaleel and Aholiab, not only developed their own skills in fine arts and crafts but taught others.

36:1-7 all the wise men, that wrought all the work . . . spake . . . saying, The people bring much more than enough

In this great project the people did more than was required, for a change, and more than enough was contributed.

36:8-38 And every wise hearted man . . . wrought the work of the tabernacle

The tabernacle and its furnishings were made in accordance with the instructions received (Ex. 26-31).

37:1-38:20 And Bezaleel made the ark . . . the mercy seat . . . the table . . . the candlestick . . . the incense altar . . . the holy anointing oil, . . . the altar of burnt offering . . . the laver of brass, . . . and he made the court

All particulars of the project were completed. (Ex. 37:1-38:20 and fn.).

38:21-31 This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony

A sum was made by Ithamar of all the gold, silver, and brass used in this great project directed by Bezaleel and Aholiab.

39:1-31 And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service . . . , and made the holy garments

Beautiful gems and colors in fabrics were used to make the garments and the breastplate, as specified.

All that good work, consecrated to the Lord (Ex. 39:30a), must have helped many to become a holy ("dedicated") people.

39:32-43 And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses

The beautiful new portable temple, with all its accoutrements, was reviewed and approved by Moses himself, and he blessed the workers.

40:1-16 And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle

Instructions were revealed for setting up, equipping, and dedicating the tabernacle for worship services and for washing, anointing, and clothing priests (BD, "Priests") so that they could properly officiate in the ordinances to be performed in the tabernacle.

40:17-33 And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up

Moses caused everything to be erected and prepared as had been specified. The testimony was placed in the ark, and it was put in its holy place. The altars, lavers, and all implements were put in their places, ready for the dedicatory services.

40:34-38 Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle

The Lord manifested his acceptance of the tabernacle as his "dwelling" on earth and as a place of worship and communication. When the glorious cloud filled the tabernacle, even Moses could not enter. Compare the spiritual phenomena similarly manifested when the first temple of the latter days was dedicated (Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 2:410). Thereafter, when the cloud moved from the tabernacle, the children of Israel moved; and when it stopped, they stopped and made camp. They should have felt very secure under such a divine favor (Ex. 40:36-38; but see Num. 10-11).

Thus ends Exodus, the record of the exit of Israel from Egypt. With many impressive, spiritual blessings and instructions the Lord prepared the children of Israel for their mission and life in the promised land. Just so will he prepare any who will accept him for service, life, and joy in his kingdom.

 
 
© 1993 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
