# PSALMS

### PSALMS
Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Commentary on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City 1993)
 
 

PSALMS

The psalms of Israel were the worship songs of Israel. They were part of the temple worship services, chanted to the accompaniment of strings, pipes, or percussion, and they continue to be so used in synagogues and churches. They are songs of praise and thanks, lament and supplication, instruction and exhortation; and they express yearnings for the righteous rule of the Lord. They were structured for chanting—often in responsive form, with a line for the leader and a parallel line for the congregation. That structure may involve synonymous, antithetic, synthetic, and other forms of parallelism. Many of the psalms are prophetic, which is one reason some eighty-five quotations from thirty-four of them are quoted in the New Testament (BD, "Quotations").

The one hundred fifty psalms are divided into five sections, each of which ends with words of praise and thanksgiving to God. A superscription, at the head of many psalms, identifies their source or collection, their author, and often the accompaniment, such as "To the chief Musician [the collection], on Neginoth [the instrument], A Psalm of David [the author, or literary type]" (Ps. 4). Features of the book of Psalms are outlined in the LDS Bible (BD, "Psalms"), including descriptions of instruments that accompanied the singing of the psalms.

Commentary

1:1-6 Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly

The book of Psalms starts out praising and commending life in harmony with the ways of the Lord. Indeed, the first line of this psalm is like a title or a thesis statement. Note the parallel progression in the sequence: neither walketh, standeth, nor sitteth with the ungodly, the sinners, or the scornful.

"Meditate day and night" poetically admonishes one to let every thought and act be tempered by principles of right from the law of the Lord (Ps. 1:2b). Note the contrast in the similes describing the godly person, compared to the ungodly (Ps. 1:3-6, and fn.).

2:1-12 The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed

The adversaries become angry, make plots, and imagine vain things against the Lord; but his word is a "rod," which shall teach some, persuade some, judge all, and condemn some. Those ultimately condemned will indeed be "broken" by his word (Ps. 2:9 and fn.).

The admonition "Kiss the Son" is an odd idiom that does not use customary terms; it can be translated "worship in purity," after which the last clause follows naturally: "Blessed are all they that put their trust in him" (Ps. 2:12).

3:1-8 A psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son

The superscription to this psalm in the English translation is the first verse in the Hebrew. The events are told in 2 Samuel 15-18.

The word selah is thought to be an instruction for the musicians accompanying the psalm. It occurs in some psalms but not in all. Often it occurs at a transition in the thought. In this psalm it comes after David's distress is told and then after the divine source of his relief is announced.

In two verses David tells of the comfort of God's care: namely, temporal salvation when enemies are smitten and eternal salvation as a blessing upon the Lord's people (Ps. 3:7-8).

4:1-8 Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness

The superscription prescribes accompaniment upon neginoth, or stringed instruments.

David gives thanks for help received, wonders why many mortals go wrong, testifies that the Lord hears him, and admonishes the unbelievers who "love vanity, and seek after leasing." Leasing is an archaic English word meaning "to tell lies." They should worship the Lord and put trust in him, for he gives the light of his countenance to the righteous and gives joy, peaceful sleep, and safety.

5:1-12 Give ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation

The musical accompaniment is nehiloth, possibly a flute.

In this psalm of supplication, after the salutation, the worshipper expresses confidence in his contact with the Lord and summarizes truths about Him for the benefit of fellow worshippers. (On "leasing," Ps. 5:6, see commentary on Ps. 4:2.)

After a statement of confidence and reverence, there is supplication for divine guidance as a safeguard against faithless enemies and another expression of confidence that the Lord hears and gives protection.

6:1-10 O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger . . . Have mercy upon me, . . . heal me

The musical accompaniment is sheminith, strings, or "eighth" string.

Though the nature of the writer's illness is unknown, anyone suffering from spiritual, mental, or physical ills may find this psalm of supplication comforting—especially when critics blame the sufferer for causing the problem and there is need for reconciliation, mercy, and healing.

7:1-17 save me from all them that persecute me

Shiggaion is not an instrument but a variety of poetry. "Cush the Benjamite" was perhaps a servant of Saul.

David's suffering as a refugee, after Saul became a jealous adversary, could have been the cause of this outcry in prayer. It expresses urgency, trust in the Lord, submissiveness if guilty of offense, indignation against wicked persecutors, and confidence that divine justice will punish the wicked. Anyone who has suffered persecution may identify with the essence of this psalm (cf. D&C 121:1-6).

8:1-9 O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!

Gittith was perhaps an instrument or a tune of the grape harvest and winepress, which is the meaning of a similar word in Hebrew.

Messianic psalms usually anticipate the second coming of Jesus Christ on earth, but this one sings praise to the reigning Lord, who is Jehovah, Master and Creator of all.

The Hebrew name of the book of Psalms is Sepher Tehillim, "Book of Praises"; and Psalm 8 certainly is full of tehillah, "praise," for the Creator of the universe and what he does with "babes" and with mankind. A human, made in the image of God, is certainly "less than the gods" (Ps. 8:5a) but is given opportunity to earn "glory and honor."

"Dominion" over others of God's creatures gives God's children opportunities to learn the ways of godliness (Ps. 8:6-8). They violate their dominion if they exploit animals or resources selfishly.

9:1-20 I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will shew forth all thy marvellous works

Muth-labben may mean "death of the son," which perhaps describes a melody.

The first verse is a thesis statement in "synthetic parallelism," in which the second line reinforces and builds upon the first.

In addition to the themes announced in the chapter heading, this psalm of praise expresses gratitude for help against enemies, reassurance in times of trouble, gratitude for salvation, and confidence that the Lord shall prevail over wicked or unbelieving nations.

Higgaion may specify a pause; and Selah, a musical interlude (Ps. 9:16).

10:1-18 Why standest thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble?

The question asked by this psalm has been asked by poets, patriarchs, and prophets from Enoch and Job to Abraham, Samuel, Jeremiah, Habakkuk, and Joseph Smith. This world is a laboratory for the children of God to use their agency, learn by experience, develop the power to discern, and create good while combatting evil; but it may seem to some that time goes by without divine intervention. Eventually, the wicked, who think God will not notice their wickedness, will be abashed, but the humble must develop patience and confidence in God.

11:1-7 In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain?

The righteous feel confident in taking a stand rather than in fleeing. Even though the moral foundations of society may decay, the Lord is still available "in his holy temple," and his "throne is in heaven." He sees the trials of the righteous and punishes the unjust violence of the wicked. Because he is righteous, he loves righteousness.

The Joseph Smith Translation applies this psalm to the ultimate situation of the wicked world just before the coming of the Lord, when the righteous will have to flee and take refuge until he destroys evil and establishes right (Ps. 11:1a).

12:1-8 Help, Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the children of men

On sheminith, see commentary on Psalm 6.

Continuing the theme of Psalm 11, this one portrays situations in which the moral foundations of society have failed, the vile are exalted, and the Lord is the only source of help. The Lord's ways will provide refuge against all evils, for his words are pure.

13:1-6 How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever?

As David did when Saul was pursuing him (1 Sam. 19-27), the righteous, when oppressed, may wonder how long the oppression will continue, but they will be restored to confidence in the Lord and be grateful to him.

14:1-7 The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God

An emended version of Psalm 14 is in the Joseph Smith Translation (Ps. 14:1a). A slightly different version is Psalm 53, in which Deity is called God (Heb., Elohim) rather than Lord (Heb., Jehovah) in verses 2, 4, and 6.

This psalm is an outcry about a time of widespread apostasy, when the righteous yearn for salvation and restoration. Joseph Smith's translation of the psalm makes it a time of yearning for the coming of the Lord to bring salvation, destroy wickedness, and reign in righteousness.

15:1-5 Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?

This essential question and answer pertain to those who enjoy the Spirit of the Lord in this life and may dwell in his celestial kingdom in the life to come. It provides a short sampling of the qualifying godly virtues.

"He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not," is one who makes covenant promises and keeps them, even if he suffers some costs or disadvantages thereby (Ps. 15:4).

16:1-11 Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust

Michtam identifies this psalm and also Psalms 56 through 60. They do not seem to have much in common, so it is not certain what the name implies, but the root of Michtam is a poetic word for "fine gold"; thus, these may be "golden psalms."

The concern in Psalm 16, as in Psalm 15, is for ultimate salvation and exaltation in the presence of the Lord. The psalmist humbly recognizes that his own goodness is not equal to that of the Lord but hopes it will be like that of the Saints in whom the Lord delights. Idolaters are at the other extreme.

The hope for salvation from the disembodied state parallels the hope expressed in the psalm of Nephi, with the prophecy of resurrection of the Holy One (Ps. 16:10a, d). Prophetically, David knew that spirits would not forever be left in she'ol ("hell," the world of the unembodied), because the Holy One would counteract "corruption" (disintegration) by resurrection and teach "the path of life" leading to "fulness of joy."

17:1-15 Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry

One may pray with David in this psalm that the judgment of the Lord will find in him no transgression and that one's honest effort to do good will succeed with the help of the saving hand and the loving kindness of the Lord. Thereby one can aspire to protection from evildoers and their fate and hope to awaken from death in the likeness of the Lord.

The "apple of the eye" is the pupil, a most precious part; hence protecting it is a simile for taking great care (Ps. 17:8).

18:1-50 I will love thee, O Lord, my strength. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer

The superscription tells the historic situation out of which this prayer of thanksgiving and praise arose (2 Sam. 22).

The poetic beauty of Psalm 18 is evident with a little help from the chapter heading and the footnotes; however, one problematic metaphor refers to the presence of the Lord coming like a thunderstorm, riding upon a cherub. The cherubim on the ark of the covenant in the tabernacle and the temple had wings, eyes, and legs meant to symbolize supreme, divine powers (BD, "Cherubim"; D&C 77:4). Thus, by his powers the Lord saves the believer. Many truths are beautifully spoken by David in Psalm 18 (see esp. vv. 24, 28, 30, 35, 46).

19:1-14 The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork

This poetic masterpiece combines appreciation for the testimony of the universe and its functioning with appreciation for the scriptures. The continuing evidences of the intelligent Creator seen in nature are symbolized, and the ennobling potentials of the laws and statutes of the Lord in the scriptures are summarized (Ps. 19:1-11). But in spite of such impressive testimonies, one may slip into insensitivity and sin; against that danger, David supplicated the Lord (Ps. 19:12-14).

One statement from this psalm is used in Handel's Messiah (chorus no. 39, G. Schirmer ed.), to characterize the ultimate spread of the gospel (Ps. 19:4, as quoted in Rom. 10:18).

20:1-9 The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob defend thee

This blessing invokes the help of the heavenly King and thanks him for salvation for his people and anointed leaders in warfare, literal or figurative. The last verse is two poetic lines in Hebrew (translation mine):

 O Lord, bring salvation;

O King, answer us when we call.

21:1-13 The king shall joy in thy strength, O Lord; and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice

As a sequel to Psalm 20, this psalm gives thanks for the Lord's answer to the supplications offered in that one. Some verses relate to King David but some to the future Messiah. The last half appears to anticipate the cleansing of the earth in preparation for the messianic reign.

22:1-31 My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

The Aijeleth Shahar of the superscription may have been a melody; it is not an instrument. It means "deer of dawn," or more properly, "doe of dawn," because the first word is feminine.

The opening words of Psalm 22 were quoted by Jesus on the cross, and other verses pertain to his suffering there (Ps. 22:7-8, 13-18). This psalm alludes to some things suffered by King David (Ps. 22:2-6, 19-25), but it is as if in his suffering he had a vision of the suffering of the "Son of David" who would come as the Savior; thus David spoke prophetically for him who would suffer all things. When Jesus quoted the first lines of this psalm, it was as if to announce that he was about to fulfill all of its prophecies (Ps. 22:1a-c, 7-8, 13-18). The psalm concludes with a prophecy of the millennial reign of the Lord on earth.

Handel's Messiah uses excerpts of Psalm 22 as a tenor recitative and a chorus (see chorus nos. 27 and 28; Ps. 22:7-8).

23:1-6 The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want

Psalm 23 is probably the best known of all the psalms, even among peoples beyond the Judaeo-Christian cultures.

The beauty and simplicity of the Hebrew is hard to translate into another language, but the rendition in the King James Version is a beautiful approximation. There are many layers of symbolism: thus, "thy rod and thy staff" is not just synonymous parallelism; the rod was a weapon, an aid in times of conflict; the staff, a walking stick useful in all times and ways of life.

In the last two verses, the poet saw himself as a guest of the divine Shepherd, which status he hoped to retain forever.

24:1-10 The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein

Psalm 24 is another well-known psalm. Verses 1 through 4 are used in a modern musical setting entitled "The King of Glory," by J. A. Parks, and verses 7 through 10 are used in Handel's Messiah as the stirring herald chorus (no. 31).

Historically, this psalm is thought to commemorate the establishment of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel by King David after he had conquered the Jebusites (2 Sam. 5:6-10; 6; 1 Chr. 11:4-9; 15). He built there a place for the ark of the covenant before the temple of Solomon was built. The festive entry of the ark therefore represented the coming of the Lord as "the King of glory."

The psalm's prophetic value is better known as the herald of the coming of the Messiah to earth to rule as Lord of lords and King of kings. That is to happen in the rebuilt Jerusalem and in the New Jerusalem in the western hemisphere (Ezek. 40-48; Ether 13:5-6; TG, "Jerusalem, New"; "Zion"). Proper qualifications for the citizens of that kingdom are given (Ps. 24:3-6). Renewal of the old earth is implied and its creation is recalled (Ps. 24:1-2; Gen. 1:2, 9). The "heads" of the gates will be high to admit the Messiah, the "King of glory," and the redeemed of Israel (Ps. 24:7-10, 7a; TG, "Jesus Christ, Second Coming").

Meanwhile, since the restoration of the gospel and the reorganization of the kingdom of the Lord on earth, all who desire to enter his kingdom may go up to a temple of God for worship and make covenants of eternity there, qualifying to do so by living in the way prescribed and by making the preparatory covenants.

25:1-22 Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. O my God, I trust in thee

Psalm 25 is an acrostic: each verse begins with a word whose initial letter is in the Hebrew alphabetical order, which, unfortunately, is lost in translation. That pattern makes this psalm a song of praise and supplication, covering the qualities and blessings the worshipper desires, as it were, from A to Z (in Hebrew, from aleph to tau). Several psalms have this alphabetic pattern: 34, 37, 111, 112, 119, and 145.

The twenty-two verses list blessings and petitions any humble person would like. Many virtues lauded here are commended also in other scriptures (Ps. 25 and fn.).

26:1-12 Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord

Psalm 26 is a prayer suitable for any person of integrity who tries to keep the commandments, shuns evil, and loves to go to the house of the Lord with other good people.

27:1-14 The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear?

Psalm 27 is reassuring to read, recite, or sing in any of the melodies to which it has been set. Anyone who loves the Lord has felt similar needs and rejoiced in blessings such as these. Light and salvation are the great gifts from the Savior.

28:1-9 Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock; be not silent

These are short prayers for help, thanks for help received, and appeals for the salvation of the Lord's people. The Lord is the only sure protection against "workers of iniquity, which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts."

29:1-11 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name

Worship and praise are expressed in this work of art. The power of the Lord is seen in a thunderstorm sweeping in from the Mediterranean Sea, over the coastline and up the highlands of northern Israel and southern Lebanon, where the forests and their animals respond to the tempest of lightning, thunder, wind, and rain. It ends in peace afterward, on land, on sea, and in the people's hearts.

The symbolism is cast in chiastic poetry; compare the content of the first verses with the last, the second with the next to last, and so on to the middle; alone at the apex, the Creator's awesome power is symbolized in the flash of lightning.

30:1-12 I will extol thee, O Lord; for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me

As a psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance, Psalm 30 recalls the many occasions in which the Lord had saved David, but its use as a "song at the dedication of the house of David" (superscription) is not corroborated in the books of Samuel or Chronicles.

Many can apply parts of this psalm to their own experience. All of it could be used at times to express relief and gratitude.

31:1-24 In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness

His times of suffering, illness, and persecution seem to be reflected in David's supplication for relief and in his gratitude for the rewards of his trust in the Lord. Some of the situations he suffered and some of his expressions of grief and gratitude are like those of other scripture writers (Ps. 31 and fn.). The words "Into thine hand I commit my spirit" were spoken by the Lord at his death on the cross (Ps. 31:5a).

The closing admonitions and encouragement are of value for the Saints or any other reader.

32:1-11 Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered

The word Maschil in the superscription may mean "making wise"; but the contents do not seem to be especially so directed, except that anyone who has repented and has been forgiven is wiser than he was. The Joseph Smith Translation (Ps. 32:1a) says "blessed are they whose transgressions are forgiven, and who have no sins to be covered," which may be taken as an exhortation to continual repentance, for who of us is without sin? This psalm is an excellent expression of gratitude for the redemption and atonement provided by our Savior.

David's gratitude for forgiveness of sins and transgressions confessed here cannot pertain to his sins against Bathsheba and Uriah, for they included murder, a sin not subject to forgiveness (1 Jn. 3:15; D&C 42:18; 132:39).

33:1-22 Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous

The theme of gratitude and praise to the Lord is resumed with enthusiastic admonishments to sing and play in praise of his name, his words, his righteousness and justice, his creative acts, and his counsel. He is praised as the God of all inhabitants of the earth: "Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord."

No defense against any enemy is sure except the help of the Lord, and the prayer concludes by seeking that help.

34:1-22 I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my mouth

Like Psalm 25, this is an alphabetic acrostic song, with twenty-two short sentences praising the Lord, giving thanks to him, and counseling to live his ways. Some verses have become proverbial (Ps. 34:13, 14, 19). Verse 20 was probably intended to complete the thought of verse 19; but by itself it is looked upon as prophetic (v. 20a).

35:1-28 Plead my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: fight against them that fight against me

Psalm 35 is another psalm of imprecation by David against his enemies, probably reflecting his years seeking refuge from King Saul. He sought the Lord's punishment for those who had laid snares for him (figuratively speaking), spoken as false witnesses against him, returned evil for good, or hypocritically mocked and hated him. Confident that the Lord perceives all injustices, David looked forward to His righteous judgment and justice.

36:1-12 The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes

The phrase "saith within my heart" is a Hebrew idiom meaning "it seems to me."

The first verse introduces this psalm. It continues with four verses about wickedness, which it contrasts with the reverence for God felt by the righteous in appreciation of his mercy, righteous judgment, loving kindness, and providence. It ends with a prayer against "workers of iniquity."

37:1-40 Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. . . . Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land

Dealing somewhat with the problem Job dealt with, this psalm admonishes patience under the oppression of seeming injustice and recommends faithful trust combined with good deeds, assuring that justice will ultimately prevail. Compare it with Psalm 73.

Many verses of Psalm 37 are constructed as proverbs with two parallel parts using either synonymous or antithetical clauses. Among them are many gems, for example, verses 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 39, and 40.

38:1-22 O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: . . . For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me

Anyone who has gone against some principle for a time and then finally committed something quite unacceptable may find comfort in Psalm 38, which speaks of remorse, repentance, and hope for redemption; read especially verses 4, 5, 13, 17, 21, and 22.

39:1-13 I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue

Jeduthun, the "chief Musician," may have been an earlier musician, a father, and the leader of a group of singers in the time of David (Ps. 39, superscription; 1 Chr. 16:41-42; 25:3, 6; 2 Chr. 29:14).

A sequel to Psalm 38, this one repeats some items and adds expressions of regret for delayed confessions and corrections. Anyone who has sinned and repented can identify with the supplications. Phrases from the psalm are set in the soul-searching German Requiem op. 45 by Johannes Brahms (Ps. 39:4, 7).

40:1-17 I waited patiently for the Lord; and he inclined unto me. . . . He brought me up also out of an horrible pit

Whatever the personal experiences of David had been to elicit this psalm of thanksgiving for a past rescue from evil and a supplication for future redemption, it is a pattern for similar prayers for most of us. For the "wonderful works" the Lord has done for those who have made Him their trust and for saving errant ones from the "horrible pit," the psalmist is also thankful. We too may feel delight in doing the Lord's will, in testifying of him, and teaching his ways as missionaries. Many would join David in praying for the future and ultimate deliverance. Parts of this psalm, especially the beginning, have also been set to music and sung in modern times.

41:1-13 Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble

The opening words of Psalm 41 and some that follow appear to have been spoken by David in almost Job-like agony. Regardless of his confessions and repentance, he had been suffering still because of his sins. His enemies, and even his "own familiar friend" in whom he trusted, had "lifted up his heel" against him. That was prophetic of what the Lord suffered on earth (Ps. 41:9; John 13:18). David knew the Lord would uphold him in integrity, and he deeply desired eternal redemption.

This psalm ends what is considered to be the first division of the book of Psalms; each division ends with a similar expression of praise and solemn amens (Ps. 41:13; 72:19).

42:1-11 As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God

On maschil, see commentary on Psalm 32.

The striking simile with which Psalm 42 opens expresses the yearning of a soul to return to the temple and to the presence of God. It begins a collection of worship songs identified with "the sons of Korah." Korah, a Levite descended through Kohath, died in a cataclysm following a rebellion, but his children did not die (Num. 16; 26:11). Their descendants were singers in the temple (2 Chr. 20:19; BD, "Korah"). Ten psalms are similarly identified: 42, 44-49, 85, 87, 88.

The poignant yearning of the author is portrayed, comparing his disquiet and depression in estrangement from the presence of God to the primeval deep (tehom; Gen. 1:2); but he acknowledges that the Lord's loving kindness could alleviate his suffering (Ps. 42:5-11).

43:1-5 O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles

This little psalm, the only one in this section without any superscription, is considered a continuation of Psalm 42. Ultimate trust in God demonstrates qualities of character in this writer, like unto the qualities of Job.

44:1-26 our fathers have told us, what work thou didst in their days, in times of old. . . . But thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth with our armies

On maschil, see commentary on Psalm 32. The theme statements from verses 1 and 9 of Psalm 44 lament that though the people of Israel knew of the power of God to do marvelous things for his people and they proclaimed him their king, he did not always respond to their needs and cries. So also in the present, people sometimes wonder why they have many afflictions, as in the history of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri and Illinois; but at the right time and in the right way, help is given according to God's wisdom.

45:1-17 I speak of the things . . . touching the king

More than a few questions have arisen regarding this "song of loves": why is it called a Maschil (wisdom psalm), what do shoshannim (lilies) have to do with its rendition, and why was it written by or for the sons of Korah? On Korah, see commentary on Psalm 42; on maschil, commentary on Psalm 32.

A Targum of Psalm 45 interpreted it as prophesying the King Messiah. Christians have followed that meaning, which is sustained by several expressions in verses 2, 6, and 17; problems for that interpretation arise, however, in verses 5, 8, 9, and 12. The "daughter" addressed could be the Lord's chosen people, and "daughter of Tyre" would represent other peoples giving homage (Ps. 45:10-15); but the origins and purposes of this psalm are not entirely clear.

46:1-11 God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble

Alamoth, in the superscription, means literally "maidens," but it is thought also to have designated a high-pitched instrument.

Another of the Korahite songs, this is a well-known and much-loved psalm. It expresses faith in God in poetic and beautiful phrases frequently cited and quoted, especially verses 1, 4, 5, 9, and 10. Compare the river and the city of verse 4 with those of the celestialized Jerusalem (Ps. 56:4-5; Rev. 22:1-3).

47:1-9 shout unto God with the voice of triumph. For the Lord most high . . . is a great King over all the earth

This psalm not only characterizes the Lord's kingship over creation in general but also prophetically anticipates his reign over the peaceful millennial world. If it seems ethnocentric (esp. Ps. 47:3-4), remember that the "people of the God of Abraham" include faithful converts from all nations—all families of the earth (Ps. 47:3-4, 9; Abr. 2:6-11). All peoples shall be under the government of the righteous, under the King Messiah.

Terrible means "causing awe" (Ps. 47:2).

48:1-14 Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion . . . the city of the great King

Continuing the messianic anticipations of the previous two Korahite psalms, this one sings of the glory of Zion, city of God's government over the future peaceful earth. The fear and retreat of unconverted peoples may reflect actions alluded to in latter-day prophecy also (Ps. 48:4-7; D&C 45:70).

49:1-20 They that trust in their wealth, . . . None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom

The themes expressed in verses 6 and 7 of Psalm 49 are developed by other declarations in the psalm, one of King David's expressions of his eternal hope for redemption from the grave through the power of God (cf. Ps. 16:10).

The contrapuntal theme is that wealth gives sufficient assurance in which to trust forever, for possessions in houses and lands would remain in the family forever (Ps. 49:6-11); but the nature of mortal life is transitory in contrast to the hope expressed by one who believes in the Redeemer (Ps. 49:15, 20).

50:1-23 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: . . . He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people

Psalm 50 is one of a dozen didactic (instructional) psalms attributed to or collected by Asaph and his descendants. Asaph was a Levite in the days of David and Solomon who was appointed to lead the musical parts of the worship services in the tabernacle and the temple; his descendants continued so to serve (BD, "Asaph"). The other songs of Asaph are Psalms 73 through 83.

In essence, Psalm 50 states that the righteous should not think they need do nothing more than offer their sacrifices, and the wicked who have covenanted falsely or given consent to immorality should not think God will overlook their evils. It is a sharp warning to any who tend to forget God but gives comforting promises to those whose worship and ways are right.

51:1-19 Have mercy upon me, O God, . . . blot out my transgressions. Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin

In this psalm David has asked for more than he could receive. For his adultery alone he could perhaps in time have made amends and received forgiveness, but murder—causing the death of his friend and neighbor Uriah, as related in 2 Samuel 11 and 12—is not forgivable (Ps. 51:14; D&C 42:18; 132:39; TG and BD, "Adultery"; "Murder"). His sins are somewhat overgeneralized and understated, for they were not only against God but also against Bathsheba and Uriah. Furthermore, by his deeds he gave "great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme"; and his lament that he was conceived in sin cannot excuse his deeds (2 Sam. 12:14; Ps. 51: 4-5; Moses 6:55).

Nevertheless, all that he said about the mercy and grace of God, extended in forgiveness and redemption, is beautiful and true for any who have sinned, felt in the burning of conscience the urgent need to repent, and accepted cleansing through repentance and receiving forgiveness. Their effective sacrifices are "a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart," and the divine Redeemer relieves all except the unpardonable sin (Ps. 51:17a-b).

52:1-9 Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? . . . Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; . . . Thou lovest evil more than good

On maschil, see commentary on Psalm 32.

The situation identified in the heading is history (1 Sam. 21-22), and the deeds of Doeg the Edomite were worse even than those reflected in this psalm. Nevertheless, this psalm could help evildoers learn more wisdom and help the innocent refrain from tasting evil.

53:1-6 The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God

Mahalath, meaning "sickness," may identify a tune for this spiritual lament. On maschil, see commentary on Psalm 32.

The use of the name God (Heb., Elohim) instead of Lord (Heb., JHVH) may have made this psalm suitable for public worship outside the temple.

In Psalm 53, a situation different from that in its counterpart, Psalm 14, results from God's intervention (Ps. 53:5; cf. Ps. 14:5-6; JST Ps. 14).

54:1-7 Hear my prayer, O God . . . For strangers are risen up against me

On neginoth, see commentary on Psalm 4; on maschil, commentary on Psalm 32.

The "strangers" who rose against David were the "Ziphims" of the superscription. They were inhabitants of "the wilderness of Ziph" who tried, for their own advantage, to betray David into the hands of Saul (1 Sam. 23:15, 19-29). An attack on Israel from another quarter diverted Saul from pursuing David in Ziph, and this psalm reflects David's relief.

Ziphim is the Hebrew plural; Ziphites would be the English plural.

55:1-23 For it was not an enemy that reproached me; . . . But . . . a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance

David's dismay at people who had been close to him turning against him foreshadows events of the later years of his reign (Ps. 55:12-14, 20-21; 2 Sam. 15-20). To David's credit, he was then more the poet than the soldier, and he mounted campaigns reluctantly against his son Absalom and against the rebel Sheba. Rather than turning vindictive, as Saul had done, David wrote psalms such as this one and through them and through prayer sought relief. With artful figures he expressed his yearning to get away from strife and insecurity.

Words of this psalm are combined with others (Ps. 55:22; 16:8; 108:4) in lyrics by Julius Schubring. Set to a beautiful melody by Felix Mendelssohn, the hymn is entitled "Cast Thy Burden upon the Lord" (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], no. 110).

56:1-13 Be merciful unto me, O God: . . . Mine enemies would daily swallow me up

The accompaniment for Psalm 56 is Jonath-elem-rechokim, an instrument or a tune called "Dove of silence of those far away." On michtam, see commentary on Psalm 16.

When David fled to Gath to escape Saul's pursuit, he found that his reputation from the days of Goliath made him suspect there (1 Sam. 21:10-15). It seemed that on every hand there was someone to swallow him up, and again he turned to God for salvation and security.

57:1-11 my soul trusteth in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge

Al-taschith means "destroy not" and may identify the tune to accompany this psalm. On michtam, see commentary on Psalm 16.

David hid from Saul in a cave just after the incident cited above (Ps. 56; cf. 1 Sam. 21:10-15; 22:1-9). In calamitous circumstances, he turned instinctively to God as a young bird returns to the wings of its mother. David's heart was steadfast in confidence in God, and he praised him for his mercy and power.

58:1-11 Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?

On the superscription, see commentary on Psalms 16 and 57.

Out of no one situation but a series of injustices he was suffering, David questioned the judgment of congregations and of individuals. He recalled much inequity and used fierce metaphors to ask God to reduce his enemies' power to do him harm, to cause them to melt or creep away. In the Middle East, thorns are burned under cooking pots as fuel, so this metaphor suggests that unjust words and actions, which hurt like thorns, will be removed by the Lord as by a whirlwind before they burn and brew further harm. When God exerts righteous judgment and avenges the righteous, they shall rejoice.

59:1-17 Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up against me

On the superscription, see commentary on Psalms 16 and 57. For historic background, see 1 Samuel 19:11-18.

Psalm 59 is another outcry for deliverance from enemies, workers of iniquity, and violent men. David hoped that all who caused him suffering for reason other than his own sins would be punished. Their overthrow would be easy for the Lord, and David was sure that divine action would precede any he might take. He anticipated some would die and some would wander, frustrated in their enterprise of evil. In relief, David sang thanks and praise to God.

The poetry of Psalms is typically done with few words in Hebrew; hence these songs are often terse, concise, even cryptic.

60:1-12 O God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast been displeased; O turn thyself to us again

On michtam, see commentary on Psalm 16.

The Hebrew shushan means "lily" and is used for any lily, including iris. The plural form of shushan is shoshannim. Shushan-eduth means "lily of testimony"; it seems to be intended to teach by a review of many occasions wherein the Lord had helped David. The situation described in the heading is one of conflict (cf. 2 Sam. 8:9-13). The point is plain: without the help of God, the people may be overcome. Times when help has been given are recalled, and prayers are raised for resumption of such help.

61:1-8 From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, . . .: lead me to the rock that is higher than I

On neginah, see its plural, neginoth, in commentary on Psalm 4. Rather than a cry in distress, this psalm is a hopeful and worshipful prayer for salvation from a higher source, for a return to the presence of God, and for preservation of self and progeny through his mercy and truth. For these blessings, David would praise the Redeemer forever and keep His covenants.

62:1-12 Truly my soul waiteth upon God: from him cometh my salvation

On the "chief Musician," Jeduthun, see commentary on Psalm 39.

With supreme confidence in the salvation of God, David saw those who would diverge from it as "a bowing wall" or "a tottering fence" and as hypocrites. The "rock" is frequently a metaphor for Deity, connoting firmness, strength, immovability, and dependability (Ps. 61:2; 62:2, 6, 7; TG, "Jesus Christ, Rock"). In his Rock, David trusted for help and for salvation.

63:1-11 O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is

David was in the wilderness of Judah, which is a dry and thirsty land, when he was fleeing from Absalom (2 Sam. 15:28-29); indeed he had dwelt in such an environment for many years previously. His desire for the spirit of God was like thirst, and he trusted in him for help and justice.

64:1-10 Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy

As David was asking for help, whether against earthly enemies or against spiritual adversaries, so may we also.

65:1-13 O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come

Psalm 65 is a psalm and a lyrical song.

Zion ("Sion") is God's dwelling, and all who are ultimately redeemed to dwell there will sing his praises. All will come to the true God in prayer. All who come unto him, all whose iniquities have been purged away and who are therefore chosen by him, will dwell in his courts. By awesome ("terrible") things in righteousness, the God of our salvation will restore confidence. He who created all, controls all, and will make earth productive and life abundant for his people.

66:1-20 Come and see the works of God: he is terrible in his doing toward the children of men

Psalm 66 is a lyrical song.

The Hebrew word translated joyful noise means "an outcry in joy or need." In King James English, terrible was adequate to translate the Hebrew, but its connotations make it inaccurate in our day; awe-inspiring is more suitable now (Ps. 66:3, 5).

Because of all the awe-inspiring works of God, all shall worship him and sing to the honor of his name. God's miraculous saving of Israel at the Red Sea is hinted at, and his overruling power is proclaimed; therefore the people are invited to acknowledge him as the sustainer of life. All who have been tested, tried, and proved faithful will be saved. Then all may go to the house of worship and to the temple with their offerings and fulfill their vows.

Psalm 66 concludes with a testimony.

67:1-7 That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations

Psalm 67 is a lyrical song.

On neginoth, see commentary on Psalm 4.

The theme of this excellent psalm, stated in the second verse, is missionary work; it is the essence of the original call of Abraham. He and his seed are to minister unto all families of all nations; they are to bring knowledge of the name, blessings, and power of the only true and living God (TG, "Abrahamic Covenant"). Thereby all nations shall be blessed. This psalm is a prayer for God's blessing to help the faithful fulfill that mission. Then all nations may sing for joy, when God shall govern the nations and all shall worship him.

68:1-35 Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him flee before him. . . . But let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God

Psalm 68 is a lyrical song.

The conversion of all peoples is anticipated in this psalm as well (cf. Ps. 67); the enemy of righteousness shall melt away and the Lord shall reign over all (Ps. 68:4;Heb. JAH, short form of Jehovah). He will bring justice and salvation. Historical manifestations of his works are cited, and the great company of missionaries who publish his word in preparation for his coming areanticipated (Handel, Messiah, no. 37).

Metaphors express the prophecy of the Lord's subduing the earth by ascending "on high" via the cross and the Resurrection, whereby he "received gifts for men" in the Atonement so that all may come unto him (Handel, Messiah, no. 36). He is "the God of salvation," for unto him belong "the issues from death," meaning all who arise from death. He is the Savior, Eve's "Seed," who did "bruise" or "wound" the head of the adversary ( Gen. 3:15; Ps. 68:19-20, 21a).

In less lovely terms are described the final wars in which right, personified as Israel, conquers all, and even such as Egypt and Ethiopia worship the Lord (Ps. 68:31a). All kingdoms of the earth shall sing praises unto the Lord when his people shall have fulfilled their mission to bring blessings to all peoples in all nations.

69:1-36 I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me

On Shoshannim, see commentary on Psalm 45.

David's cry for help continues, but then in his own trouble, he seems to have envisioned the Savior's rejection by his people, his cleansing the temple, and his sufferings through the Crucifixion (Ps. 69:7-21 and fn.). David called down justice upon his adversaries; a phrase he used was later applied to Judas Iscariot (Ps. 69:25 combined with Ps. 109:8 in Acts 1:20). David humbly prayed for salvation "on high" along with the humble and poor, and he looked to the time when Zion shall be redeemed and the cities of Judah be built, so that the seed of the Lord's servants may inherit it and "they that love his name shall dwell therein" (Ps. 69:29-36 and fn.).

70:1-5 Make haste, O God, to deliver me; . . . and let such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified

Continuing the supplications of Psalm 69, this psalm, whose purpose is "to bring to remembrance," also looks forward urgently to the Lord's salvation and deliverance.

71:1-24 In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion. . . . Cast me not off in the time of old age

Reminiscent of his prayers for forgiveness (Ps. 32; 51), this song from David's old age eloquently tells of his yearning to retain the comfort of the presence of the Lord and repeats his hope for redemption (Ps. 71:9, 18). Again, he may have hoped for more than he could be given, in view of what he had done to his friend Uriah and his wife Bathsheba (Ps. 71:21; 51:14; D&C 42:18; 132:39).

72:1-20 Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king's son

The "king" and the "king's son" was Solomon, son of David, as the superscription says; but prophetic elements in this prayer apply really to the ultimate "Son of David," the Messiah. It is evident in retrospect that Solomon's reign did not achieve the ideal conditions and the glory described here (Ps. 72:4, 7-8, 12, 14). They will be achieved only by the divine Messiah.

Psalm 72 ends with a doxology typical of the ending of each of the five sections of the book of Psalms. An added verse announces the end of "the prayers of David," but that seems to pertain only to the prayers in this section, for another prayer is labeled with his name (Ps. 86) and several more are labeled

"A psalm of David."

73:1-28 Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped

On the superscription, see Psalm 50. The theme of Psalm 73 is a familiar one in the book of Psalms and in the book of Job. More than half its verses describe common evidences that the wicked are not immediately punished by God for wickedness, and some do prosper in this world. Some even question whether God knows what is going on (Ps. 73:3-16). Only in the sanctuary (the temple) could the psalmist gain assurance about the end of the wicked and understand the final justice of God; then he felt humbled and ashamed of his premature judgment. As a result he expressed a strong resolution to trust in God, who like a father holds one by the hand, gives guidance and counsel, and afterward rewards one in glory. The psalm ends with a trusting and comfortable commitment to "the Lord God" (Heb., Adonai JHVH).

74:1-23 O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?

On the superscription, see Psalm 50.

A national cataclysm, such as the overthrow and captivity of Judah by Babylon, is portrayed in this lament (Ps. 74:3-4, 6-8, 10). After the death of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, the people in captivity, as well as any left back home, were without a prophet (Ps. 74:9-11; cf. Lam. 2:3, 9), although Daniel was in the court of the kings of Babylon and Persia and did pray for the return of Judah when the time for it came (Jer. 25:12; Dan. 9:2). But despite impatience for relief, the author could still express great faith in God's powers, trusting that He cared for His people and their covenant mission; he knew God would not let them pray in vain nor let the enemy triumph.

75:1-10 Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, . . . for that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare

Psalm 75 is a psalm and a lyrical song. On Al-taschith, see commentary on Psalm 57; on Asaph, commentary on Psalm 50.

After the opening declaration of thanks to God, the author quotes words of God regarding His coming judgment and His universal control. The psalm cites confidence in the power of God and contrasts it with the foolishness of the wicked, who lift up their "horn" (prate about their own power). The "cup" in the hand of God symbolizes His rewards and punishments. The psalm concludes with praise for the Lord and assurance that the wicked shall perish and the righteous win.

76:1-12 In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel. In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion

On neginoth, see commentary on Psalm 4; on Asaph, commentary on Psalm 50.

This psalm of praise and thanks alludes to times when the enemy was repulsed and the righteous saved. It speaks of the early Salem of Melchizedek and relates it to the ultimate Zion. When the Lord shall arise to save the meek of the earth at the end of times, the wrath of man shall turn to praise or be restrained. Then all will covenant with God and worship him whose power is awesome; he will vanquish princes and kings.

77:1-20 I cried unto God with my voice, . . . and he gave ear unto me. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord

On Jeduthun, see commentary on Psalm 39; on Asaph, commentary on Psalm 50.

In the first half of Psalm 77, the psalmist expresses despair and dismay in a time of trouble, when help seems not to be coming, and then makes a humble confession of inner infirmity. In the second half, he speaks of the works of old, the wonders God has always done in bringing relief, and sings praises to Him.

78:1-72 Give ear, O my people, to my law . . . Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us

On Maschil, see commentary on Psalm 32; on Asaph, commentary on Psalm 50.

A review of Israel's history forms the body of this didactic psalm, touching vital events from the "testimony in Jacob" to the appointment of David, but most of the details pertain to the Lord's hand in events in Egypt and the wilderness. It condemns Israel's failure to appreciate his help and be loyal to him.

The Lord gave to his people his law (Heb.,Torah, "guidance," "instruction") and certified it by his testimony (Heb.,'eduth, "witness"). The law and the testimony were to be perpetuated from generation to generation so that Israel might excel over earlier, rebellious generations. Yet there was infidelity in "Ephraim," the birthright tribe, and among others who neither kept the covenant nor obeyed the law. Ungrateful for all the miracles of deliverance by the plagues in Egypt and the sustenance in the wilderness the Lord had provided, they were punished as in the years of wandering.

The Lord led them to the border of the "sanctuary," the promised land, and helped them enter the land by going up with them against the enemy; and they divided it for their inheritance. Yet they "tried" and provoked the Lord and kept not his law nor remembered his testimony; therefore, he forsook the sanctuary established at Shilo and abandoned the leadership of Ephraim there. Because of the apostasy and decay of the tribes of northern Israel, he let them be taken into captivity. He retained Judah, the house of David, and established headquarters in "mount Zion," where he maintained and prospered the people of Judah for a time.

The purpose of the psalm, at the time it was written, may have been to teach and warn the people of Judah in later years to be true to the covenant and the law, so that they might return from Babylon and be saved for their destiny.

79:1-13 O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps

On Asaph, see commentary on Psalm 50.

Psalm 79 does not continue the history of Judah from where Psalm 78 left off; but like Psalm 74, it laments the Babylonian invasion and the destruction of the country of Judah, the city of Jerusalem, and the temple. The people in their misery prayed for forgiveness and mercy and asked that the horrors of destruction, death, scorn, unburied bodies, and captivity imposed by "the heathen" be avenged.

80:1-19 O Shepherd of Israel, . . . Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh stir up thy strength, and come and save us

On Shoshannim-Eduth, see the commentary on Psalm 60; on Asaph, the commentary on Psalm 50.

Psalm 80 seems to have been a prayer in the temple at the ark of the covenant on behalf of some of the tribes of Israel when the Assyrian invasion was threatening in the decade before 721 B.C. Poetic references to God's transplanting Israel from Egypt and cultivating her in the promised land are followed by supplications of help for the people once chosen. The two images of God, as Shepherd of Israel and as keeper of the vineyard, characterize the intimate relationship of the people with God in better times in Israel.

81:1-16 Sing aloud unto God our strength: . . . Blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed

On Gittith, see commentary on Psalm 8; on Asaph, commentary on Psalm 50.

Psalm 81 urges the people to resume proper worship, remembering the Israelites who went into Egypt in the time of Joseph and later came out by the hand of the Lord. The poet spoke for the Lord, reviewing his help in the Exodus, his law given them, their failure to respond, and his abandonment of them to wickedness and exile. The psalm ends with a review of what the Lord could have done with Israel, thus implying what he could do in their release from exile. Traditionally, this psalm has been used in celebration of the Feast of Tabernacles because of its references to the exile and the return, which that feast celebrates.

82:1-8 God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; . . . How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the . . . wicked

On Asaph, see commentary on Psalm 50.

Essential theology is found in this little psalm. Its purpose is to show that God is the ideal judge and that human judges, because they are of divine parentage, should follow his example. If they do not, they perish as do earthly princes. The poet appealed to men to improve and appealed to God to execute justice and rule the nations.

Recall Jesus' use of Psalm 82:6 against his assailants who accused him of blasphemy in claiming to be the "Son of God" (John 10:32-37; cf. Gen. 1:26-27; Luke 3:38). His citation of the fatherhood of God and sonship of man as "written in your law" implies that all the inspired books are part of the Torah.

83:1-18 Keep not thou silence, O God: . . . For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult

Psalm 83 is a lyrical song. On Asaph, see Psalm 50.

This last of the psalms of Asaph is another cry for God to defend himself and his reputation by defending his people. All of the neighboring and related peoples are listed—descendants of Esau, Ishmael, Lot, Hagar, and others of the inveterate enemies of Israel. A review of previously vanquished enemies follows, with the fate they suffered because they sought to possess Israel, the "habitations of God" (Ps. 83:12; houses is a mistaken translation). Various catastrophes were invoked upon them.

The one positive result was that other peoples might seek the Lord and know that he whose name is Jehovah is over all the earth. This name is rarely transliterated in full, but it is done here to make the meaning precise. Usually the word Lord is substituted (commentary on Gen. 2:4).

84:1-12 How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

On Gittith, see commentary Psalm 8; on the sons of Korah, commentary on Psalm 42.

Rendered as "How lovely is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts," stanzas 1, 2, and 4 of this psalm are adapted to the beautiful German Requiem by Brahms (op. 45). This refreshing and inspiring Korahite psalm expresses the comfort of being spiritually in harmony with the Lord and physically in his temple. It is indeed better to be a doorkeeper in the house of God than to dwell in the homes of the wicked.

85:1-13 Lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy land: . . . Turn us, O God of our salvation

This psalm of the sons of Korah speaks of the early return of Judah from the Babylonian captivity, for which the people were grateful; but they needed God's further favor to strengthen them for the arduous tasks of reconstruction. It expresses confidence in God's favor and help and poetically describes the cooperation between earth and heaven.

In the latter-day restoration of the gospel, literal fulfillment of prophecy was seen in the retrieval of inspired scriptures from their vault in the earth and companion revelations being sent from heaven to establish God's kingdom on earth again (Ps. 85:11a-b).

86:1-17 Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy

On this additional prayer of David, see commentary on Psalm 72.

Psalm 86 expresses dismay at sins within and enemies without. The word holy does not quite convey the concept of the Hebrew word chasid, which connotes "loving kindness." The whole psalm is an expression of deep love and comfort in the presence of God. The request to be taught right ways, with a resolution to walk therein, is exemplary; they need only to be followed by equivalent actions. But David still needed help against proud and violent enemies, from whom only God could save his soul.

87:1-7 The Lord loveth the gates of Zion. . . . Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God

Psalm 87 is a poetic prophecy of the messianic age, when the Lord shall reign in Zion, the city of God, over those born there and those who know him, though they were born in the lands of former enemies—Rahab (Egypt), Babylon, Philistia, Tyre, and Ethiopia.

88:1-18 O Lord God of my salvation, . . . Let my prayer come before thee

Psalm 88 is a lyrical song. On the sons of Korah, see commentary on Psalm 42; on Mahalath Leannoth, "sickness to oppress," commentary on Psalm 53; on Maschil, commentary on Psalm 32. Heman may be associated with Ethan the Ezrahite referred to in 1 Kings 4:31.

This psalm is more like the bitter laments of Job; even the suggested accompaniment was doleful. Part of the author's depression seems to have come from his feeling that the Lord brought him to his misery and that his prayers had not been answered; moreover, his friends, acquaintances, and loved ones had been put far from him. In spite of all, however, he did attribute "lovingkindness" and the power of salvation unto the Lord.

89:1-52 I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations

Ethan the Ezrahite began at the opposite end of the spectrum of mood and spirit from Heman the Ezrahite of Psalm 88, but they each wrote a Maschil, a psalm to engender wisdom. After the opening verses of praise for the Lord's mercies (Heb., lit., "the loving kindness of Jehovah"), the author quoted promises made to David's seed to be established forever (Ps. 89:1-4a). Because the Messiah was to be of that lineage, the continuing words of praise are appropriate to his creative and controlling powers.

Ethan spoke of blessings to the people who shall hear the joyful sound heralding the Lord and walk in the light of His countenance. The psalmist recounted more of the promises made to David and his seed; and though it is evident that some were fulfilled by David and his people when they were worthy, the truly glorious promises remain to be fulfilled by the Messiah.

David himself sinned and so did his descendants; for their sins, all Judah and their king had been "cast off and abhorred" by the Babylonian conquest; land, people, and king had been covered with shame. Hence, the psalmist asked "How long, Lord? wilt thou hide thyself for ever?" He prayed urgently for the time to be short until there would be an outpouring of loving kindness and an end to the time of reproach.

The doxology and amen close both this psalm and the third part of the book of Psalms.

90:1-17 Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations. . . . from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God

The superscription attributes this psalm to Moses. Some of the concepts and phrasing are comparable to poetic chapters of Deuteronomy, such as the song of Moses and his final blessings (Deut. 32, 33). A hymn by Isaac Watts, "O God, Our Help in Ages Past" (Hymns, 1985, no. 31), was inspired by it.

Psalm 90 speaks of the Creation and of man's brief mortal life. Man's years are as a moment to God; his iniquities may cause his sudden removal by God's justice, or His anger. The psalm asks that humankind may seek for wisdom and that God may have mercy upon us to bring us to joy after affliction. It asks that we may come to know God's work and glory, that his beauty will be upon us, and that the work of our hands will be blessed (Ps. 90:12-17, 16a).

91:1-16 I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust

This song of trust in the Lord is a sequel to Psalm 90. It begins with assurances to those who stay close to the Lord and resolve to trust in him for protection. Then the Lord's protection is exemplified in easily understood symbols and images. Satan used one of these promises of protection in tempting Jesus (Ps. 91:11-12; Luke 4:10).

The Savior's promises to all who set their love upon him include the blessings of deliverance and salvation (Ps. 91:14-16).

92:1-13 It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O most High

The first third of this Sabbath worship psalm and song expresses praise and appreciation for the help and good given by the Lord to the righteous. The second part contrasts with it the way the "brutish" and the wicked respond to the Lord and the way he affects their lives. The third segment tells of ways the Lord helps the righteous overcome their enemies and increases their power so that they may flourish and grow in the courts of the Lord and bear fruit even in old age—all of which demonstrate the firmness and uprightness of the Lord.

Figuratively, "horn" symbolizes power; righteous strength can be increased by commitment through an anointing, as implied in verse 10; this concept pertains to latter-day anointings also.

93:1-5 The Lord reigneth, he is clothed with majesty

Ascending parallelism is used to build to two climaxes: the first portrays the Lord's creative power and the second shows the Creator mightier than the mightiest things he created. The conclusion affirms that all witnesses to those truths are very sure and that holiness characterizes his "house."

94:1-23 Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud

Psalm 94 begins with the observation that until the Lord reigns everywhere, wickedness and injustice do at times triumph; this psalm is another cry for divine justice. Some think that the Lord does not see or heed; but the Creator who made eyes and ears knows, and his chastening and instruction in the law are therapeutic. The psalm concludes with gratitude and praise for divine help, mercy, inspiration, protection, and eventual elimination of evil.

95:1-11 O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation

Here begins a series of six psalms with the same purpose as Psalm 93—to assemble worshippers and sing praises to the Lord.

"Let us make a joyful noise" means simply "shout joyously" to recognize the greatness of the true God and his power over everything. People ought not harden their hearts against his truths, nor seek to test or prove him as did the generation that provoked him and consequently had to wander forty years in the wilderness.

96:1-13 O sing unto the Lord a new song . . . all the earth

Only the Lord deserves praise; all the gods of other nations are only idols. Therefore all kindreds ought to worship the Lord "in the beauty of holiness"—a lovely phrase and concept. The time will come when the world shall know that the Lord reigns; then heaven and earth will rejoice—even the seas, the fields, and the woods. The Lord will come to judge with righteousness and truth.

97:1-12 The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice

All of the phenomena of nature proclaim the Lord's power and goodness; hence, they who worship idols must surely be confounded, and the idols be cast down before him. The earth is cleansed by fire before his coming. Worshippers of God can be glad, love him, hate evil, be enlightened and preserved, and give thanks.

98:1-9 O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things

Continuing the series begun with Psalm 95, which sings about the Creator and the Shepherd, this psalm sings of the Lord's victory in providing salvation "in the sight of the heathen"—salvation to be seen in "all the ends of the earth." All creation is invited to join in acclaim of his salvation and his righteous judgment.

99:1-9 The Lord reigneth; let the people tremble

In proclaiming the Lord's reign, Psalm 93 speaks of his majesty; Psalm 97 invites all earth to rejoice; and Psalm 99 invites reverence for his awe-inspiring ("terrible") name.

The judgment which the divine King loves establishes justice, equity, and righteousness.

Historic exemplars—Moses, Aaron, and Samuel—are mentioned among others with whom the Lord communicated and whom he blessed or punished as needed. Hence, all are admonished to worship him at his temple (Heb., lit., "his holy hill"), for he is "holy" (Heb., qadash, "set apart, consecrated").

100:1-5 Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all ye lands. Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing

Psalm 100 is another "psalm of praise," with an invitation to all the earth to "shout unto the Lord," serve him happily, and worship him with exultant singing. The rest of this well-known psalm reminds all to be thankful that he made us and provides for us; he is merciful and good to us; and his truths are eternal.

101:1-8 I will sing of mercy and judgment: . . . I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou come unto me?

Psalm 101 is another "Psalm of David." Like so many other Davidic psalms, it contains a host of righteous resolutions by a ruler who hopes to be worthy of the Lord's help in ridding his house and the land of evil.

102:1-28 Hear my prayer, O Lord, . . . For my days are consumed like smoke

This psalm is a Job-like supplication in the first half, speaking not only of a time of personal suffering but also a time of national suffering in exile when Israel longed to return to Zion. It is a prayer that the people shall be gathered together and shall serve the Lord in his glory. Then the seed of the Lord's servants shall be established in his presence.

103:1-22 Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name

Psalm 103 is yet another "Psalm of David."

Bless is used to translate the Hebrew barak, which means "to kneel" to extend adoration, good will, or benefits. Usually it is God who blesses mankind; but the concept that man can also bless God appears occasionally. This psalm and the next start with the same exhortation to adore and show appreciation to God.

Psalm 103 lists many aspects of the Lord's benevolence toward humanity, not only throughout the brief mortal life but throughout eternity. To those who "keep his covenant" and "remember his commandments to do them," mercy and righteous justice are extended forever. The psalm concludes with an exhortation to all the Lord's angels, all his hosts and ministers, and all his works in all parts of his dominion to "bless the Lord."

104:1-35 Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great

For the meaning of the admonition to "bless" the Lord, see commentary on Psalm 103.

Psalm 104 expresses adoration of the Lord for beauty, goodness, and functional practicality shown in all nature. It is one of the best such expressions in all scripture. It would be good for reading in "the woods and forest glades," or "from lofty mountain grandeur," as the hymn "How Great Thou Art" asserts (Hymns, 1985, no. 86). This psalm speaks of God's functions in creation, providing water, causing food to grow, establishing the changing seasons, providing day and night; indeed, it acclaims his making and controlling all things of earth and sea. For all these, any singer of this psalm can praise the Lord, meditate in sweet thought, avoid sinfulness, bless the Lord, and thank him.

105:1-45 O give thanks unto the Lord; call upon his name: . . . sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works

Psalm 105 is the first of three longer psalms that review major incidents from the history of the seed of Abraham through Israel as reasons for giving thanks to the Lord. This one advocates not only giving thanks and praise to the Lord but also glorying in his holy name and seeking for his strength. And of course, recognition of the Lord's goodness redounds to one's own good.

The blessings are listed mainly in chronological order, with some variations, and are plain enough to be easily recognized, beginning with the covenant of the Lord with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Some historical transitions are abrupt as the mode and the purposes of bringing Joseph into Egypt are reviewed. Israel's entry into Egypt and the developments there are briefly covered. Then the mission of Moses in the negotiations with Pharaoh, the plagues, the Exodus, and the beginnings of the wilderness wandering are presented. Note the emphasis on the benevolence of the Lord, with a little about the weaknesses of the people.

106:1-48 Praise ye the Lord. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: . . . Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord?

Although this psalm continues from Psalm 105 with more history, the intent of Psalm 106 is to remind the Israelites of past sins they had committed despite the Lord's blessings and to urge them to repentance, good behavior, and fidelity, with assurances of the Lord's future help. Comments on divine help in Egypt to free the Israelites and help them cross the Red Sea are followed with reminders of their ungrateful rebellions and infidelity. Also, in moving to the promised land, the Israelites often failed to obey. The psalm reviews the many times they failed, suffered oppression, repented, and received deliverance. Finally, the end of the psalm asks for another deliverance from bondage "among the heathen." That is followed by a doxology that concludes this psalm and the fourth section of the book of Psalms.

107:1-43 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so

Whatever the basis was for dividing the book of Psalms into five sections, it was obviously not subject matter or type of literature; indeed, the division seems somewhat arbitrary, for this first psalm in the fifth section continues the review of Israelite history begun in Psalm 105. Psalm 107 covers the gathering of the Israelites in Egypt from all directions and details their wandering in the wilderness after their deliverance from Egypt.

From time to time the psalmist exclaimed, "Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness" (Ps. 107:8, 15, 21, 31). After each outcry, he presented another aspect of God's goodness and contrasted it with man's failure to show appreciation by behaving with consistent goodness. Typically, "fools" among mortals do badly and could do better. "They that go down to the sea in ships" feel awe and a need for the Lord; hence, they respond better to him. Another wish that humankind would praise the Lord and obey him is amplified by allusions to his helping Israel in the wilderness and establishing them in the promised land. A final generalization contrasts "princes" with "the poor."

108:1-13 O God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my glory

This little song of praise and supplication repeats parts of previous psalms (Ps. 108:1a, 6b). No doubt it is attributed to David because the earlier psalms were. Its essence is that the worshipper's "heart is fixed" (steadfast) in its resolve to praise and thank God that His beloved people will receive help in trouble and finally "do valiantly."

109:1-31 Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise; For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue

Reminiscent also of previous psalms of David (Ps. 25; 69), Psalm 109 is a prayer for help against adversaries who are difficult to combat, especially those who repay "evil for good" (Ps. 109:3-4a). Verse 8 of this psalm is combined with verse 25 of Psalm 69 to describe in Acts 1:20 the punishment of Judas Iscariot. Requests for punishment may not seem to be suitable matters for ritual; vengeance is truly best left to the Lord. The admonition "Let them [the wicked] curse, but bless thou" sums up the message of this psalm.

110:1-7 The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool

King David prophesied of the Messiah in this psalm, calling him a priest "after the order of Melchizedek" (Ps. 110:1a-e, 4b-d; Heb. 5:6; 7:17, 21). Because the Lord (Jehovah) spoke this promise to King David, He was obviously speaking of His own role on earth and His own ultimate victories over all enemies.

David understood that the priesthood of Melchizedek is different from that of Aaron; and we understand from modern revelation that the true name of the Melchizedek Priesthood is "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God" (D&C 107:1-4). Melchizedek means "King of Righteousness"; thus the name is doubly appropriate.

Psalm 110 is difficult to interpret because of the names and because of the description of future bloody victories in the destruction of kings, resulting in many "dead bodies," but the psalm may speak symbolically of the demise of the kingdoms of this world and the perishing of all the wicked.

111:1-10 Praise ye the Lord. . . . The works of the Lord are great

Psalm 111 is the first of the Hallelujah Psalms, which comprise Psalms 111 through 113 in one set and Psalms 146 through 150 in another. Each begins with the Hebrew word hallelujah, meaning "praise ye Jehovah."

Three varieties of the Lord's "works" described in Psalm 111 are more specific in Hebrew: his "deeds," his "work," and his "wonders," each of which is exemplified. The poet started each clause with a different letter of the Hebrew alphabet, and all twenty-two letters are used in the ten verses. This acrostic pattern suggests that the Lord's works in the world for the good of his people cover the whole spectrum from aleph to tav (from A to Z).

112:1-10 Praise ye the Lord. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in his commandments

The second of this trio of Hallelujah Psalms praises the Lord for blessings to his "seed," people made righteous by his righteous ways. These also are arranged in an alphabetic, acrostic pattern. The scope of these psalms may be seen in the variety of topics footnoted.

113:1-9 Praise ye the Lord. Praise, O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord

The third of this set of Hallelujah Psalms starts with a triple entreaty and ends with a hallelujah. The reasons for praising the Lord are briefly generalized and then particularized with examples.

114:1-8 When Israel went out of Egypt

Perhaps the most familiar subject of praise and cause for worship in Israel was the historic rescue from Egypt. Psalm 114 points to that event as the beginning of the nation of Israel—later two nations, Judah and Israel. It poetically portrays the drama of seas, mountains, and rocks responding to the controlling powers of God.

115:1-18 Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake

The contrast of the living God to idols and idol worshippers to worshippers of the true God is artistically done, as is the summary of idols and their makers. That leads to a threefold exhortation to all Israel, to the priestly tribe of Aaron, and to all those who reverence the true God to trust in him. Reassurance through history and testimony is presented.

The closing verses urge people to worship the Lord now and not to put it off until their bodies are dead and in the grave, where they cannot speak. Latter-day revelation assures us, however, that "the dead" can praise him in the spirit world (Ps. 115:17a; D&C 138:14-19).

The psalm ends with a resolution to "bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore." The last phrase is "Praise the Lord"—in Hebrew, hallelujah.

116:1-19 I love the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications. Because he hath inclined his ear unto me

Psalm 116 expresses gratitude for relief from some of the common problems of life—sorrow at death, pain of conscience, disillusionment. But because there is relief through communication with the Lord and through his merciful attention to "the simple," a profusion of sincere expressions of gratitude follows—which many readers can echo. Some verses would be appropriate meditations during sacrament services (Ps. 116:12-14). The psalm ends with hallelujah.

117 O praise the Lord, all ye nations

This briefest of the psalms anticipates fulfillment of the mission of Abraham's seed, when all peoples in all nations shall worship the Lord. All will at last appreciate God's merciful kindness and truth.

118:1-29 O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: because his mercy endureth for ever

Psalm 118 expresses gratitude to the Lord and confidence in him, as do many others; it may have been the psalm Jesus and the Twelve sang at the Last Supper (Matt. 26:30). Note how many verses apply to that situation.

Two other connections with New Testament events are also evident. One is the phrase "Save now" (Ps. 118:25), which translates a compound word in Hebrew, hoshia' na, meaning "O save us now"; it is anglicized to Hosanna. Recall the Hosanna Shout at the triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem (Matt. 21:9; Mark 11:9-10; John 12:12-13). The second is the passage "the stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner" (Ps. 118:22), which is quoted with reference to Jesus (Luke 20:17; Acts 4:11; 1 Pet. 2:6-7).

Psalm 118 may have been composed at the time the second temple was dedicated, at the time of Haggai and Zechariah, and could have been sung at the Feast of Dedication (Hanukkah) in the time of the Maccabees. It could well be sung in temple dedications in our day: "the Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation" (Ps. 118:14). This psalm begins and ends with one acclaim: "his mercy endureth for ever."

119:1-176 The twenty-two, eight-verse segments of this long psalm are addressed separately in this commentary

Only one psalm separates the shortest, Psalm 117, from the longest, Psalm 119, which is an acrostic poem with eight verses for each of the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The theme of this long psalm is that blessings follow those who obey the law, the statutes, and the testimonies of the Lord and who live in reverence before him (cf. Ps. 19:8-10). One Hebrew letter and its name appears above each eight-verse segment.

119:1-8 ALEPH [pronounced AL-eff]. . . Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord

The first two verses are parallel statements of the theme: "Blessed are they that keep his testimonies." The Hebrew word ntzr, here translated keep, means "to watch over, protect, preserve." Thus should one's own testimony, born of the witnesses of the Lord, be treasured and nourished while one walks in the way of the Lord.

119:9-16 BETH [pronounced baet] . . . Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?

The answer to this universally useful question is simple, but its ramifications are profound: by watching and guarding himself, and by obeying the Lord's word from the scriptures and the prophets.

119:17-24 GIMEL [pronounced GIE-mel] . . . Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word

The simple sweetness of the supplications that follow befit a person desiring to be righteous.

119:25-32 DALETH [pronounced DAH-let] . . . My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word

There is physical, moral, and spiritual symbolism in this statement of man's being of this earth-dust but yearning for heavenly sublimation (Ps. 119:25b; TG, "Man, Natural, Not Spiritually Reborn"; "Man, New, Spiritually Reborn"). The psalmist expressed his conversion to the Lord's ways in the remaining verses, using the same word (Heb., davaq) to declare that he had "stuck unto thy testimonies" as he had formerly "cleav[ed] to the dust," or world (Ps. 119:25, 31).

119:33-40 HE [pronounced hey] . . . Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it unto the end

The worshipper prays for understanding, guidance, protection, understanding—to keep true to the Lord's ways, for which he had longed and which he adopted.

119:41-48 VAU [pronounced vav] . . . Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according to thy word

It truly is by the Lord's grace we are saved (Ps. 119:41; cf. 2 Ne. 25:23); hence all we can do may well be done with gratitude, having been set "at liberty" (Ps. 119:45; John 8:32; Gal. 5:1). Then we will bear testimony of the blessing by word and deed, as promised in the concluding verses.

119:49-56 ZAIN [pronounced ZAH-yin] . . . Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope

Word is by extension message and in context here, promise. The remaining verses testify that the petitioner has remembered the Lord's good promise and has maintained hope through afflictions, derisions, and horrors in the course of his life's pilgrimage. Throughout all he was comforted, as the Lord promised.

119:57-64 CHETH [pronounced khaet] . . . Thou art my portion, O Lord: . . . The earth . . . is full of thy mercy

In life's vicissitudes one may ask for the Lord's mercy when trying to repent; and any who have had that experience may well also have awakened "at midnight" and given thanks for his mercy in judgment. There is security in being a companion of others who "fear" (revere) the Lord.

119:65-72 TETH [pronounced taet] . . . Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word

He who went astray is grateful for the affliction that helped him cease going astray and begin to learn the law. That theme is reiterated, describing how most mortals feel as they strive to become just and moral (Ps. 119:67, 71). The proud forge lies and have unreceptive hearts.

119:73-80 JOD [pronounced yud; rhymes with could] . . . give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments

It is a process to learn the commandments and become "sound in [the] statutes"; hence, it is comforting to have company along the way. One achieving soundness need not be ashamed.

119:81-88 CAPH [pronounced caf] . . . My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word

Unjust persecution of humble followers of the Lord by "proud" adversaries may make their souls almost faint; but hope for divine salvation quickens (makes alive again) their testimony through the grace of the Lord's loving kindness.

119:89-96 LAMED [pronounced LAH-med] . . . Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction

The thesis of this segment appears in the middle of it. Through the Lord's word, faithfulness, and ordinances, the afflicted one learned the law and will never forget it. He now belongs to the Lord, who will save him. The wicked shall not destroy him now, for with the witnesses of the Lord, he has seen the goal of all perfection, and the Lord's commandment is broad enough to help him reach it.

119:97-104 MEM [pronounced maem] . . . Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies

He loves the law of the Lord, for divine commandments have made him wiser than the enemy and more understanding than the teachers and the elders. Therefore he has resisted evil and been guided by the Lord's judgments. The Lord's words are sweet, and His precepts increase understanding.

119:105-12 NUN [pronounced noon] . . . Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path

This pair of synonymous metaphors is often quoted; there are other memorable passages in this segment also. The writer, like many of us, relies on the Lord's guidance to help him through all afflictions. He offers his offerings and trusts he can keep the Lord's statutes even to the end.

119:113-20 SAMECH [pronounced SAH-mekh] . . . Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be ashamed of my hope

The author loves the Lord's law and the security He provides against evildoers. He trusts he will be upheld in his hope, for the wicked are trodden down and are purged away. He is so inspired with awe that he trembles in humility before the Lord.

119:121-28 AIN [pronounced EYE-yin] . . . It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy law

Despite all the blessings and successes he has experienced in righteous living, the writer still finds it evident (as Job so often declared) that the wicked prosper and even triumph. So it is time for the Lord to take a hand and sustain the righteous; the writer has full confidence in His commandments and precepts.

119:129-36 PE [pronounced pay] . . . Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them

In other words, "the witnesses [evidences] of thee are marvelous, therefore doth my soul retain them." The writer loves the Lord's words, commandments, mercy, guidance, and deliverance. He supplicates the Lord's favor and weeps when he goes astray.

119:137-44 TZADDI [pronounced TSAHD-dee] . . . Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it

With great appreciation for the Lord's judgments, testimonies, and revealed word, the psalmist is overwhelmed that his enemies could have forgotten them. He feels humble but does not falter in trying to keep the precepts and the true law. Despite the trouble and anguish he has experienced, the Lord's commandments are his delight, and his righteous testimonies are eternal. Because the Lord gives him wisdom, he shall live.

119:145-52 KOPH [pronounced koef] . . . I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word

Prevent, from the Latin prevenire, "to come before," is used here in that original sense. With help from the footnotes, we can see the intended meaning: in morning and evening he turned first to his prayers to be true to the ways of the Lord and be protected from the evildoers. Though his enemies threaten mischief, he trusts forever in the Lord's testimonies.

119:153-60 RESH [pronounced raysh] . . . Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law

This section of the psalm supplicates for deliverance, protection, and salvation from afflictions, persecutors, and transgressors. The psalmist never sought help as an entitlement but pleaded for it in hope of divine mercy, trusting in the Lord's judgments forever.

119:161-68 SCHIN [pronounced sheen] . . . Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in awe of thy word

Troubles were created by civil governments anciently also. Those who lie (Ps. 119:163) can cause much persecution. Yet the word of the Lord and his law give peace through consistent prayer; the love of his precepts and testimonies brings about salvation.

119:169-76 TAU [pronounced tav] . . . I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant; for I do not forget thy commandments

As a conclusion to the whole psalm, from aleph to tau, the author sums up the human predicament. He seeks true salvation through the mercy of the Lord by obedience to His commandments and through divine assistance obtained by prayer.

120:1-7 In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me

Psalm 120 begins a series of fifteen psalms, each of which is called, with some variations, "A Song of degrees." That is a plausible translation, but ma'aloth is from the root word 'alah, meaning "to ascend," and it can also mean "steps." Perhaps these psalms were songs for going up the steps to the temple, or for pilgrims going up to Jerusalem, or for exiles going up to the promised land again.

Perhaps a clue to the purpose of the psalm is found in verse 5: the author (and hence any singer of the psalm) laments about sojourning in "Mesech" and "Kedar." Those were places associated with Japhetic and Ishmaelite peoples (Ps. 120:5a-c) and hence symbolized being in exile, or away from Zion; thus the song is a prayer for deliverance from evils of the outside world. It is a prayer to rise above all that—to be exalted—in the spirit, at least, out of the worldly presence of "him that hateth peace" (Ps. 120:6).

121:1-8 I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help

This "song of ascent" is a prayer for exaltation above worldly dangers. The "hills, from whence cometh my help" are the mountains of the Lord's house; thus it is made clear that "my help cometh from the Lord" (Ps. 121:1-2). This psalm, which is almost as well known as Psalm 23, "The Lord is my shepherd," gives the same assurance of protection in the walks of life but in a different idiom. It is another beautiful song.

122:1-9 I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord

This is a "psalm of ascents" for obvious reasons—going up for temple worship. It is as applicable now as it was when it was written. The messianic New Jerusalem, or Zion, and the ultimate temple are clearly envisioned. Many workers in latter-day temples already feel like singing this song of exaltation.

123:1-4 Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens

Again a theme of "lifting up" predominates. Beautiful similes make real the relationship of a humble servant to the Lord our God and Master. And humble faith can lift up the oppressed from the contempt or scorn of the haughty "that are at ease."

124:1-8 If it had not been the Lord who was on our side . . . Then they had swallowed us up quick

The poetry of Psalm 124 is characterized by a progressive, "stair step" parallelism that enhances symbols of divine help lifting souls up out of the waters of oppression, out of the stream of "proud waters," and out of the snare of the bird catchers. Much uplift can indeed come "in the name of the Lord."

125:1-5 They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever

The "mount Zion, which . . . abideth for ever" is the celestial Zion; they that trust in the Lord shall thus be exalted. This is another song of ascent, a song of exaltation, a song of seeking a celestial home. The discerning judgment of the Lord upon the good and bad is clear.

126:1-6 When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream

The return of Judah from Babylon after it was conquered by Persia (ca. 538-537 B.C.) was like a dream come true; but though "the Lord [had] done great things" for them, there was yet "captivity" in mortality itself, from which they desired redemption. If they who sow in tears go forth in life to sow "precious seed," then the Lord will lift them up with joy as they come "bringing . . . sheaves" to the Judgment Day. Redemption from Babylon was like a dream; but redemption from the wicked world of "Babylon" (D&C 1:16) will be a dream come true. Thus this psalm too sings of the ultimate elevation of man by the Lord.

127:1-5 Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain

A "house" may be either a domicile or an extended family; in either case, except it be done in the ways of the Lord and by His power and blessing, they indeed labor in vain that build. It was so of the great King Solomon, who builded great "houses" but did many things that were not of the Lord (D&C 132:38; Jacob 2:23-24) and were therefore in vain.

After making the point in general, the psalm makes it specific with regard to the family, for children "are an heritage of the Lord" and "the fruit of the womb is his reward" (Ps. 127:3). Those who know how "families can be forever" through celestial marriage recognize this as a psalm about exaltation.

128:1-6 Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord; that walketh in his ways

This psalm about a reverent, obedient husband and wife, their children, and their children's children—all of whom are promised that "the Lord shall bless thee out of Zion"—is more clearly about family exaltation. It is clearly a song of "ascent" or exaltation.

129:1-8 Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, . . . yet they have not prevailed against me

A person who has suffered persecution, imprisonment, and torture by the lash or people with ethnic memories of suffering may well hope for "Zion," when the Lord will "cut asunder the cords of the wicked." But those who hate "Zion" shall perish. In this prophetic psalm the righteous rise above evil conditions; it is truly a "song of ascent."

130:1-8 Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord

This psalm is the cry of a sinner begging to be lifted out of depths where he can hardly feel hope, even in the Lord, because of his many iniquities. It is reminiscent of Jonah's testimony: "I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice" (Jonah 2:2).

The Hebrew word translated depths in verse 1 of Psalm 130 is a word that implies deep water; but the author knows that the miracle of forgiveness is available and is reverent in that knowledge. A beautiful metaphor expresses Israel's hope for just such a miracle of redemption.

131:1-3 my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty

A brief disclaimer of pride is uttered in this song labeled "of David"; then that virtue of humility and its blessings are sought for Israel as a whole. As for being a "psalm of ascent," Jesus pronounced the same principle illustrated in this psalm: "whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted" (Matt. 23:12).

132:1-18 Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions: How he sware unto the Lord . . . ; Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house . . . Until I find out a place for the Lord

With allusions to the commitment of David and the people of his time who secured a place for the temple and prepared to have it built so that they might "go into his tabernacles" to worship, this "song of degrees" supplicates the Lord to return to his place, possibly at the time of the return from Babylon, when the second temple had not yet been built. Reminders of the Lord's promises of a Davidic ruler then become prophetic anticipations of the Messiah (Ps. 132:11-18). Thus Psalm 132 returns to the topic of Psalm 122—the yearning to go up to Zion and to the temple, there again to be able to worship the Lord.

133:1-3 Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity

Words of this psalm have become a popular folk chant in the modern nation of Israel. This short Davidic psalm of exaltation yearns for the ideal age of Zion to come, with the blessings of peace, love, and "life for evermore" in true exaltation.

134:1-3 Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord . . . Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the Lord

The last "song of going up" (or "song of degrees") is set in the temple, and the worshippers are invited to conclude the service by lifting their hands in the sanctuary to bless the Lord. The officiator then asks that the Lord bless them "out of Zion."

135:1-21 Praise ye the Lord

This psalm of praise begins almost like the "little" Hallelujah Psalm, Psalm 113; the Hallelujah Psalms are Psalms 111 through 113 and 146 through 150. The second admonishment, "Praise ye the name of the Lord," is not entirely synonymous with the first, for his very name, Jehovah, connotes creative power, and divine power is exerted by those (of the priesthood) holding the right to invoke it. The sacred name was never to be used "in vain" for unauthorized purposes or by unauthorized spokesmen (Ex. 20:7 and commentary).

The worshippers in the temple are urged to praise and thank the Lord for appointing Israel as his "peculiar treasure" (Ps. 135:4b-c; BD, "Peculiar"), for with that treasure he extends his kingdom, defends his kingdom, and operates his kingdom.

Historical evidence of some aspects of the Lord's greatness are cited. Then with a transition from what the Lord can and will do for his people, the praise continues in a comparison with, and ridicule of, dumb idols that have nonfunctioning limbs and organs. It is clever irony to say "they that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusteth in them." Again, all worshippers are urged to bless the Lord. All should participate—the houses of Israel, Aaron, Levi, and all in Zion at Jerusalem. The psalm ends with one more hallelujah, "Praise ye the Lord."

136:1-26 O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever

The opening words of Psalm 136 and succeeding verses have been repeated in liturgical adulations by Jewish and Christian worshippers for ages. They are followed by a review of the Lord's might and works from the Creation through the Exodus, the establishment of Israel in the promised land, and some cases of redemption from enemies. They recognize the universal providence of God and give thanks to him as "the God of gods" and "the God of heaven." The refrain in every verse declares him worthy of praise because "his mercy endureth for ever" (the Hebrew is even more clear: "for to eternity [is] his lovingkindness").

137:1-9 By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion

The Israelite singers hung their harps upon the willows in Babylon and could not sing a song of Zion as demanded by their captors; but the psalmist composed a lament about that event. Many have since set the lament to music and sung it (see, for example, Hymns: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948], no. 55).

With bitterness the psalmist hoped for punishment for the Edomites, who applauded and encouraged the Babylonian conquerors of Judah (Ps. 137:7a-b; Obad. 1, on Edom's doom). Perhaps only people who have known or felt some of the effects of the twentieth-century holocausts wrought upon Jewish people and others understand the bitterness.

138:1-8 I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing praise unto thee

Before is used here to translate the Hebrew neged, which means "face to face, confronting, opposite." The "gods" were the idols of Babylon; the psalmist in exile defied them by worshipping the living God not only in front of them but also toward God's holy temple. Worship toward the holy temple by Israelites in need, by the absent armies of Israel, by "strangers" in other lands, or by captive Israelites in exile was a mode of worship suggested by Solomon in his dedication of the temple (1 Kgs. 8:35-50). He prayed that the Lord would hear and bless them all. A confident testimony asserts that the Lord always does answer prayers and will be worshipped by other peoples, including their kings. "Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the proud he knoweth afar off."

Note the Joseph Smith Translation emendation of the final testimony and supplication (Ps. 138:7-8a).

139:1-24 O Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me. . . . If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there

The omniscience of the Lord is dramatically declared in this famous psalm, and the gratitude of those who are comfortable in the presence of the Lord is beautifully stated. It is marvelous and comforting that there is no hiding place God does not know. The psalmist expresses trust in God and desire for his help in the process of repentance.

There are many gems in this literary jewel, especially verses 2, 9, 10, 14, 17, and 18; every reader will find other favorites as well.

140:1-13 Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent man

Only a person who has suffered much from many enemies would compose so many prayers for protection against the ungodly and beseech the vengeance of God upon them. The psalmist cried out to the Lord in ardent supplications and ended with a confident testimony.

141:1-10 Lord, I cry unto thee: make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when I cry unto thee

This psalm is the second of this series of Davidic prayers for help. It asserts that reproof of a righteous person can be tolerated—indeed it is good for one—but asks for divine retribution for unjust judges and workers of iniquity, who have let the bones of the righteous be scattered even at the grave's mouth. The author hoped they might fall into their own gins (traps) and snares, while he enjoyed the Lord's protection.

142:1-7 I cried unto the Lord with my voice; . . . I poured out my complaint before him

On Maschil, see commentary on Psalm 32.

The third of this series of outcries describes the desperate straits David found himself in because of persecution; he had no source of help save the Lord (cf. 1 Sam. 22; 24). The prayer expresses the psalmist's confidence in salvation from the Lord.

143:1-12 Hear my prayer, O Lord, . . . in thy faithfulness answer me

The fourth Davidic psalm in this series urgently beseeches rescue from deep depression, but again it expresses complete confidence in the Lord, not only for rescue but for guidance, teachings, and revival. Hope persists because of the Lord's loving kindness and his mercy.

144:1-15 Blessed be the Lord my strength, . . . My goodness, and my fortress

This composite "psalm of David" has parts from many others (some of which are footnoted). Accordingly, it reiterates familiar themes, such as deliverance in battle, the weakness of a man without God, deliverance from enemies, praise to God for victory, supplications for help against alien influences, and prayers for prosperity.

145:1-21 I will extol thee, my God, O king; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever

The whole book of Psalms is called, in Hebrew, Tehillim, "Praises"; but only this one is called "David's Psalm of praise" in a superscription. The last of this series of eight psalms of David, Psalm 145 is also a prelude to the remaining group of Hallelujah Psalms, each of which begins with hallelujah, "praise ye Jehovah."

This psalm praises the Lord's name, greatness, mighty acts, awesome powers, great goodness, grace, compassion, patience, mercy, and righteousness—familiar themes throughout the book of Psalms. Like many others, it declares the dependability of his help, available to all who humbly and honestly seek it. The alphabetic acrostic pattern suggests the comprehensiveness of the Lord's power.

146:1-10 Praise ye the Lord. Praise the Lord, O my soul

Psalm 146 begins the final group of Hallelujah Psalms.

Trust in the Lord is contrasted against trust in any "princes" or other mortals. Then, as in many psalms, the virtues of the Lord are reviewed, and his reign in the eternal Zion is anticipated. Hallelujah, "praise ye the Lord," ends the psalm.

147:1-20 Praise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant; and praise is comely

The first statement of Psalm 147 is a refreshing assertion. Much of the rest of the psalm identifies facets of the Lord's goodness, power, and mercy. Pleasant word-pictures portray the cycles and functions of nature under the Lord's hand. Revelations to Israel, the scriptures, go forth to the world from the Lord through his chosen people (Ps. 147:19-20). The psalm ends with hallelujah.

148:1-14 Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise ye him in the heights

Starting with an exhortation that angels, the hosts of the heavens, and the orbs of the skies praise the Lord, the author admonishes all creations of earth and all leaders and peoples to do likewise, for the Lord's "glory is above the earth and heaven." The Lord exalts the powers ("horn") of his people and the qualities of his covenant ones ("saints") of Israel. The psalm ends as it began, with hallelujah.

149:1-9 Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise in the congregation of saints

The praise of the Lord and a new song shall be in the congregation of the virtuous, the "saints."

Psalm 149 is an avowal of the relationship between God and his people. Israel will rejoice and praise the Lord, whereas he will "beautify the meek with salvation" (cf. "blessed are the meek" in Matt. 5:5; 3 Ne. 12:5). Then secure from present and ultimate dangers, the Saints will be joyful when awake, secure when asleep, and have power to resist and bind unbelievers and former oppressors. This psalm, too, ends as it began, with hallelujah.

150:1-6 Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power

This final, grand hallelujah psalm begins each clause with hallelu, "Praise ye." The place of "his sanctuary" is stated in a synonymous parallel as "the firmament of his power"—the heavens. Because of "his excellent greatness," all instruments of music and all living things are summoned to his praise. Then both the psalm and the book of Psalms end with one last hallelujah.

This is the book of Psalms, the book of praises, testimonies, supplications, outcries of despair, hope, confidence, and gratitude, and even more praises. They are voiced by ordinary people, priests, a king, other leaders, exiles. Their language is sometimes strange to us but often strangely familiar. Their times were different, long ago; but in the present many things are like their times. Thus the psalms are valuable for history, for heritage, and for worship.

 
 
© 1993 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
