# ISAIAH

### ISAIAH
Ellis T. Rasmussen, Latter-day Commentary on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City 1993)
 
 

ISAIAH

In the treasury of Hebrew writings is a wide variety of prophetic teachings with great moral and spiritual value. Isaiah's contributions are high among them, for they were valid for his times, for our times, and for the future. The book of Isaiah contains reprimands for evil, appeals for repentance, promises of forgiveness for those who do repent, and warnings to those who do not. In Hebrew, about three-fourths of the book is in poetic form.

Isaiah prophesied about the virgin mother and birth of the Savior, about his suffering for all and his making redemption available to all, and about his future reign of peace. Isaiah's prophecies emphasize the duty of Israel and of all true believers to prepare for Christ's reign and foretell the grandeur and glory of it. The Savior himself said: "Great are the words of Isaiah. For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people" (3 Ne. 23:1-2).

Isaiah wrote also some historical chronicles of his times (2 Chr. 26:22) and, so far as we know, recorded his own prophetic revelations. The revelations are arranged somewhat according to subject, as follows:

Chapters 1 through 12 pertain mostly to Isaiah's times and nation; however, he often extended his scope from the immediate to the intermediate and then on to ultimate matters. This integration of past, present, and future is typical of the "manner of prophesying among the Jews" of which Nephi spoke; he said it was hard for his people to understand—and it may be harder still for us (2 Ne. 25:1). The center position in these chapters, Isaiah 6, is the report of Isaiah's call to be a prophet, which was extended to him in a vision of the Lord.

Chapters 13 through 23 are prophetic "burdens," or warnings, mostly to nations that affected Israel. Some are addressed to Israel and Judah. Much significant doctrine is found even in the prophecies to other nations.

Chapters 24 through 35 contain prophecies that are mostly concerned with the latter days.

Chapters 36 through 39 are historical, showing the prophet at work in his times (cf. 2 Kgs. 18-20). These chapters may be part of the chronicles he wrote (2 Chr. 26:22).

Chapters 40 through 49 are mostly concerned with the redemption of Israel and others through the ministry of the Lord as Savior.

Chapters 50 through 59 contrast the wickedness and fall of Israel with the suffering of the Redeemer and his comforting good tidings of salvation for all mankind.

Chapters 60 through 66 tell of the future glory of Zion, the new heaven and the new earth, after the destruction of wickedness.

Abundant cross-references and other helpful information may be found in the footnotes to the book of Isaiah.

Commentary

1:1-4 The vision of Isaiah . . . concerning Judah and Jerusalem

. . . I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me

Visions were frequently the source of Isaiah's information.

Though the information here was addressed primarily to "Judah and Jerusalem," Isaiah invited the attention of all who would hearken in heaven and earth. That is typical, for messages arising out of immediate situations often have future applications.

The "children" who had "gone away backward" were Israelites; they were the people chosen to teach the true religion to others but who learned and practiced others' idolatry instead.

1:5-9 Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more

The prophet described Israel as a body wounded, unsound from head to foot and sick at heart. The healing messages of the Lord had not been taken to heart and consistently applied.

Evidently the military attacks by Assyria were those that Isaiah predicted here (Isa. 1:7-9 and fn.; for historical details on the attacks, see Isa. 36-37; 2 Kgs. 17-20).

1:10-20 Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah

Isaiah called the leaders of Israel "rulers of Sodom" and their followers "people of Gomorrah," thus characterizing their sensual practices, false worship, and violence. The remedy would be cleansing by repentance. The promises of forgiveness and blessings were amazingly generous; the warnings were clear and vigorous about the grievous results of choosing the wrong alternatives (Isa. 1:16-18 and fn.; cf. D&C 19:15-20).

1:21-31 How is the faithful city become an harlot!

In poetic verses the prophet lamented Jerusalem's condition and added warnings, promises, and more warnings from the Lord. They are applicable to anyone in any time with similar ills. Note the phrase in Isaiah 1:26 echoed in our hymn, "The Spirit of God" (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], no. 2).

2:1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw

The Hebrew word davar, translated here as word, can also be translated message. The Hebrew word khazah, translated here as saw, indicates that Isaiah received this message also from the Lord in a vision (cf. Isa. 1:1).

2:2-4 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains

This prophecy would be fulfilled when the true religion had been restored, so that the chosen people could return to the true faith. That done, Abraham's mission would be resumed and peoples from all nations converted. The faithful would gather to the "mountain of the Lord's house" in Zion and to the restored Jerusalem to learn his ways and walk in his paths (Isa. 2:2-3; on two holy cities, Isa. 64:10; D&C 84:1-4; 133:9-13, 21-24; 3 Ne. 21:21-26; Ether 13:4-11; BD, "Zion"; TG, "Jerusalem, New"; "Zion").

The Lord shall rule, judge, and correct his peoples, and peaceful activities shall eliminate war at last.

2:5-22 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord

This kindly appeal precedes another reminder of the reasons why the Lord would forsake his people, but that is only when they apostatize and turn to idols for guidance and for pleasure. All who refuse his loving appeal will want to hide themselves and bury their idols when "the day of the Lord" descends upon all the world (Isa. 2:6-21; note in 16a incidental evidence that the Book of Mormon had the complete original text from the plates of brass). The final admonition applies to those who refuse his invitation (cf. Isa. 2:22b, 5).

3:1-16 For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay . . . of bread, and . . . water

In the time of Isaiah, the Lord was about to allow the invading Assyrians to destroy Israel's material security. The northern ten tribes were indeed conquered and taken away in the middle period of Isaiah's ministry (ca. 722 B.C.); however, one king of Judah hearkened to the Lord's warnings through the prophet Isaiah. As a result, though the people of Jerusalem suffered considerably during an Assyrian siege, the city was spared for another century, until it fell to the Babylonians.

When all capable leaders are decimated in a crisis, inept leaders take over; and then such moral and political problems develop that potentially capable people are reluctant to take office. Wicked leaders, who oppress their people and fail to defend them, will be held responsible by the Lord.

3:16-4:1 the Lord saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes . . . the Lord will smite . . . the daughters of Zion

Some, who are vanity-faddists and wanton women instead of being true "daughters of Zion," will contribute to Zion's downfall and be shamed and rejected. Yet when all vain things are taken away, and their men have fallen by the sword in siege, the surviving women will clamor for the security of marriage.

4:2-6 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious

Then will come the day of the Lord, terrible for the wicked but great for others of the true "branch of the Lord" in the newly established Zion and the newly cleansed Jerusalem. They will be in the presence of the Lord, who will bring peace and security.

5:1-7 My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill

In this parable, Israel is the vineyard of the Lord; abandonment of the vineyard symbolizes the scattering of Israel. Poetic assonance and parallelism of the Hebrew of the last two lines could be imitated in English thus:

 He looked for justice, but behold, jostling;

for the righteous, but behold, the riotous.

5:8-25 Woe unto them that

In calling Israel to repent, Isaiah warned of the results that would follow various types of self-indulgence and perversion. They include greed, drunkenness, willful ignorance, habitual sin and doubt, perversion, self-righteousness, and corruption. Such modes of life naturally cause oppression, captivity, damnation, unfaithfulness, distorted values, and ultimately, self-destruction.

But though the anger of the Lord is kindled, the hope for the repentance and the return of the sinners is extended: "His hand is stretched out still" (for the meaning of that symbol, see Isa. 9:12; Jacob 5:47; 6:4. Some commentators believe it means his anger continues).

5:26-30 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations

There are many implications in the latter-day lifting of the gospel "ensign" to the nations to gather the righteous into the fold of the Lord. There will be miraculous migrations and divine help for the righteous in the end of times.

6:1-8 In the year that king Uzziah died I saw . . . the Lord

The word also was left out of the quotation from Isaiah 6:1, above, because no word requiring that translation appears in the Hebrew account.

Isaiah's vision and call were about 740 B.C., for we know that King Uzziah reigned 790 through 739 B.C. (2 Kgs. 15:1-7; 2 Chr. 26; BD, "Chronology," p. 638). Isaiah experienced the rare privilege of seeing the Lord (TG, "God, Privilege of Seeing"; "Jesus Christ, Appearances, Antemortal"). It was doubtless this visitation to which Nephi referred in his testimony that Isaiah had seen the Lord (2 Ne. 11:2).

The seraphim, in covering their faces and feet, symbolized reverence (BD, "Seraphim"). Isaiah, conscious of his faults and those of his people, was overwhelmed. The symbolic cleansing by a live coal from the heavenly altar must have relieved Isaiah of guilt feelings, so that when he heard the divine request for a messenger he volunteered to serve. Recall that neither Enoch nor Moses responded so willingly when they were called (Moses 6:31; Ex. 4:10-14.)

6:9-13 And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not

It was to a hardhearted and reprobate people that Isaiah would preach repentance on his mission (Isa. 6:9-10; Matt. 13:13-16). If Isaiah understood that his appeals for repentance would make the people only more obdurate, his pathetic cry, "Lord, how long?" was natural. The Lord's reply would not have given him much hope for success in his mission, but the people of Israel could not go to their destruction without a chance to repent. On that point, the prophet Amos, who lived a little earlier than Isaiah, pronounced: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7).

Note the potential for some of the holy seed of true believers to be perpetuated into the last days (Isa. 6:13a-b).

7:1-16 in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah . . . king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it

Syria and Israel attacked Jerusalem when the grandson of King Uzziah ruled five or six years after Isaiah's call (BD, "Chronology," p. 638, for King Ahaz of Judah and King Pekah of Israel). The book of Isaiah gives more historical details than do the books of Kings and Chronicles about Syria and Ephraim combining against Assyria and trying to force Judah to join their alliance (Isa. 7:1b-d).

It is poignant to visualize the prophet and his little son going outside the walled city to meet the worried King Ahaz at the city's vital water supply (Isa. 7:3a-c). The prophet went to give the king some assurances and warnings; but the king would not believe that Syria and Ephraim (northern Israel) would be "broken." Ironically, King Ahaz, who was not known for faith or fidelity, piously refused the prophet's offer of a token, or symbol, to assure him that the prophet's message was truly from the Lord.

It was in that setting that the prophecy of the virgin birth of Immanuel was given by Isaiah (Isa. 7:14a-e). Doubtless the prophecy had little meaning or comfort for Ahaz, but for more than seven centuries it gave myriads of others comfort and hope, awaiting the day of Immanuel's first advent (related prophecies follow in Isa. 8-9).

7:17-25 The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people . . . the king of Assyria

Judah was at that time a bone of contention between the big power of the north and east (Assyria) and that of the south and west (Egypt). Of those, Assyria would give Judah the close shave as a "razor that is hired" (Isa. 7:20). The Lord did in fact let Assyria be the "rod of [his] anger" (Isa. 10). Isaiah foresaw that as a result of Assyria's scourge, Israel would become a land whose cities and economy were destroyed by war and plunder, so that only a few country folk could survive, too few to cultivate the vineyards and combat the weeds (see fn. for alternate translations).

8:1-4 she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz

Isaiah had told King Ahaz that the threat from Syria and Ephraim (Israel) would pass and the child Immanuel would be born in Judah as part of the country's future destiny (Isa. 7:14-16). Then the promise of relief from attack was made more immediate by the Lord's assurance that before a son yet to be born to Isaiah and his wife could learn to say avi (daddy) and immi (mommy), both Damascus of Syria and Samaria of Israel would be conquered by Assyria. The name of this baby was a token of Assyria's attack on northern Israel (Isa. 8:1d).

8:5-18 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah . . . behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, . . . even the king of Assyria

The "waters of Shiloah" had long been Jerusalem's water supply (2 Sam. 5:8 and commentary). Water flowed to Shiloah from the spring Gihon, which represented the Lord's providence, whereas the "waters of the river," the Euphrates, represented the forces of Assyria. King Ahaz did not follow the prophet's advice, so Judah was invaded and Jerusalem besieged. It was not conquered, however, thanks to the stronger faith and better behavior of the next king, Hezekiah, son of Ahaz. Jerusalem was saved by the Lord, as promised by the "stretching out of his wings" over the land of Immanuel. Nevertheless, the country was almost overwhelmed by Assyrian forces, reaching nearly to "the neck" (Isa. 8:8, 10; Isa. 36-37).

Because the Lord would save Judah, the prophet advised against a confederacy with other nations for security; the king and people should make the Lord their "sanctuary." Isaiah knew, however, that the Lord as Savior in those times, as also later during the Lord's life on earth, would be "a stone of stumbling," upon whom many unbelievers would "stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken" (Isa. 8:14-15).

Neither the king nor the people would accept the testimony given to the Lord's disciples, nor would they understand the "signs" and wonders provided through Isaiah. The names of Isaiah and his sons symbolize the scattering and gathering of Israel and the salvation of the Lord (Isa. 8:18a).

8:19-22 And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, . . . should not a people seek unto their God?

The main point of this passage is that turning to any sort of spiritualism, such as turning to the dead on behalf of the living, is forbidden. People of faith should turn "to the law and to the testimony," which are the scriptures. If other sources do not agree, "it is because there is no light in them."

They of Israel who had ceased to seek the true God were about to pass into the bondage their king had led them to. Trouble, darkness, and the dimness of anguish lay ahead.

9:1-7 in Galilee of the nations. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light . . . For unto us a child is born

The "dimness of anguish" and the "darkness" of exile and oppression (Isa. 8:22) are again mentioned, merging prophecies of affliction in exile with prophecies of later oppressions to come to northern Israelite lands, including Galilee. There the afflicted people would begin to see the "great light" of the life and teaching of the Messiah. If they could accept him and his way fully, then the yoke, burden, staff, and rod of oppression could be broken. All the paraphernalia of battle will eventually be done away by the cleansing fire of his kingdom (Isa. 9:5a-b).

Although the Child was not accepted in his first advent with all his potentials to heal, to save, and to rule, the increase of his government and the extension of his peace would continue to go forward by the zeal of the Lord of hosts until in his second advent all will be fulfilled (Isa. 9:1-7 and fn.).

9:8-10:4 The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel. And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria

Events that befell northern Israel (2 Kgs. 17) during the life and ministry of Isaiah were reviewed by the prophet. He knew that if the people of the northern kingdom—sometimes called by the name of the birthright tribe, Ephraim—had at any time hearkened and repented, the Lord's hand was "stretched out still" to help them (cf. Isa. 5:25 and commentary; Isa. 5:17, 21; 9:12d; 10:4; Jacob 6:4).

10:5-19 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger . . . I will send him against an hypocritical nation

As anticipated in Isaiah 7:17-25,Isaiah explained why the Lord let Assyria be his tool, withdrawing his hand of protection from Israel and letting Assyria take the people of that kingdom. Isaiah also predicted that the Assyrians would suffer the effects of their own wickedness and corruption and fall prey to another powerful nation—a prophecy that was fulfilled a century later.

10:20-23 The remnant shall return . . . unto the mighty God

Prophecies of the ancient scattering of Israel are often accompanied by prophecies of their later return to the true God and then to the heritage foretold for true Israel ( Isa. 10:20-23 and fn.).

10:24-34 O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian . . . For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction

The son and heir of King Ahaz was the good King Hezekiah. He accepted Isaiah's prophetic guidance, and most of Judah was saved from Assyria's siege (Kgs. 18-20; Isa. 36-38).

The approach of the Assyrians toward Jerusalem is sketched in dramatic poetry (Isa. 10:28-32). Then the destruction of the Assyrian hordes is described in metaphors (Isa. 10:33-34).

11:1-9 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots

Because Jesse was the father of King David and his descendants were the kings of Judah, of whose lineage Jesus would be born, it is clear who this "Branch" is. Jesus is the Lord, Jehovah; hence the wisdom, understanding, counsel, might, knowledge, and reverence of the Lord reside in him. Jeremiah and other prophets also knew this "Branch" (cf. Jer. 23:5 and fn.). Matthew saw the residence of Jesus in Nazareth as symbolic, for Nazareth is derived from the Hebrew word meaning "branch" (Matt. 2:23). Modern revelation also confirms that Jesus was the one anticipated (Isa. 11:1-5; D&C 113:1-2). His righteous reign on earth, bringing justice and peace to man and beast, will be established in his second coming (Isa. 11:4-9; TG, "Jesus Christ, Millennial Reign").

11:10-16 the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people

When the "Gentiles" see the gospel ensign and realize the nature of the Lord's kingdom, they will desire to be a part of it (Isa. 11:10). And when the Lord does restore priesthood power and set his hand again to gather Israel, there will be a reconciliation between Judah and Ephraim. Great movements of people and land masses will prepare the world for His reign (Isa. 11:10-16 and fn.).

12:1-6 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation

This poetic song of praise and thanksgiving is to the Lord, the author of our salvation (Isa. 12:2a; cf. Ex. 15:2; Ps. 118:14).

The "water out of the wells of salvation" is a symbol also used in Jeremiah 2:13 and John 4:7-14. It is life-giving "water" of new birth unto salvation and atonement.

It would be a privilege to be among the choirs singing praises to the Lord in that day of salvation.

13:1-22 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see

Burden is used several times in Isaiah's prophetic addresses to several of Israel's neighboring nations and to Jerusalem itself in the next dozen chapters. It is used to translate the Hebrew massa, meaning "something lifted up" against the wicked, with a call for their repentance. While addressed to nations known in history, the messages have symbolic meanings also for peoples having like faults in later times.

This burden is addressed to Babylon, an ancient nation thriving first in patriarchal times but arising again after Isaiah's time (BD, "Chronology"; "Assyria and Babylonia"; "Babylon or Babel"; TG, "Babylon"). Isaiah's warning to King Hezekiah about Babylon as a future threat to Judah is recorded later (Isa. 39). Details of what Babylon eventually did to Judah are found in several places (2 Kgs. 24-25; and in the books of Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and Habakkuk).

The first part of Isaiah's prophecy applies more to the destruction of the latter-day "Babylon," or the wicked world (Isa. 13:1-15 and fn.). The ancient nation of Babylon is more specifically and clearly addressed in the remaining verses. The suffering of children and women is not to be seen as the will of the Lord but is foreseen as part of the blood and horror of worldly strife. The Medes and Persians fulfilled this prophecy (ca. 539-538 B.C.).

14:1-3 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with them

The prophecy of the gathering of Israel and the conversion of other peoples is resumed (cf. Isa. 11:10-16). Words about making some peoples "servants" and "captives" and establishing "rule" over them may be understood in a spiritual sense (Isa. 14:1-3 and fn.).

14:4-23 thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased!

A dramatic description prophesied the Babylonian king's demise (Isa. 14:4-11). Then he was addressed metaphorically as if he were a paradigm of "Lucifer, son of the morning," whose origin in the Council in Heaven is depicted (Isa. 14:12-13 and fn.). A taunt-song reflects the joy of earth to be rid of this "king of Babylon" and depicts scorn by his peers in hell (Isa. 14:16-23).

14:24-32 The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying, . . . I will break the Assyrian in my land . . . Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina

A short message of reassurance during the Assyrian siege begins a reiteration of earlier prophecies, all of which were fulfilled in Isaiah's lifetime (Isa. 14:24-28; 7:17-25; 10:5-19). They also have latter-day applications, however, as does the ensuing one on the doom of the Philistines (Isa. 14:29-32). They anticipate the kingdom of God replacing the nations.

15:1-9; 16:1-14 The burden of Moab

Israel's neighbors, the cousin-peoples east of the Dead Sea, were generally opposed to Israel from the time of Moses on. Nonetheless, Ruth came from Moab, and King David was descended from her and Boaz. The burden against Moab is not a total condemnation; empathy is expressed, with a lament for Moab's destiny (Isa. 15).

Isaiah suggested that Moab appeal to Judah to provide a refuge for the Moabite outcasts, with the merciful and just king on the throne of David (Isa. 16:1-5). But the idea was rejected by Jewish leaders as unwarranted, leaving Moab to mourn. The prophet felt sorry for the Moabites, however, and wrote another poignant lament (Isa. 16:6-14).

17:1-11 The burden of Damascus. . . . The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim

The first two verses of the burden against Damascus predict the Assyrian conquest of Syria, whose capital was Damascus; but Syria's ally, northern Israel, is the main subject of this burden (Isa. 17:3a). Syria had been thought of as a "fortress" for the protection of Israel, but in vain. Israel would be devastated but not destroyed; a few people would remain, like the few gleaning grapes or olives left after the harvest. And why was Israel to suffer the invasion? Because the Israelites had forgotten the God of their salvation, the rock of their strength (Isa. 17:4-11).

17:12-14 Woe to the multitude of many people . . . and to the rushing of nations

Isaiah promised once again that invading multitudes, who would be permitted to punish Israel, would in time suffer the rebuke of God (Isa. 17:12a).

18:1-7 Woe to the land . . . which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia: That sendeth ambassadors by the sea

The first word of Isaiah 18 would be better translated Hail than Woe (v. 1a). Any land "beyond" Ethiopia would be for biblical people a land very far away. The message the prophet sent back with the "ambassadors" seems reassuring. An "ensign" will be hoisted when the time comes for the Lord to take action to decimate the enemy. Thereafter, the people "scattered and peeled" will send a present "to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Zion" (Isa. 18:2, 7).

Early Latter-day Saint interpretations applied the imagery of this prophecy to missionaries going from the western hemisphere to the scattered tribes of Israel. The Book of Mormon contains related prophecies that help apply it to that action or to messengers taking the gospel to the latter-day remnant of Lehi's descendants (Isa. 18:7a-b).

Translators have had many difficulties with this short chapter, and their translations differ considerably.

19:1-25 The burden of Egypt

Egypt also was in danger from the Assyrian empire; this burden may warn either of a threat of the same period when Israel and Judah suffered invasion (670-660 B.C.) or of attacks by later empires. Civil strife in Egypt and agricultural and other problems arising from dependence on the annual floods of the Nile were foretold.

The prophecy reaches down to ultimate developments "in that day" when Judah is restored and has become a formidable power, and the language and religion of Israel will be spread into Egypt (Isa. 19:16-22). Miraculously the old enemies will be converted, and Assyria, Israel, and Egypt will be blessed by the Lord (Isa. 19:23-25). That will indeed be the great day of the Lord, when the burden to Egypt has become a major oracle about the Lord's plans for the earth when all peoples shall be governed by him and peace shall reign.

20:1-6 In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, . . . the Lord said, . . . So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives

This brief prophecy concerning an event that occurred in Isaiah's lifetime adds detail to the burden of Egypt (Isa. 20:1a-b; 19:1-15).

When King Sargon of Assyria sent his military leader, Tartan, to take the former Philistine city of Ashdod, Isaiah dressed like a slave for three years to warn Israel that if Egypt and Ethiopia were unable to defend themselves against Assyrian enslavement, they certainly could not help protect Judah (Isa. 20:2a, 5a). Within ten years Assyria indeed invaded Judah and besieged Jerusalem. Isaiah gave a detailed account later of how King Hezekiah of Judah did indeed depend upon the Lord and not upon "this bruised reed, even upon Egypt" (2 Kgs. 18:21; Isa. 20:6).

21:1-10 The burden of the desert of the sea

Babylon was addressed in this prophecy, though it was given for the benefit of Judah (Isa. 21:1a). Two centuries after Isaiah's time, this burden was fulfilled when Babylon was conquered by the Medes and Persians ("Elam") under Cyrus (Isa. 21:2b). Its fulfillment was good news for the Jews then in Babylonian captivity, for under the Persian kings they were permitted to return. Isaiah was dismayed at the cataclysm, but when the main message was given that Babylon would fall and her idolatry be destroyed, he addressed the future Jewish exiles with relief and joy (Isa. 21:10a).

This prophecy pertains in the latter days to the destruction of the wicked world, also called Babylon (Isa. 21:9a).

21:11-12 The burden of Dumah

It is interesting, but not surprising, that messengers from various lands sought out a Jewish prophet concerning their fate in those troublous times.

21:13-17 The burden upon Arabia

Arabian caravans, suffering from such invading empire-building forces as the Assyrians and later the Babylonians, made their way through forests (thickets) rather than along the regular trade routes, and compassionate towns such as Tema "prevented" (came before) them with food and water. Some of those desert towns would also be destroyed by invaders, especially if control of trade routes could be established thereby.

22:1-25 The burden of the valley of vision

Jerusalem is the "valley of vision," the source of these burdens. The largest of the valleys in Jerusalem, the Kidron, is sometimes called "the valley of vision" (Isa. 22:1a).

The prophet was distressed by revelry in the city when there were inadequate preparations for siege (Isa. 22:2-10 and fn.). Their preparations for saving water from the important spring in a "ditch" or pool would not be as vital for them as trust in the Lord, the "maker" of the spring (Isa. 22:11a-b). Isaiah urged the people to repent of indulgence and neglect. He made an example of a government official, Shebna, who was preparing a sepulchre, warning that he would likely die in exile.

Isaiah made a symbol of Shebna's replacement, Eliakim. His name means "God shall cause to arise," anticipating the Savior, who holds the "key of the house of David" but was fastened

"as a nail in a sure place" until the burden of the Atonement was complete. Upon Him rests "all the glory of his father's house." Isaiah recommended depending on Him for everlasting security (Isa. 22:20-25 and fn.).

Gethsemane is in the Kidron valley, that "valley of vision."

23:1-18 The burden of Tyre

Despite their prosperity and power, Tyre and Sidon will also be made desolate for a time. Overconfident because they had never been conquered, they would be overcome and cease to be centers of trade. They were to lie waste for seventy years, about the life span of a man. Ultimately, Tyre's return and prosperity in lasting things would depend, as with all God's children, on consecration to the Lord (Isa. 23:18a).

24:1-23 Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste

At the end, all the wicked world will be affected. Reasons for the end will include haughtiness, transgression, changing of ordinances, and breaking of eternal covenants. Instead of blessings, curses and confusion will prevail. The righteous ones saved will be like the gleaning grapes and olives left when the harvest is over. They will be grateful to be spared and sing praises to God.

The prophet lamented, as he occasionally did in seeing such evil and its destructive results (Isa. 24:16-19 and fn.). But he also saw that those in the spirit prison, after many days, would be visited (Isa. 24:22a-c; D&C 138:29-33). The Lord of hosts would finally reign in glory before the elders in both Mount Zion and in Jerusalem (Isa. 24:23a-c).

25:1-12 O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things

A psalm of praise and thanksgiving follows the lament of the previous chapter. It is fine Hebrew poetry (as is about three-fourths of Isaiah's writings), employing rhetorical forms like those used in the book of Psalms. Respect by the strong and gratitude by the humble are proclaimed, and a great feast of the saved is anticipated (Isa. 25:1-6; D&C 27:5-14; 58:8-11; and all fn.). The "vail that is spread over all nations" will be removed, so all may know about the Lord's action. The first resurrection will be concluded, and the saved will "be glad and rejoice in his salvation" (Isa. 25:7-9). Adversaries such as Moab shall be brought down, their power and pride destroyed.

26:1-21 In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; . . . Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in

This grand song of thanks and praise for redemption credits the Lord not only with bringing about resurrection but with initiating it in raising His dead body (Isa. 26:19 and fn.; Isa. 25:8-9). These are some of the best Old Testament statements on the resurrection of the dead. Enjoy the beauty and truth in many of the poetic couplets in this prophecy (e.g., Isa. 26:3-4, 7, 12, 19-20).

On "Lord Jehovah," see Isaiah 12:2a.

27:1-13 In that day the Lord . . . shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea

In the beginning, the Creators had to command and control unorganized, chaotic elements to organize an earth and its environs as a suitable abode for the children of God. The forces of chaos are sometimes poetically symbolized as the great powers in and of the seas, and even as sea monsters. A like event symbolically foretold here is the binding of Satan, who is the opponent of all of God's creative work (Isa. 27:1a-e; 1 Ne. 22:26; D&C 43:31).

Isaiah's song of redemption is about Israel as a vineyard that at last resumes bearing fruit for the Lord (Isa. 27:2-6 and fn.; cf. Isa. 5:1-6; Hosea 10:1).

Israel's unproductive days of wickedness and punishment are recalled in another song (Isa. 27:7-11). Then the prophet returned to anticipating the last days when the Lord will harvest the fruit (the redeemed) from Mesopotamia to Egypt. Israel will be gathered from lands of exile when the great shophar signal is sounded. All peoples will then worship in the temple at Jerusalem (Isa. 27:12-13 and fn.).

28:1-29 Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower . . . hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men . . . in Jerusalem

Ephraim was the tribe of Jeroboam, first king of the northern ten tribes of Israel after they separated from Judah, and Ephraim was often the name used for that northern Israelite nation (recall that Ephraim was the birthright tribe; Gen. 49:22-26; 1 Chr. 5:1-2). Most of the kings of northern Israel were apostates, and some were openly idolatrous. Isaiah here reproached Ephraim (northern Israel) for pride and drunkenness. He used poetic imagery to contrast their potential beauty and productive capacity to their actual performance—a "fading flower" and "hasty fruit."

"In that day" in Old Testament prophecy often means "in the day of the Lord." Sometimes the phrase is used, as here, without an evident antecedent, but the reader recognizes by context that it refers to the day of restoration, when a gathered remnant will be blessed by the Lord and will finally prosper (Isa. 28:2-6).

Israel's apostasy and degradation included indulging in alcohol and rejecting the prophets. The people had been taught from infancy, a step at a time, but by contrast they were to be instructed in exile with another language because they had not listened to their own. Ironically, their childhood instruction had been counterproductive, resulting only in rebellion and ending with their being taken captive (Isa. 28:9-13 and fn.).

The prophet turned next to Jerusalem and Judah, to warn that southern Israelite kingdom of false covenants they had made for protection and to decry false confidence in those covenants for safety against the Assyrian threat. The Lord revealed to Judah that the cornerstone of Zion was, and would be, in Jerusalem. For the time being, the plots that would destroy them would be abated and immediate exile avoided (Isa. 28:14-22 and cross-references).

A final parable compares the relationship of God and his people with that of a farmer and his crops. Both know how, what, and when to plant and harvest, and both use the proper instruments to thresh their different grains (Isa. 28:23-29).

29:1-24 Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt!

This great prophetic warning begins with Isaiah's vision of the siege of Jerusalem; however, it has a more infinite aspect, with elements applicable to a later "marvellous work and a wonder" to be done by the Lord. Nephi, writing about one hundred fifty years after the time of Isaiah in another hemisphere, saw that elements of this great prophecy would be fulfilled in the downfall of his own people centuries later. He foresaw the burial of the Nephite records, followed by their divinely directed retrieval and translation by an "unlearned" but inspired prophet of the latter days. That translation and publication would lead to the restoration of the true doctrines and covenants of God and the establishment of his Church for the benefit of all—the Gentiles and Jews, the spiritually deaf and blind, and all humble people who will hear and see (Isa. 29:1a; 2 Ne. 26-29).

30:1-33 Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; . . . That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth

The immediate crisis addressed by this prophecy was still the Assyrian threat, which caused some politicians and people to look toward the other powerful nation of the time, Egypt, for help and defense. The prophet's admonition was to trust in the Lord, be still, hearken to the true seers and prophets, repent, and be confident; then blessings would follow. The unbelieving and rebellious, who rejected these admonitions, were severely reprimanded.

Again the prophet's vision of immediate events has applications to latter-day events, including the return of Israel to God and the establishment of His kingdom on earth.

31:1-9 Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help

A warning was given to those who trusted in Egypt and in forces of the "flesh" rather than in the powers of God and the Spirit. A simile depicts the Lord's concern (Isa. 31:5). The anticipated fall of the Assyrians can be taken as symbolic of the ultimate triumph over evil by the power of the Lord (Isa. 31:6-9 and fn.).

32:1-20 Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness

Earthly kings should reign in righteousness, provide security, solve problems, and discern the churl from the charitable, but such an ideal government will come only with the true, anointed King (Isa. 32:1-8 and fn.). Meanwhile, the heedless (represented this time by the "women that are at ease") must repent lest their lands be desolated, palaces and forts abandoned, and all be taken into exile (Isa. 32:9-14). Only when revelations from heaven resume and works of righteousness and peace prevail are people to be gathered to their rightful places again, to be blessed by God's providence (Isa. 32:15-20).

33:1-24 Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled

A forecast of doom was addressed to the Assyrian siege armies again, and the prophet prayed for Israel's salvation; then Assyria's destruction was prophesied (Isa. 33:1-4; 10:5-19; fulfillment is recorded in Isa. 37:35-38).

Anticipation of the reign of the Lord is the main substance of the rest of the chapter, beginning with a review of times of suffering and want and continuing with a surprising picture of the cleansing by fire that will precede the Lord's reign. Who can survive such fire and indeed "dwell with everlasting burnings"? Only the righteous can do so (Isa. 33:5-15 and fn.; Mal. 4:1). The chapter closes with a beautiful picture of the millennial reign of the Lord from Jerusalem and Zion (Isa. 33:16-24).

34:1-17 the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies

The end of the wicked world is the subject of this vision (footnoted cross-references lead to other prophetic pictures of this scene, and translation notes explain some idioms). Idumea (Edom) is a metaphor for the wicked world (Isa. 34:6; D&C 1:13). The symbol of the sword of the Lord, all bloody, may not be a pleasant one, but the idea of a violent end to violence, blood, and horror is often prophetically conveyed (Isa. 34:5-10). The desolated earth before a renewal and the reign of peace ends the vision (Isa. 34:11-17).

35:1-10 The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad . . . the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose

The earth is renewed to enjoy its paradisiacal glory (see the cross-references to other prophetic visions of this happy state). Note the glorious promises to the earth; to the weak and feeble; to the blind, deaf, and lame; to the thirsty ground; and to the ransomed who shall return to the Lord and come to Zion.

36-39 Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of Judah

Isaiah's historical chapters repeat, with a few differences, reports in the historical books of the Old Testament: 2 Kings 18:13-37 corresponds with Isaiah 36; 2 Kings 19, with Isaiah 37; 2 Kings 20:1-11, with Isaiah 38; and 2 Kings 20:12-19, with Isaiah 39 (see the commentary on those passages).

Two verses in 2 Kings 18 (vv. 15-16) about Hezekiah's delivering precious metals from the palace and temple to Assyria are not repeated in Isaiah. Four verses in 2 Kings 20 (vv. 8-11) about King Hezekiah asking Isaiah (and Isaiah asking the Lord) what sign would assure Hezekiah that he would recover from his illness are not repeated in Isaiah; however, a voluntary sign is reported in Isaiah.

On the other hand, something is added in the Isaiah account: King Hezekiah's psalm of thanks and praise to the Lord for saving him after he had considered in deep sorrow the prospect of coming to the end of his life. He was grateful for his added fifteen years (Isa. 38:9-20; that item is not recorded in 2 Kgs. 20).

40:1-8 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people . . . her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned

Jerusalem's restoration near the end of time is anticipated in this announcement heralding comfort to come when mortal struggles and suffering for past sins are at last over. Cataclysmic changes heralded by a voice in the wilderness will prepare for earth's renewal and the Messiah's coming in glory; "and all flesh shall see it together." Mortal flesh will pass, but things eternal will go on (Isa. 40:6-8; 1 Pet. 1:18-25 regarding the Messiah-Redeemer who makes it possible). Words from this passage in Isaiah are used in Handel's Messiah and in Brahms's German Requiem.

40:9-31 O Zion, that bringest good tidings, . . . the Lord God will come

"The Lord God" is Adonai JHVH in the Hebrew text, that is, "My Lord Jehovah." Though many of Judah do not yet know it, the Lord is the Messiah and someday will say "Behold your God." He will reign, feed his flock, gather the lambs, and tenderly care for all (Isa. 40:9-11). Not at all like idols created by man, the Lord is the all-knowing and all-powerful Creator (Isa. 40:12-27). He is eternal and never fails; he can give power to the faint; they who hope for him and live his laws shall "run, and not be weary; . . . walk, and not faint" (Isa. 40:28-31 and fn.).

41:1-29 let the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment

As the return under Cyrus would be directed by the Lord, so shall the future gathering of Israel be divinely directed (Isa. 41:1-7; 44:28 and 45:1). Israel in the latter days shall fulfill its mission (Isa. 41:8-10; "How Firm a Foundation," Hymns, no. 85,v. 3). The Lord will aid in the latter-day gathering and the earth will be made productive and beautiful. Former "gods" are impotent to know or act, but the Lord is omnipotent (Isa. 41:11-29).

42:1-4 Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles

This servant is Jesus the Messiah, servant of the Father (as Matthew correctly recognized; Isa. 42:1a). Aspects of His work in both the first and the second advent were foretold in these verses. Be aware, however, that Isaiah sometimes calls Israel the "servant" of the Lord.

42:5-25 Thus saith God the Lord, . . . I the Lord have called thee, . . . and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles

The speaker here is "God the Lord" (Heb., Ha-El JHVH, meaning, "the God Jehovah"). The work that he will do, and calls his people to help him do, is to bring light to the other nations (the "Gentiles") and also to the spirit world, making the saving covenants available to all (Isa. 42:5-7 and fn.).

The prophet exulted with a song of praise and awe as he envisioned the might of the Lord in destroying decadence and disease, to create new ways and works on earth (Isa. 42:8-18).

The prophet lamented, with a song of reproach, about the past failings of the Lord's servant-people, Israel. Because of their failings, the Lord let them be taken into exile and awaited their return unto him (Isa. 42:19-25; JST Isa. 42:19-23).

43:1-28 But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee

The Creator is also the Redeemer and Savior. He will gather latter-day Israel to resume the mission of Abraham and Israel to enlighten the "blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears" in all nations. Those who respond and truly serve the Lord become his "witnesses" (Isa. 43:1-10 and fn.). The Lord (that is, Jehovah) is the only Savior, the Redeemer, the Holy One, the Creator, and King; he will make new ways for peace and end old wars (Isa. 43:11-17).

This vision ends with a fervent call from the Lord to his people to forsake and forget their former sinful ways, fulfill their covenant duties, be relieved of their suffering, and rejoice that the Lord will blot out transgressions for all who turn to him and communicate with him. They can become "justified" (Isa. 43:18-28).

44:1-27 Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen

These synonymous clauses are a poetic couplet introducing another of Isaiah's prophetic delineations of the mission of the faithful for the Lord. He created them, called them, and will prosper them. Their converts will take upon themselves the name of Israel and also become the Lord's people. He identifies himself by names and titles: King of Israel, Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, the First and the Last, and God. He is the revealer of things to come, and his covenant peoples are his witnesses (Isa. 44:1-8).

By contrast, idols and they who manufacture them are ridiculous; the shaper of a wooden idol profits more from the part of the wood he burns to warm himself and cook his food than from the part he makes into a wooden god (Isa. 44:9-20 and fn.).

The miracles of the forgiveness of sins and the restoration of "decayed places" by the Redeemer are dramatically promised (Isa. 44:21-26).

44:28-45:4 That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd

Isaiah foretold a dramatic event to come—which it did in about two hundred years, ca. 539 B.C.—when a king named Cyrus would be raised up to shepherd the Lord's people (Judah) back from Babylonian captivity to Jerusalem and would facilitate the rebuilding of the city and the temple (2 Chr. 36:22-23; Ezra 1:1-4; and commentary). The "higher critics" of the Bible commonly reject this as a prophecy by Isaiah because he lived centuries before Cyrus, who is called by name here; but our belief in divine foreknowledge allows us to accept Isaiah's authorship.

45:5-25 I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me

In this theological revelation, Isaiah declared a number of the Lord's creative and redemptive works. Like the Father, the Son is uniquely God, and there is no other in his role (Isa. 45:5-6).

Light and darkness, peace and evil, in a poetic couplet, illustrate both ends of the spectrum of things permitted to exist under the divine system. That spectrum allows exercise of individual agency, because it permits "an opposition in all things" (2 Ne. 2:11). Moral evil is, of course, not created by God (Isa. 45:7b), but he did create a system wherein it is allowed to be present, just as Satan is permitted to be among humankind.

When punishment or suffering comes upon people under the Lord's hand, they call their sufferings "bad"—and they are, compared to the good they could have had if they had qualified for blessings.

Atheism was shown by the prophet to be illogical—as if a clay pot were to question the potter and deny the work of his hands or children were to deny that parents begot and bore them (Isa. 45:9-10).

More reviews of the works of the Lord include another declaration about the mission of Cyrus (Isa. 44:13 and fn.). Unlike idols, the Lord is not commonly seen, but he is "the Savior," who saves "with an everlasting salvation." Worshippers of visible idols shall be ashamed and confounded (Isa. 45:11-17).

The prophet testified that the Lord, the God who created the heavens and who formed the earth, is not secretive, but straightforward and righteous (Isa. 45:18-19).

In conclusion, our Savior and God invites the gathered of Israel and "all the ends of the earth" (Isa. 45:22) to look unto him and be saved. Eventually, every knee shall bow and every tongue covenant with him (Isa. 45:20-25 and abundant fn.).

46:1-13 Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts . . . To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal

Here is another scathing rebuke of idolatry; though modern "idols" may look different, they are in essence the same as the ancient ones. Because the true God has borne his people from the beginning, they greatly offend him by lavishing adoration and adornment upon idols, which indeed bear nothing, but they themselves have to be borne. "To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal" (v. 5) is a challenge to which any nomination would be absurd; then the Lord states again the absurdity of making idols to worship. Isaiah urged people to be firmly faithful, remembering the true God's deeds and words, which are dependable, authoritative, helpful, and corrective. The Lord invites all to trust in his salvation.

A strange metaphor was added to what had been revealed about Cyrus of Persia, who would let the Jews return (Isa. 46:11a; 44:28; 45:1).

47:1-15 Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne

Although in Isaiah's time Babylon had been suppressed by Assyria and neo-Babylonia would not rise for about a hundred years (ca. 625 B.C.), this prophetic chapter by Isaiah anticipated its downfall yet another century later (ca. 539 B.C.), after having held Judah captive for a time (Isa. 47:1-6 and fn.). This whole word-picture may also be read as a prototype for destruction of the wicked world at the end of time, for Babylon is sometimes so used in the scriptures (BD, "Babylon").

48:1-22 Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah

The people of Israel, either by birth or baptism, who are not faithful to their covenants or have not hearkened to prophetic warnings, if they are not summarily cut off, shall be refined "in the furnace of affliction" (Isa. 48:3-11, 1a, 2b). Part of that affliction would be in Babylon, where Israel would be exiled because they did not hearken to their Redeemer. The Lord would have power to deal with Babylon and redeem Israel when they had hearkened to his commandments. Had they done so sooner, peace would have flowed for them as a river and their numbers been as the sands of the sea (Isa. 48:12-19).

The prophecy ends with an invitation for Judah's future and for ours, "Go ye forth of Babylon" (Isa. 48:20; D&C 133:14). A reminder is added about the saving power of the Lord, demonstrated in the Exodus; and another reminder affirms that there is no peace unto the wicked (Isa. 48:20-22 and fn.).

49:1-26 Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord hath called me from the womb; . . . And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword

In this somewhat complicated review (involving concepts from Isa. 40-48), Isaiah declares his own call and mission and Israel's mission. The mission of Israel is the dominant subject, but the Messiah who comes through Israel is the primal "light to the Gentiles" and the source of "salvation unto the end of the earth" (Isa. 49:1-6; 1 Ne. 21; D&C 86:8-11).

It is again declared that the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, had chosen Israel and would help them as a covenant people to redeem even the prisoners in the spirit prison. For the great work to be done, Israel would be saved and preserved and in the end gathered from all directions (Isa. 49:7-12, 9a). Great rejoicing is to accompany that gathering, and all shall know the Lord has not forgotten his covenant promises. Mention of the signs engraven in the Lord's hands may be an allusion to an event Zechariah foresaw in the second coming of the Messiah, when some shall say, "What are these wounds in thine hands?" (Zech. 13:6; Isa. 49:13-17; D&C 45:48-54).

The remainder of the review tells of the great numbers of the restored of Israel. The Lord promises them help from other nations through their "kings" and "queens." A rhetorical question is posed about whether the "lawful" captives of "the mighty" can be delivered during the gathering; impossible as it would be for mortal deliverers, yet the Lord indeed promises deliverance. All shall know he is Savior and Redeemer, while the "mighty" destroy each other (Isa. 49:18-26).

50:1-11 Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, . . . Wherefore, when I came, was there no man?

The Lord, through the prophet Isaiah, challenges His people to answer why they act as if they have been divorced from God or sold by Him—indeed, why they sell themselves for iniquitous pleasures. Why have they not responded when He called? In view of all He has done, do they yet think He has no power to redeem? (Isa. 50:1-3). Isaiah reviewed his prophetic credentials—his inspiration as a spokesman, his receptivity. He envisioned the future persecution and torture of the Savior and the things He would suffer and endure for mankind. It strengthened the prophet's confidence that the Lord would help, defend, and justify him, whereas his condemners would wax old and be consumed (Isa. 50:4-9).

The prophet, speaking for "the Lord God," invited all who fear the Lord and obey His servant, to trust Him, even if they were still in darkness. The alternative is to walk by the light of their own fire, their own little "sparks"; but if they do, they will "lie down in sorrow" (Isa. 50:10-11; 2:5).

51:1-23 Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: . . . Look unto Abraham . . . and unto Sarah

A message of comfort and reassurance is given to all the seed of Abraham to anticipate true Zion, renewal of the Eden-like glory of earth, righteous rule, salvation, and an end to reproach and revilings at the end of the wicked world (Isa. 51:1-8 and fn.). The same faithful people are invited to "awake, put on strength." It means that they should resume functioning in the power of the true priesthood in the last days (Isa. 51:9; D&C 113:8 concerning Isa. 52:1). That priesthood, which is the power of God, is the same power that overcame chaos in the creation of the world, parted the waters for Moses and Israel, and shall accomplish the latter-day gathering of Israel. The Lord gives assurance that he will comfort his people, destroy the oppressors, loose the captives, put words in the mouth of his people, and lay the foundations of Zion; then Jerusalem can awaken and arise (Isa. 51:9-17).

At a time when there is none to guide the people of Jerusalem during the gathering and the conflict, "two sons" shall arise and prophesy; though smitten, they are redeemed, and former oppressors shall be oppressed at last (Isa. 51:18-23; 2 Ne. 8:19-20; Rev. 11:3-12; D&C 77:15).

52:1-12 Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, . . . loose thyself from the bands of thy neck

Repeating the summons to the latter-day heirs of the mission of Abraham, the prophet Isaiah spoke for the Lord in urging the chosen people of the end of time in Jerusalem to do better than the redeemed Israelites of the exodus from Egypt who eventually suffered the Assyrian captivity. Those gathered in the last days must eliminate hypocrisy and blasphemy and function truly as the Lord's messengers (Isa. 52:1-6; 51:9; D&C 113:7-10).

Then "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings" (v. 7) of the gospel of peace and salvation. The latter-day messengers help the Lord to establish Zion, redeem Jerusalem, and make the power of the Lord dominant in all the world (Isa. 52:7-10). They are urged to go out on their missions, being clean, as those "that bear the vessels of the Lord," and God will go with them (Isa. 52:11-12b).

52:13-53:12 Behold, my servant . . . shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high . . . his visage was so marred more than any man . . . He is despised and rejected of men

In this passage lies the heart of the message of Isaiah and of all the prophets (Mosiah 13:33). There should be no problem in identifying this Servant of God. He is our divine Redeemer—he who was both humble and mighty, persecuted and honored. He was stricken and rejected, but he still perfected our salvation and atonement. Many commentators recognize this as a prophecy about the Messiah; though not all who read it recognize Jesus of Nazareth as the Messiah, they will when they see the wounds in his hands (Isa. 52:13-15; Zech. 13:6; D&C 45:52).

Appreciation of this great prophecy can be enhanced by study of the version of it, and the commentary on it, in the Book of Mormon and other scriptures (Isa. 53:1-3 and fn.; Mosiah 13:33-35; 14:1-12; 15:1-3l).

Because the Lord is the Savior, what may be meant by the phrases "the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all," "it pleased the Lord to bruise him," and "the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand"? Remember that the Firstborn Son of God volunteered in the Council in Heaven to become the Savior (Moses 4:2; Abr. 3:27; TG, "Jesus Christ, Messiah"; "Jesus Christ, Jehovah"). He was "pleased" to lay upon himself our sins and let himself be persecuted and bruised; his pleasure (the joy of the redemption of all humankind) shall indeed prosper by his hand (cf. Mosiah 15:5-8). Consider what he was willing to suffer (1 Ne. 19:9-10). Thus, he "poured out his soul unto death: . . . and he bare the sin of many" (Isa. 53:4-12 and fn.).

54:1-17 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; . . . for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord

Israel was sometimes compared by the prophets to a wayward and estranged wife. Here Israel is promised that in spite of "the shame of [her] youth" and "the reproach of [her] widowhood," her Maker and Husband is also her Redeemer, and He will gather her in (Isa. 54:1-5; Hosea 2).

The children of the erstwhile "desolate" will be more numerous in the latter days than the children of the former "married wife" (covenant people) in the early history of Israel. Therefore the "tent" of Israel will have to be enlarged, its fabric extended, its cords lengthened, and its stakes strengthened in the latter days (Isa. 54:2; D&C 82:14; TG, "Stake"). Even as there will never be another flood like the "waters of Noah," so the Lord's people will never be scattered and lost again. The ultimate picture is of millennial peace and beauty (Isa. 54:6-14).

The Lord created all and controls all, including the "waster to destroy" and the weapons formed against his people; by him they will be condemned to destruction at last (Isa. 54:15-17).

55:1-13 Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price

This short poetic prophecy is about salvation and redemption. The opening words are an invitation to everyone who has spiritual desires to come unto the Lord and receive the blessings of sacrifice and sustenance ("wine" and "milk"). In contrast, it disparages spending labor and means on nonessential things.

The poetic metaphor "sure mercies of David" (Heb., lit., "the established loving kindnesses of David") is a synonymous parallel with the "everlasting covenant." "David" here is he who is given "for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people": he is the Messiah, the Christ. That he provides all the blessings he has freely promised is evident (Isa. 55:1-4 and fn.).

The mission of Abraham and Israel will be fulfilled when peoples of all nations come unto the Lord, the Holy One of Israel. All are admonished to seek him "while he may be found"—while they are still spiritually sensitive enough recognize him. The way to come to him is to repent, believing that he will pardon, and covenant with him (Isa. 55:5-7). If such generous promises of salvation and loving kindness seem too good to be true, it is because our thoughts are not like God's thoughts nor our ways like his ways. His are higher than ours, but his words will as surely bear fruit as will the soil watered by the rain—and his words will not evaporate (Isa. 55:8-11).

Some lovely aspects of life in the renewed, righteous earth conclude the prophecy (Isa. 55:12-13).

56:1-8 Thus saith the Lord, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation is near to come

A topic broached above is further developed in this segment, with blessings promised to old and young who live justly and keep the Sabbath, including converts and those who had been excluded (such as the eunuch; BD, "Eunuch"). "Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer"; for that house, the temple, "shall be called a house of prayer for all people," including "outcasts." Thus the mission of the chosen people will be fulfilled when they have borne "this ministry and priesthood unto all nations" and "all the families of the earth [are] blessed" (Isa. 55:5; 56:3-8; Abr. 2:9, 11).

56:9-57:12 All ye beasts of the field, come to devour . . . His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, . . . Yea, they are greedy dogs

Turning from the lovely anticipations of the future world of fulfillment and peace, Isaiah abruptly pronounced a scathing rebuke upon Israel's careless, ineffective, and selfish leaders, whose failings and faithlessness had caused the righteous to perish with their only comfort being that they were thus taken away from further evils to come (Isa. 56:9-12; 57:1-2). The rebuke could have been addressed to such leaders as the last kings and leaders of northern Israel (cf. 2 Kgs. 15-17). Their evils included sorcery, adultery, rudeness, falsehood, idolatry, sexual aberrations, necromancy, and refusal to repent. Their "righteousness" and "works" were not adequate to save them (Isa. 57:3-l2).

57:13-21 but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain

In contrast to the wicked leaders, who will cry in vain to their idols for deliverance, leaders and people trusting in the Lord can ask for the stumbling blocks to be removed and the way of return prepared. The true God who dwells "in the high and holy place" will hear those of "a contrite and humble spirit"; he will return to heal them and gather them. They shall finally hear his blessed words, "Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near." The wicked, however, shall remain filthy and have no peace (Isa. 57:13-21; 48:22).

58:1-14 Cry aloud . . . shew my people their transgression . . . they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways

To questions about performing such ordinances as fasting and then failing to feel any spiritual results, the prophet's answer from the Lord explained that the fasting was perfunctory, for they had not lived as their ordinances had pledged them to. Fasting should increase charity in the heart and charitable deeds in the community. Real blessings, both spiritual and material, will flow from sincerely fasting and giving fast offerings (Isa. 58:9-12). Even such a simple virtue as sincere Sabbath keeping is a sign that all covenants are held sacred, and the way of life that results therefrom will be rewarded (Isa. 58:13-14; Ex. 31:12-17; D&C 59:9-24).

59:1-21 Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; . . . But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you

Sin had separated the people of the Lord from him: "your sins have hid his face from you" (Isa. 59:2, emphasis added). There had been too much bloodshed, lying, injustice, vanity, plots and webs, eagerness for evil, and haste to violence (Isa. 59:1-8).

Misery and insecurity had resulted from that separation; fair judgment and justice were lacking (Isa. 59:9-15). But the Lord feels compassion for humankind and has provided salvation; he intercedes and defends and will recompense; and as the Redeemer, he will come to Zion. At last his people will act in accordance with his covenant and become his faithful messengers (Isa. 59:16-21 and fn.).

60:1-22 Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, . . . but the Lord shall arise upon thee

True Israelites will fulfill their missions by letting their light illuminate life for others (Isa. 60:1-3).

In the gathering of Israel to Zion, many converted peoples of other nations ("Gentiles") will participate, helping Israelite people come home "as the doves to their windows" (these words were quoted by Orson Hyde in his dedication of the Holy Land). "Sons of strangers" and of former oppressors will help in rebuilding and reclaiming the land (Isa. 60:4-14).

Under the Lord as Savior and Redeemer, Zion will reach "eternal excellency" (v. 15), and precious things from many nations shall adorn her. Violence will cease, and Zion's walls shall be salvation and praise of righteousness. The Lord shall be her light, and her people shall gain their eternal inheritances, multiply, and be blessed abundantly (Isa. 60:15-22).

61:1-11 The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings

As the chapter heading states, Isaiah spoke messianically to announce the beginning of the Messiah's redemptive work on earth. The words that open this chapter were quoted by Jesus in his hometown of Nazareth, and the people were told he would fulfill this prophecy (Isa. 61:1-2 and fn.; Luke 4:18-19; 3 Ne. 22; 23:1).

The themes of restoration of the previous two chapters are continued with further messages about the rebuilding and the establishment of Zion. Moses' prophecy that Israel would become "a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" is finally to be fulfilled (Ex. 19:6; Isa. 61:3-6).

Reversing the disinheritance status of the years of exile, Israel will at last inherit a birthright ("double") portion, and the mission of the seed of Abraham will finally be fulfilled.

A song of rejoicing ends this prophecy (Isa. 61:7-11 and fn.).

62:1-12 And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory

The prophecies of restoration continue, and Isaiah was ardent in prophesying about this subject. Israel of the future shall have a "new name"; new titles will characterize her restored status (Isa. 62:1-5 and fn.).

The Lord will appoint prophets as watchmen on the walls of Jerusalem to watch for the coming of the Lord—proclaiming salvation and bringing his redeemed with him. Jerusalem shall be called, "Sought out, A city not forsaken" (Isa. 62:6-12).

63:1-19 Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? . . . I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save

As the footnotes and cross-references to other scriptures (including the Doctrine and Covenants) show, the meaning of this passage is that the Savior will come again, having overcome such enemies as sin and death. The metaphor is of sin and death as people whose blood stained the Redeemer's garments. In fact, when he ransomed us from sin and death, his garments were stained with his own blood (Isa. 63:1-6 and fn.; Luke 22:44; D&C 19:18; John 19:34).

Isaiah declared the Lord's loving kindnesses and His great goodness in His service also as temporal Savior in redeeming Israel of old from afflictions in bondage and in the wilderness. Even though they rebelled and vexed the Spirit sent to be their guide in the days of Moses, yet the Lord "put his holy Spirit within" Moses and made him their shepherd to lead them through wilderness and sea and down into the valley to rest in the promised land (Isa. 63:10-14).

Then the prophet addressed a direct supplication to the Lord as "our father," as one who cares for the people of Israel even more than did their earthly forefathers, Abraham and Israel. The prophet inquired for the people: "Why hast thou made us to err" (corrected in JST; Isa. 63:17a). By erring, Israel lost His protection, so that invaders could take over their inheritance and tread down the sanctuary. The prophet pleaded for salvation from the invaders and redemption for those who bear His name (Isa. 63:15-19).

64:1-12 Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down . . . to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!

The supplications are continued (from 63:16-19) in a yearning prayer for the Lord to establish his beautiful kingdom for all who believe in and look for him (Isa. 63:16-19; 64:1-4).

Unworthy, unclean, and unfaithful though decadent Israel was, yet the prophet pleaded for them with the Lord as their Father and as the divine Potter in whose hands they are the clay (Isa. 64:5-8).

Then the vision shifted from the times of Israel's decadence to the last days when the "holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation" awaiting the restoration and establishment of the Lord's kingdom on earth (Isa. 64:9-12). Note the reference to two "holy cities"—Zion and Jerusalem (Isa. 64:10; TG, "Jerusalem, New"; "Zion"; BD, "Zion").

65:1-16 I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: . . . I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts

Responding to Isaiah's previous supplications, the Lord indicated that he had always been available, but only in distress had his people turned to him; they had not sought him or heeded his outstretched hands. His erring people had dealt in "abominable things" and yet said to others "I am holier than thou." They had been offensive, iniquitous idolaters and would be recompensed for their wickedness (Isa. 65:6-7).

Nevertheless, the Lord knows there is always some good juice in a cluster of grapes, for which reason they may be saved. There were some good seeds in Jacob (Israel) and Judah, and they would yet qualify for an inheritance. Sharon, on the western slopes, and Achor, in the eastern valley of Jordan (where trouble arose in Joshua's time), shall become peaceful pastures in the time of restoration (Isa. 65:8-10; on Achor, see Josh. 7:24; Hosea 2:14-15).

All will not be blessed, however. They who forsake the Lord will leave their names for a curse. They will be differentiated from the true servants who seek the blessings of the true God and are true to their covenants (Isa. 65:11-16).

65:17-25 For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come to mind

The epoch-making change when the kingdom of God is fully established on earth has been foreseen by prophets of many periods of history, but nowhere is the picture more appealing than here in the details of family life, freedom from sorrow and bereavement, and divinely blessed life, labor, and peace among all living things on earth (Isa. 65:17c-e).

66:1-24 Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; your brethren that hated you . . . shall be ashamed

This chapter has seemed to many to be anticlimactic, following as it does the lovely vision of the new heavens and the new earth. But it does deal with the advent of that splendid state, even though it emphasizes the destruction of evil that will precede it. The old rituals, so often hypocritically performed, will be done away, and they who have only such worship to their credit shall suffer the consequences (Isa. 66:1-4 and fn.).

The righteous with joy will see the Lord appear; but they who hate righteousness will be ashamed. The new Jerusalem and the the new Zion will be born "in one day," and they who take part in them will rejoice. Peace will flow on like a river, and the Lord will comfort his people (Isa. 66:5-14 and fn.).

"The Lord will come with fire," purifying the earth of all idolatrous peoples. Then they who accept the Lord will be gathered from "all nations and tongues." Those who do not know him will be provided a sign (or ensign), and missionaries will declare his glory among all those Gentiles. Israel's gathering will be completed, the priesthood will again be established, and worship of the Lord by all will begin (Isa. 66:15-23).

The book ends with a sobering scene of the destruction of the wicked who have not repented and accepted the Lord (Isa. 66:24).

The Savior himself quoted some of Isaiah's prophecies, and he recommended that we study them (3 Ne. 23:1-2). It is rewarding and instructive for us to do that—reading the whole book to get the whole perspective and then pondering on each topic. As the Lord said, "Great are the words of Isaiah."

 
 
© 1993 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
