Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

Preface

A scriptural and theological examination of man's pre-mortal existence and its impact on mortality is, as Elder Neal A. Maxwell has expressed it, "one of the doctrinal roads least traveled by." However fragmentary our veiled mortal knowledge may be, there is something in each of us that seeks for expanding enlightenment regarding our origins. President David O. McKay taught that "everyone is possessed with an irresistible desire to know his relationship with the Infinite." Knowledge of one's literal relationship to God and of one's premortal heavenly associations can, as President McKay continued, "urge him to rise above himself, to control his environment, to master the body and all things physical and live in a higher and more beautiful world."

It is often thought that because a veil is drawn and we cannot remember, there must not be very much known about that spiritual realm. Some also seem to regard it as a topic that is "off limits." Yet there are many things that we naturally wonder about concerning that former abode. The expansive understanding that we once possessed has since been muted, leaving only intimations, suppositions, and partially answered questions. To attempt to answer all of the questions would be impossible, since the Lord, in his infinite wisdom, has withheld much regarding our premortal home. However, the scriptures and, particularly, the inspired writings and utterances of latter-day prophets have parted the veil just enough to provide impelling insights. The Brethren have written or spoken much more on this subject than most of us imagine. The scriptures, likewise, speak to us in sometimes indirect ways to teach us about our life before mortality. The purpose of this book is certainly not to speculate or theorize about things hidden from our view but rather to compile and organize those scriptural and seeric statements that can inform and inspire, and to draw reasonable conclusions therefrom. The more we can learn about the life before, the more we will be motivated to live worthy to return to the presence of our Eternal Father.

There will remain many unanswered questions. The veil will yet be drawn. It is my hope, however, that this book will help to answer some questions and, more important, to stimulate your thinking-for as you ponder and study, more questions will arise, followed by greater spiritual insight. "Knowledge is of no value unless used," said President Spencer W. Kimball. That is the objective of this book-to provide information that will enlighten the mind and prepare the heart for the inspiration that can change our lives and buoy us up spiritually as we pass through this second estate.
