Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

Acknowledgments

Several people have helped to shape the words and ideas of this book. I extend to each of them my appreciation for their important input. Thomas F. Olmstead, coordinator for the Church Educational System in the Richmond, Virginia, area, first encouraged me to seriously pursue this project. I appreciate the research ideas he shared with me. I also appreciate my former colleagues of the Church Educational System, U.S. Northeast Area, who served as sounding boards for many of my ideas.

Several of my colleagues from the BYU religion faculty also helped in a variety of ways with this project. I appreciate the input of ideas, editorial suggestions, and critical feedback that I received from Robert L. Millet, Stephen E. Robinson, Kent P. Jackson, Joseph F. McConkie, and Art Bailey. I am especially grateful for the "extra-mile" service of my colleague, friend, and mentor, Larry E. Dahl, who continually encouraged me in my research and writing. He unselfishly shared not only much of his own research but also his time in reviewing the manuscript and offering valuable suggestions. My association with all of my colleagues of the BYU religion faculty has influenced this work indirectly. I am daily touched by their enormous collective and individual knowledge of and love for the gospel, and by their deep commitment to religious education and gospel scholarship.

I am deeply grateful for my four children and for the contribution they have unknowingly made to this book. Their love, their character, and their questions have stimulated my desire for research on this subject. While carefully observing them, I have gained many insights about our premortal existence. In them I can see that, in a spiritually significant way, as Tiffany said, their "insides are older than their outsides."

Most important, I extend my love and appreciation to my wife, Wendy, for her assistance in this work. She has unwearyingly reviewed, edited, and improved the manuscript. She not only has given significant editorial service but also has influenced my ideas with her own inspired insights. I deeply needed and profoundly felt her support and encouragement. With this project, as with other more eternally important endeavors we share, she has been an inspiration in my life.
