Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

1 Man's Search for His Spiritual Roots

Several years ago, Alex Haley captivated the American public with his epic novel, Roots, and its subsequent television miniseries. That monumental work aroused a new fascination with genealogies and family histories. Soon many became fervently involved in tracing family "roots" and in delving into the annals of ancestors. Like Haley, others felt that discovering their own biological and cultural heritage would lead them to greater understanding of their own identity. It is undeniably true that our roots help shape the trunk, branches, and limbs that make up not only ourselves and our posterity but also, ultimately, all of mankind.

Just as the discovery of our earthly genealogy, enhanced by familial and cultural history, can guide us to a greater understanding of our temporal selves, perhaps even greater insight into the eternal nature and destiny of man emerges from a search for our spiritual roots or eternal lineage. In virtually all mankind there is some sort of innate yearning to know what was before this life and how it affects man in his earthly sojourn. Eliza R. Snow, in the familiar hymn "O My Father," expressed this yearning for a knowledge of spiritual roots:

For a wise and glorious purpose Thou hast placed me here on earth And withheld the recollection Of my former friends and birth; Yet ofttimes a secret something Whispered, "You're a stranger here,Â And I felt that I had wandered From a more exalted sphere. [^1]

This feeling or intimation of a former existence, described by Eliza R. Snow as a "secret something," is not unique to Latter-day Saints. Several surveys conducted during the last three decades among peoples from many countries in the Western world-countries whose cultures and religions generally reject the notion of a premortal life of man-found substantial numbers of the population who felt strongly that there was a life or existence before their present life on earth. [^2] With regard to the ample sentiment among men and women of all cultures, religions, and backgrounds for a premortal existence of man, Erik Erikson, a noted psychoanalyst, observed, "And let us face it: 'deep down' nobody in his right mind can visualize his own existence without assuming that he has always lived and will live hereafter; and the religious world-views of old only endowed this psychological instinct with images which could be shared, transmitted, and ritualized." [^3]

This feeling or sense of the premortal existence and immortality of the soul, described by Erikson as a "psychological instinct," surfaces in many sources. Man's yearning to know his spiritual roots and to understand more fully the meaning of his premortal life threads through the writings and beliefs of people throughout all ages and across diverse cultures, religions, and philosophies.

Anthropologists have reported a strong belief in the immortality of the soul of man and in the concept of "rebirth" among age-old African folk religions. [^4] Roots offered us a sample of these ancient African beliefs. The main character, Kunta Kinte, learns of the premortal existence and the life beyond mortality from his father, Omoro, upon the death of his beloved grandmother. "He said that three groups of people lived in every village," explains Haley. "First were those you could see-walking around, eating, sleeping, and working. Second were the ancestors, whom Grandma Yaisa had now joined. 'And the third people-who are they?' asked Kunta. 'The third people,' said Omoro, 'are those waiting to be born." [^5]

The age-old African folk beliefs depicted by Haley are also evident in the writings of Chinua Achebe, a Nigerian novelist. Achebe, like other West African writers, has drawn upon the folk stories, legends, and spiritual beliefs of his people in the development of his literary works. Some of this folklore described by Achebe has intriguing references to a life before mortality. In African tradition, Achebe says, "the idea of the child as a messenger is certainly prevalent." There are many African tribal stories "about how children come from the world over there into the world of men....The child comes from somewhere else... [and] there is a constant coming or going between us and the world of the ancestors....Then it's the child who can tell you about that world since its coming from there-it's not the old man who's going there but the child who's coming from there." [^6]

When the Romans conquered the Celts, they discovered a people with strong beliefs in the immortality of the spirit of man. Historian Alfred Nutt reported that these ancient peoples of the British Isles held definite religious views regarding a premortal existence of man and the concept of rebirth from a previous life. [^7] Such folklore is exemplified in this statement from the Scottish poet Fiona Macleod: "I think the soul knows. I think the soul remembers. I think that intuition is divine and unshakeable. We have travelled a long way, and forgotten much. The secret road of the soul is a long road." [^8]

While other cultures and civilizations have shared many of these beliefs, each with its own unique adaptations, perhaps the most widely known cultural acceptance of the immortality and previous existence of man's soul is found in the Eastern religions, and this acceptance is embodied in the doctrine of reincarnation. Though not generally accepted in Western culture, the concept of reincarnation has gained much publicity in recent times with considerable media attention focused on prominent figures from the entertainment world who have embraced a belief in reincarnation and the immortality of the soul. Even modern psychologists have exerted considerable time and effort in the study of "past lives" and beliefs about reincarnation. Despite the recent public interest in this idea, the concept is not new and its roots can be traced to ancient Eastern religious thought. While Latter-day Saints reject the doctrine of reincarnation as taught in Hinduism, Buddhism, and other religions, our theology shares with it many important principles, such as the immortality and preexistence of the spirit and the doctrine of restoration. Thus, despite theological differences, a commonality exists that sheds light on the idea of a premortal existence.

The ancient Greeks accepted the notions of a premortal state for man and the immortality of the spirit. Famous Greek writers and philosophers such as Plato, Cicero, and Seneca wrote extensively concerning this idea. Plato, responding to Socrates in his famous dialogue Phaedo, remarks, "Your favourite doctrine, Socrates, that knowledge is simply recollection, if true, also necessarily implies a previous time in which we have learned that which we now recollect. But this would be impossible unless our soul had been in some place before existing in the form of man; here then is another proof of the soul's immortality. [^9]

In addition to the Greek philosophers, Philo of Alexandria, the Jewish theologian who was a contemporary of the early Apostles of Jesus, also spoke of a premortal existence of man. David Winston, a noted expert in Greek and early Jewish literature, reported some interesting similarities between LDS views on the premortal existence and Greek and Jewish writings. "Analogous doctrines may be found in ancient Greek and Jewish literature, though with subtle and important variations. We shall find, for example, that the notions of preexistence, the creation of the world out of primordial matter, and the placing of human life on earth for moral testing, are in one form or another common to Mormonism and the Hellenic and Jewish traditions. The eternal generation of spirits by God may be partially paralleled in Greek and Jewish-Hellenistic writings, though not in rabbinic literature." [^10]

Hugh Nibley has done considerable research in this area and has given numerous examples from apocryphal and other writings, including those from Qumran, Nag Hammadi, and the Mandaeans, that speak not only of a premortal existence of man but also of a unique relationship to a Heavenly Father. [^11] With increasing discoveries of such scrolls and documents of ancient origin, evidence has come to light more frequently that these early civilizations believed that man himself had a premortal life. Truman G. Madsen noted that one scholar now estimates that there are "well over eight hundred references to the premortal existence of mankind in Jewish and Christian source materials." [^12]

As we study the references to these beliefs in a previous existence of man across the many cultures and religions of the world, one important question arises: How can there be so many similarities in belief concerning a previous existence and immortality and yet such diversity among those beliefs? It is logical to assume that each of these cultures and religions was exposed to some of the truth, as evidenced in their basic belief in a previous existence, but what accounts for those teachings that are far from the truth? The First Presidency issued an official statement in 1978 that helps to account not only for the similarities but also for the differences in belief among the great religions and philosophies of the world:

Based upon ancient and modern revelation, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints gladly teaches and declares the Christian doctrine that all men and women are brothers and sisters, not only by blood relationship from common mortal progenitors, but also as literal spirit children of an Eternal Father.

The great religious leaders of the world such as Mohammed, Confucius, and the Reformers, as well as philosophers including Socrates, Plato, and others, received a portion of God's light. Moral truths were given to them by God to enlighten whole nations and to bring a higher level of understanding to individuals ....

Consistent with these truths, we believe that God has given and will give to all people sufficient knowledge to help them on their way to eternal salvation, either in this life or in the life to come. [^13]

Not only has the Lord revealed portions of the truth regarding the origins of man to great religious leaders and philosophers in an effort to lift them and their people to a nobler, more purposeful existence, and thereby to lead them to the fulness of the gospel, but he has also inspired other thoughtful and sensitive individuals in many other walks of life and in many lands to "a higher level of understanding." This higher level of understanding is reflected in the personal musings of searching individuals in literature, philosophy, psychology, and other disciplines.

Most Latter-day Saints are familiar with the famous lines of William Wordsworth:

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home: Heaven lies about us in our infancy!

Not as familiar as these beautiful lines are Wordsworth's personal comments concerning the ideas that influenced him to write "Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood." He wrote of childhood memories and images which he described as the "presumptive evidence of a prior state of existence." He further commented:

I think it right to protest against a conclusion, which has given pain to some good and pious persons, that I meant to inculcate such a belief. It is far too shadowy a notion to be recommended to faith, as more than an element in our instincts of immortality. But let us bear in mind that, though the idea is not advanced in revelation, there is nothing there to contradict it, and the fall of Man presents an analogy in its favour. Accordingly, a preexistent state has entered into the popular creeds of many nations; and, among all persons acquainted with classic literature, is known as an ingredient in Platonic philosophy....Having to wield some of its elements when I was impelled to write this poem on the "Immortality of the Soul," I took hold of the notion of preexistence as having sufficient foundation in humanity for authorizing me to make for my purpose the best use of it I could as a poet. [^14]

Wordsworth is not alone among literary figures in writing about this subject. Alfred, Lord Tennyson, also wrote with wonder about the possibility of former worlds and premortal relationships:

...We say "All this hath been before, All this hath been, I know not when or where." So, friend, when first I looked upon your face, Our thought gave answer, each to each, so true, Opposed mirrors each reflecting each- Altho' I knew not in what time or place, Methought that I had often met with you, And lived in each other's mind and speech. [^15]

A hundred years or so before either Wordsworth or Tennyson penned their lines, the poet Henry Vaughn wrote of a "celestial" home and of a new home "appointed for my second race." Such a description certainly is an intriguing parallel to the common LDS terminology for mortality as the "second estate."

Happy those early days, when I Shin'd in my Angel-Infancy! Before I understood this place Appointed for my second race, Or taught my soul to fancy aught But a white celestial thought: When yet I had not walk'd above A mile or two from my first Love, And looking back-at that short space- Could see a glimpse of His bright face. [^16]

The works of Thomas Traherne came to light only in this century, but he also made several references to man's immortal spirit and celestial lineage. In the mid-seventeenth century his works were viewed as radical at best and heretical at worst. The prevailing religious thought of his day was of the innate sinfulness and fallen state of man. Traherne, however, alluded to a more pure spirit of man which had its origins in a heavenly home. His strong belief in man's celestial roots and in his inherent goodness appears in Traherne's own meditations as well as his poetic works. "Will you see the infancy of this sublime and celestial greatness?" mused Traherne. "Those pure and virgin apprehensions I had in my infancy, and that divine light wherewith I was born....I was a little stranger which at my entrance into the world was saluted and surrounded with innumerable joys. My knowledge was divine; I knew by intuition those things which since my apostasy I collected again by highest reason.Â [^17]

In his poetry, Traherne also used terms and phrases that to Latter-day Saints may hint that he had an intimation of a previous spiritual existence. While we must be careful not to read too much into his writings or to interpret his poems to meet our own preconceived notions or doctrinal objectives, it is fascinating to look at those terms and lines and to ponder what he must have felt and believed. In his poem, "The Preparative," he describes his birth with beautiful imagery and uses the term "intelligence," which certainly has significance in light of modern revelation:

Before my Tongue or Cheeks were to me shewn, Before I knew my Hands were mine, Or that my Sinews did my Members joyn, When neither Nostril, Foot, or Ear, As yet was seen or felt, or did appear; I was within A House I knew not, newly clothed with Skin.

Then was my Soul my only All to me. A Living Endless Ey, Just bounded with the Skie Whose Power, whose Act, whose Essence was to see. I was an inward Sphere of Light, Or an Interminable Orb of Sight, An Endless and a Living Day, A vital Sun that round about did ray All Life, all Sence, A Naked Simple Pure Intelligence. [^18]

In two other poems, Traherne returns to the theme. In "The Rapture," he writes, "From God above Being sent, the Heavens me enflame....O how divine Am I!" In "The Salutation," he asks, "Where have ye been? Behind what curtain were ye from me hid so long?" Finally, in his work entitled "Wonder," Traherne writes:

How like an Angel came I down! How bright are all things here! When first among his Works I did appear O how their Glory me did crown? The World resembled his Eternitie. [^19]

In his novel Demian, Herman Hesse, the eminent German novelist, also spoke of the spirit of man. The novel is about a young boy's search for his own true identity. In that search, Hesse uses several images of a rebirth or reawakening from some previous knowledge or existence. In the prologue to Demian, Hesse writes:

I cannot tell my story without reaching a long way back. If it were possible I would reach back farther still-into the very first years of my childhood, and beyond them into distant ancestral past ....

... Every man is more than just himself; he also represents the unique, the very special and always significant and remarkable point at which the world's phenomena intersect. ... That is why every man's story is important, eternal, sacred....In each individual the spirit has become flesh ....

... Each man's life represents a road toward himself, an attempt at such a road, the intimation of a path. No man has ever been entirely and completely himself....Each man carries the vestiges of his birth-the slime and eggshells of his primeval past-with him to the end of his days....We all share the same origin;... all of us come in at the same door. [^20]

Marcel Proust, who was perhaps the most influential of modern French novelists, was another author who seems to have given profound thought to the idea of a premortal life. Writes Proust, "Everything in our life happens as though we entered upon it with a load of obligations contracted in a previous existence... obligations whose sanction is not of this present life, [which] seem to belong to a different world, founded on kindness, scruples, sacrifice, a world entirely different from this one, a world whence we emerge to be born on this earth, Before returning thither." [^21]

In addition to poets Wordsworth, Vaughn, Traherne, and Tennyson, and novelists Hesse and Proust, numerous other writers not only of literature but also of philosophy and psychology have advocated their ideas on the immortality of man's soul. [^22] In fact, many of the prevailing teachings in modern psychology refer to man's "larger consciousness" as a collection of personality traits and attitudes that the soul or mind of man has acquired from previous experience. Dr. M. Scott Peck, a noted psychiatrist and author, attempted to explain this enigma in his thoughtful book, The Road Less Traveled.

How did I know this which I did not know? Among the possible explanations, one is that of Jung's theory of the "collective unconscious," in which we inherit the wisdom of the experience of our ancestors without ourselves having the personal experience. While this kind of knowledge may seem bizarre to the scientific mind, strangely enough its existence is recognized in our common everyday language. Take the word "recognize" itself....The word says we "re-know" the concept, as if we knew it once upon a time, forgot it, but then recognized it as an old friend. It is as if all knowledge and all wisdom were contained in our minds, and when we learn "something new" we are actually only discovering something that existed in our self all along. [^23]

While this psychological phenomenon, puzzled over by great thinkers such as Carl Jung and Sigmund Freud, may be difficult to accept or understand without a belief in the literal existence of the spirit of man prior to his birth, it rings true to those who accept the immortality of the soul. The "larger consciousness" or "larger self" spoken of by the noted English scientist Sir Oliver Lodge is readily identified as the spirit of man which was schooled and enlarged upon in a premortal realm and subsequently influences the psychological and intellectual traits of the mortal person. Lodge observed, "We living men and women, while associated with this mortal organism, are ignorant of whatever experience our larger selves may have gone through in the past-yet when we wake out of this present materialized condition, we may gradually realize... the wide range of knowledge which that larger entity must have accumulated since its intelligence and memory began.Â [^24] This psychological theory merges with theological fact in the words of Elder Neal A. Maxwell: "The reality of premortality responds to puzzlings which suggest we are strangers here. It is a curative for the yearnings expressed in music and poetry and literature....Thus when we now say 'I know,' that realization is rediscovery; we are actually saying 'I know-again!' From long experience, His sheep know His voice and His doctrine.Â [^25]

Thus we see that through years of "scientific" inquiry into the human mind, psychologists and psychiatrists have theorized what thoughtful poets and authors have intimated, what philosophers have philosophized, and what ancient civilizations have faithfully believed and celebrated in one form or another: man has spiritual roots which reach far back beyond this existence.

In addition to all of the supposing of poets and philosophers and doctors and religious leaders throughout the centuries, there is something deep within each of us individually, which, if heeded, whispers, "You're a stranger here." Often we need no source outside ourselves to tell us what we already feel, as was so eloquently stated by this early Church leader, H. W. Naisbitt.

There is something in every man and in every woman which savors of the divine, in all the circumstances of life there is a reaching out after something which is beyond the grasp; there is a soaring of the spirit, a seeking after something to which the present surrounding gave no clue. Man feels that he is. He not only feels that he is, but thousands and millions of the human family have an inkling of the great fact that they have been, and millions and millions more have an inkling of the other great fact that when they leave this stage of existence they will continue to be. And it is the realization of such things which establishes the idea outside of any other special revelation that our origin is divine as well as human. [^26]

Fortunately, though we may need no special revelation to tell us we had a life before, such revelation exists. Plentiful enough in scripture and in prophetic teachings, these revelatory insights not only confirm our intimations but also paint a clear and understandable picture of just who we are, where we came from, and why we are here. Without this modern revelation we could only guess at what it all means, but with it the scriptures unveil a meaning hidden to the rest of the world-the premortal heavens are no longer a mystery.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Papias, in Patrologiae Cursus Completus ... Series Graeca, 5:1260, as cited in Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 226.
[^2] Clement, in Patrologiae ... Graeca, 8:321, as cited in Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 228.
[^3] St. Augustine, "On the Immortality of the Soul," in The World's Great Thinkers, Man and Spirit: The Speculative Philosophers, edited by Saxe Commins and Robert N. Linscott (New York: Random House, 1947), pp. 3-4.
[^4] Tertullian, Apologeticus..., in Patrologiae... Graeca, 1:307-308, as cited in Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 229; italics added.
[^5] Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 229.
[^6] Origen, Peri Archon, in Patrologiae... Graeca, 9:230-231, as cited in Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 230.
[^7] Geoffrey Hodson, Reincarnation, Fact or Fallacy? An Examination and Exposition of the Doctrine of Rebirth (Wheaton, Illinois: The Theosophical Publishing House, 1967), pp. 14-15. For additional information on Origen's teachings and the Council of 543 A.D., see Quincy Howe, Jr., Reincarnation for the Christian (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1974), pp. 62-84.
[^8] Jacob Boehme, The Doctrine of Jacob Boehme, compiled by Franz Hartman (New York: 1928), p. 52, as quoted by Gary W. Ellsworth, "Trailing Clouds of Glory-Poets and Philosophers Examine the Preexistence," Ensign, October 1974, p. 51.
[^9] Flavius Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, 15:371; Jewish Wars, 2:154-156.
[^10] R. H. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, 2 vols. (Oxford: Oxford University, Clarendon Press, 1976), 2:444.
[^11] Hugh Nibley, Old Testament and Related Studies (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and The Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies), pp. 156-157; see also pp. 174-175.
[^12] Hugh Nibley, Old Testament and Related Studies, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and The Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies), p. 157.
[^13] Hugh Nibley, Old Testament and Related Studies, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and The Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies), p. 158.
[^14] Joseph Fielding McConkie, "Pre-Mortal Existence, Foreordinations and Heavenly Councils," ch. 9 in Apocryphal Writings and the Latter-day Saints (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1986), pp. 183-184.
[^15] Joseph Fielding McConkie, in Apocryphal Writings and the Latter-day Saints, (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1986), pp. 194-195.
[^16] William de Arteaga, Past Life Visions: A Christian Exploration (New York: Seabury Press, 1983), p. 127.
[^17] Clement of Alexandria, Paedogogus, in Patrologiae... Graeca, 8:321, as quoted by Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 228; italics added.
[^18] Stephen Winward, A Guide to the Prophets (Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1976), p. 123; italics added.
[^19] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1977), p. 193.
[^20] Howe, Reincarnation for the Christian, pp. 96-97.
[^21] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 18:290.
[^22] Quincy Howe, Jr., Reincarnation for the Christian (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1974), pp. 92-93.
[^23] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 1:480.
[^24] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), 3:387.
[^25] Wilford Woodruff, Millennial Star, 56:229, as quoted in Doctrines from the Prophets, compiled by Alma P. Burton (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1970), p. 265.
[^26] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 4:216.
