Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

2 Theological Glimpses of Man's Premortal Existence

Despite the many inspired references to a pre-earth life in cultures, religions, literature, and intellectual thought around the world, most of modern Christianity rejects such a notion. This, however, has not always been the case. In addition to the examples of insight that have already been cited, there are numerous theological "glimpses" into man's spiritual origins. These theological references come from a variety of sources, including the writings of the early Christian fathers and theologians as well as more recently discovered ancient manuscripts such as those from Qumran, Nag Hammadi, and elsewhere. These early writings on the premortal existence of man, though often viewed by conventional Christianity as speculative or apocryphal, take on even greater significance when viewed in light of biblical references to the doctrine. And finally, through modern revelation, inspired latter-day prophets have lifted the doctrine further out of ambiguity and obscurity, leaving no doubt as to its truthfulness.

Early Christian Theologians and the Doctrine of Preexistence

There is considerable evidence which suggests that the doctrine of a premortal existence was common in the early Church and was discussed openly by theologians such as Pierus and John of Jerusalem into the sixth century A.D. Some of these early Christians believed strongly that much of our earthly experience could be understood only in terms of premortal agreements and of a plan established before the foundation of the world. One such early Christian writer sharing this view was Papias. Speaking of the "Elders," he wrote, "To some of them, that is, those angels who had been faithful to God in former times, he gave supervision over the governments of the earth, trusting or commissioning them to rule well....And nothing has occurred [since] to put an end to their order.Â [^1]

In addition to Papias, other prominent early Christian theologians such as Justin the Martyr and Clement of Alexandria also made references to a premortal plan that was presented to the "first angels." Clement, commenting on the scriptural passage in Jeremiah in which the Lord states that he knew Jeremiah before birth, generalized the doctrine as having universal application. He wrote that "the Logos is not to be despised as something new, for even in Jeremiah the Lord says, 'Say not "I am too young," for before I formed thee in the womb I knew thee, and before thou camest forth from thy mother I sanctified thee.' It is possible that in speaking these things the prophet is referring to us, as being known to God as faithful before the foundation of the world." [^2]

St. Augustine, to a lesser degree, also taught of a premortal state of man. He spoke of the mind and the reasoning ability of man as being immortal and eternal. Could it be that he was indeed speaking of man's spirit when he referred to the eternal mind of man in his work "On the Immortality of the Soul"? Augustine wrote:

If science exists anywhere, and cannot exist except in that which lives; and if it is eternal, and nothing in which an eternal thing exists can be non-eternal; then that in which science exists lives eternally. Further, if science cannot exist except in that which lives... then science is in the mind of man. Science is eternal. For what exists and is unchangeable must be eternal.

When we reason it is the mind that reasons. For only he who thinks reasons. Neither does the body think nor does the mind receive help of the body in thinking. For what is thought is thus eternal, and nothing pertaining to the body is thus eternal. All that the mind knows, moreover, it contains within itself. Therefore the human mind always lives. [^3]

Another common theme relating to the premortal existence of man was that of man's innate yearning to return to a heavenly home. This idea was articulated by the early Christian writer, Tertullian. He maintained that the Christian "is a pilgrim in a strange land, among enemies: his is another race, another dwelling, another hope, another grace, another dignity.Â [^4] This statement, among others of the early Christian fathers, has caused Hugh Nibley to pose these pertinent questions and make this important conclusion:

But how can we be out of our element here if this [mortality] is the only element we have ever known? Here we are lost and ill at ease. Lost from what? The theory of the later fathers is that man has an irresistible urge to get to heaven because he was created for the express purpose of filling the gap left in heaven by the fall of the angels. But the same fathers who maintain this doctrine also hold that the vast majority of spirits thus created will never see heaven-a strange inconsistency indeed. The early Christians thought of the yearnings of the soul for heaven specifically as an urge to return to a familiar home. [^5]

No other early Christian theologian and scholar spoke more extensively or more explicitly regarding man's premortal existence and its impact on mortality than Origen of Alexandria. His writings of the third century caused a furor among leaders of the early Church after his death. It was his belief that the many differences seen among men on earth could be traced back to the differences in rank and glory of the premortal angels. Without such a belief in a premortal existence, he maintained, it would not be possible to view God as "no respecter of persons," but rather God would seem arbitrary, cruel, and unjust. Origen believed that the differences among men on earth, as with the "angels," were based on merit. Just as there would be a judgment at the end of man's earth life, Origen believed that some sort of judgment had already taken place before we came here which was based on work done in a premortal state. In applying this principle to Jacob's being preferred over Esau, Origen wrote, "We believe that he was even then chosen by God because of merits acquired before this life.Â [^6]

Despite concurring beliefs held by others, Origen's teachings were zealously attacked by his opponents and criticized as unscriptural, too speculative, and having too much the element of Greek thought. Origen had his supporters as well, but in the end the critics got their way, and the proponents of a premortal life of man and the immortality of the soul were censured. In A.D. 543, the Roman emperor, Justinian, coerced the pope to convene a council to reject the teachings of Origen. In an edict known as the Anathemas Against Origen, the teachings of Origen, including his inspired writings on the premortal life of man, were declared heresy in the Church. From this date on, the doctrine of man's premortal state and relationship to God was viewed as heretical and unfounded in scripture of early Christian religious thought. Today conventional Christianity vehemently rejects the notion of a premortal existence but fails to remember that the doctrine was widely taught and accepted prior to the Council of A.D. 543. Even today, some modern Christian scholars view this council and its repudiation of Origen's teachings with a degree of regret and skepticism. One current Christian scholar has written:

While it is true that a Council of Constantinople in the sixth century A.D. pronounced belief in the preexistence of the soul to be heretical, an examination of the scriptures strongly suggests that the doctrine of rebirth was generally accepted in those days and that Our Lord himself believed it. Whether this be the case or not, the student of the Christian doctrine may well ask whether a decision made by a group of men in the sixth century should be regarded as binding today ....

In any case, heresy thus condemned so long ago need not be regarded today as of major importance. Truth matters a great deal more and a condemned heresy may turn out to be a truth, as happened, for example, when a local church of Rome condemned Galileo's heliocentric doctrine and forced him to recant. Galileo was right and the church in question was wrong. It is therefore quite legitimate for both clergy and laity of the Christian faith to preach and believe in [a] preexistence. [^7]

Even after the doctrine of premortal existence had disappeared from the accepted teachings of the Church, it periodically resurfaced in the writings of thoughtful and inspired Christian theologians. One such theologian was Jacob Boehme, the seventeenth-century religious leader and philosopher. During the Reformation, Boehme wrote concerning man's soul: "As the eye of man reaches the stars where it had its primitive origin, so the soul penetrates and sees even within the divine state of being wherein he lives.Â [^8]

These theological glimpses of the premortal life of man as set forth in the writings and teachings of the early Christian fathers have faded through the years until now the doctrine is rejected by the churches who once embraced it. Yet these glimpses are not isolated, apostate teachings but can be substantiated with still other theological references to man's pre-mortal state and his relationship to God.

Early Christian and Jewish Writings on the Preexistence

When the Prophet Joseph Smith was involved in the work of translating the Old Testament, he questioned the Lord concerning the role and value of the Apocrypha. In answer to his questions, the Lord revealed to him what is now Doctrine and Covenants section 91, which gave some important guidelines concerning apocryphal writings. "There are many things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated correctly; There are many things contained therein that are not true, which are interpolations by the hands of men....Therefore, whoso readeth it, let him understand, for the Spirit manifesteth truth; And whoso is enlightened by the Spirit shall obtain benefit therefrom." (D&C 91:1-2, 4-5.)

Not only was this a valuable revelation for guiding Joseph in his translation of the scriptures in 1833 but also it is valuable to us today in gleaning truths from the Apocrypha and numerous other apocryphal writings that have come to light in recent times. Many of these ancient documents contain important glimpses of man's premortal origins.

Josephus, the Jewish historian, wrote of the Essenes as a Jewish sect who believed in the immortal soul of man. He wrote that these Essenes taught that the soul of man was indestructible and was imprisoned, temporarily, in a mortal body. In addition to immortality and premortal existence, the Essenes also ascribed divinity to the soul of man. [^9] Josephus's early description of Essene doctrine has taken on greater validity in light of the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran. The Dead Sea Scrolls of the Essenes and other significant finds have now given strong, concurring evidence of a belief in a premortal existence among these early contemporaries of Christ and the Apostles.

There are other evidences that there was a belief in a pre-mortal existence of man among Jewish sects in the Christian era. Commenting on the phrase "all souls are prepared... before the foundation of the world," which is found in the apocryphal text, the Book of Enoch, R. H. Charles, the eminent expert on the Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, noted that "the doctrine of the preexistence of the soul... became a prevailing dogma of later Judaism....All souls which were to enter human bodies existed before the creation of the world in the Garden of Eden....According to Bereshith rabba, c. 8, God takes counsel with the souls of the righteous before He creates the earth.Â [^10]

In several of his works Hugh Nibley has given us numerous examples from the writings of these apocryphal scrolls and libraries which refer to man's premortal existence with God. In the Gospel of Philip we learn that man is literally a child of God. In the Apocryphon of James we read that the Lord told the Apostles, "They will ask you where you are going." And He told them to answer, "To the place from which I came. I return to that place." "When they ask you who you are," it continues, "say 'I am a son and I come from the Father.' And when they ask you what sort of son and from what father, answer, 'From the preexistent Father and I am a son of the Preexistence.'" A psalm on these ancient scrolls states, "The spirit existed before the flesh.Â [^11]

The Gospel of Thomas refers to the elect of God as those who find the kingdom of heaven because they came from it in the first place. The Psalm of Thomas speaks of the return to a heavenly home. "I came from the house of my Father in a far land, and I shall mount up until I return to that land of the pure.Â [^12] Other scrolls speak of man as being older than the world and a child of an earlier spiritual birth or creation.

After citing numerous references to man's premortal life and his divine relationship to God, Nibley concluded that, to the writers of these early Christian and Jewish texts, "Man's premortal existence was an illustrious one. There are descriptions of the glory we enjoyed before we came here.Â [^13]

Joseph Fielding McConkie also has identified references in these ancient texts not only to the immortality of man's soul but also to foreordinations and premortal heavenly councils. While there is still debate among the scholars concerning the authorship and inspiration of many of these ancient writings, one text in particular displays unique insight and understanding. It is found in the Acts of Thomas and is known as the Syriac Hymn of the Pearl. McConkie has given us this summation of this ancient apocryphal yet inspired glimpse of the doctrine of premortal life:

This is an allegory of a king's son who is required to leave his father's kingdom, where he enjoyed great wealth, to obtain a pearl. The pearl, quite obviously, is a symbol of his own soul. His parents see that he is properly provisioned for his journey. Before leaving their presence he is required to surrender his splendid robe. This robe, or garment of light, we are told, had been woven to the measure of his stature. He also enters into a covenant with them to obtain the pearl and return that he might once again enjoy their presence and wear his splendid robe. The covenant is written upon his heart.

Though the way is hazardous and difficult, an intimate friend referred to as "an (anointed one)" warns him of the dangers that beset him. Notwithstanding all this he soon forgets his identity as a king's son and his mission to obtain the pearl. At this point a council is held; it is attended by his father, his mother, his brother (the crown prince), and many other great and mighty ones. They determine to send him a letter imploring him to awake and remember who he is and what king he serves. He is encouraged to remember his splendid robe and to so conduct himself that his name might be written in the book of heroes, and that with his brother he may be an heir to his father's kingdom.

Thus reminded, he commences again his efforts to obtain the pearl, which he must wrestle from a terrible serpent. This he is able to do only by naming his father's name, that of his brother, and that of his mother. Having obtained the pearl he flees Egypt, sheds his dirty and unclean garments, and is further guided by the letter. At this point he is greeted by messengers from his parents, who clothe him once more in his royal robe, and he returns as an heir to his father's kingdom. [^14]

The great value of these ancient apocryphal texts is that they verify that the doctrine of a premortal existence was common among the early Christians as well as among ancient Jewish sects. By themselves certainly they do not prove man's premortal existence or serve as the foundation for LDS beliefs, but rather they provide additional evidence of the validity of the doctrine when coupled with scriptural teachings. As Joseph Fielding McConkie concluded after enumerating and describing several of these glimpses in the ancient Jewish and Christian texts, "The doctrines of premortal existence, heavenly councils, and foreordinations were all a part of the theology of the ancient Saints and as such are a necessary part of the promised restoration of all things. Not found in the theology of the rest of the so-called Bible-believing world, these doctrines stand as an evidence that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that ours is an ancient church restored....These doctrines, of such importance to the ancient Saints, have been restored once again to a place of prominence among the Saints of the latter days.Â [^15]

Biblical References to Man's Premortal Existence

Nephi saw in vision the day when the "great and abominable church" would be involved in eliminating from the holy scriptures those simple truths and teachings that they neither believed nor desired that others embrace. Nephi said:

They have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away.

And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men.

... Because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God-because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them. (1 Ne. 13:26-27, 29.)

Surely the doctrine of man's premortal relationship to God was among the "plain and precious" doctrines that were lost from the scriptures during the dark period of apostasy that prevailed during the first few centuries after Christ. The disappearance from canon of the doctrine of premortal life was virtually completed by A.D. 543 when the pope's council, convened by Justinian, labeled such teaching as heresy. Despite the adversary's efforts, as seen by Nephi, to remove such "plain and precious" teachings from the Bible, there remain glimpses of man's premortal role in both the Old and New Testaments. While not understood by much of the world and misinterpreted by most of Christianity, these scanty scriptural glimpses, when coupled with modern revelation, provide valuable insight into man's spiritual origin.

Jeremiah was told by the Lord, "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations" (Jer. 1:5). This Old Testament passage has troubled biblical scholars for generations. Some have said that it is merely evidence of God's omniscience or foreknowledge. Others have suggested that it is only symbolic or poetic language. A few Christian scholars admit that there may be something to the idea that Jeremiah existed in some way prior to his birth which would allow God to know him beforehand. "The idea of preexistence means only that in some manner a person existed before his or her incarnation on earth," wrote one Christian scholar in referring to God's foreknowledge of Jeremiah. "This question was hotly debated by Christians of late antiquity, and the faction of the Church which was bitterly opposed to preexistence gained the upper hand. By the sixth century belief in preexistence was declared heresy. All of this is quite astonishing in view of the clear and repeated biblical evidence for preexistence." [^16]

Even one of the earliest Christian theologians, Clement of Alexandria, recognized the significance of this passage in Jeremiah as it relates to man's foreordination. He suggested, "It is possible that in speaking these things the prophet [Jeremiah] is referring to us, as being known to God as faithful before the foundation of the world. Only now have we become babes for the purposes of fulfilling the plan of God.Â [^17] Another theologian also asserts that Jeremiah's "prenatal" calling applies not only to God's chosen prophets but also to all Christians. "It is revealed to him [Jeremiah] that God's selection and purpose go back to his prenatal life and conception. The choice was from the beginning, the plan was predetermined. Before his birth, he was chosen, set aside, and appointed to the prophetic office. As with the prophet, so with the Christian. There is a divine plan which is prior, not only to our response, but also to our existence.Â [^18]

Theologians continue their debate and their efforts to refute the notion that Jeremiah did, indeed, live in some pre-mortal state. However, a look at the Lord's use of three specific words -knew, sanctified, ordained-indicates that this scriptural passage can be taken literally. These terms are related, and, in fact, are significant steps in a spiritual process. The Lord knew Jeremiah prior to his birth and was familiar with his spiritual attitudes and abilities. Because of that knowledge and because of Jeremiah's premortal faith, obedience, and valiance in defending and sustaining the predetermined plan, he was sanctified. With this prenatal sanctification he was then prepared to actually be ordained a prophet to ancient Judah even before his birth. These are steps in the process of foreordination, of which we learn from modern revelation. Foreordination will be discussed in chapter 7; but the Lord's words to Jeremiah, as seen in the Old Testament, offer a glimpse of man's premortal life.

There are numerous other biblical references whose true meaning would be lost to the world without the assistance of modern revelation and the teachings of living prophets. One such reference is the Lord's question to Job: "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?" The answer came when God spoke of a glorious premortal day when "all the sons of God shouted for joy" (Job 38:4, 7). Why would God ask Job where he was during this event, if Job had not also had a prior existence? If all the sons of God shouted for joy, did not God consider Jeremiah-the worthy, sanctified and chosen prophet of God-also a son of God who also shouted for joy?

Ecclesiastes speaks of the immortal nature of man as evidenced in death. "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it" (Eccl. 12:7; italics added). How can a spirit return to a place or a state of being where it has not been before?

Moses made several references that imply a premortal life. In praying, he spoke of God as "the God of the spirits of all flesh" (Num. 16:22; 27:16). On another occasion, he spoke of a premortal day "when the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel" (Deut. 32:8). Elder James E. Talmage commented on this passage: "From this we learn that the earth was allotted to the nations, according to the number of the children of Israel; it is evident therefore that the number was known prior to the existence of the Israelitish nation in the flesh; this is most easily explained on the basis of a previous existence in which the spirits of the future nation were known.Â [^19]

Just as Job learned that before the earth was formed all the sons of God shouted for joy, there are also several references to men on earth as being those sons-spiritual children of God. A Psalm of Asaph says, "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the Most High" (Ps. 82:6). Moses spoke of the children of Israel as "children of the Lord your God" (Deut. 14:1). Hosea the prophet spoke of ancient Israel as "sons of the living God" (Hosea 1:10). No doubt these "sons of God" and "children of God" were with Job and Jeremiah and all the offspring of God who shouted for joy in a premortal abode. The question posed by the Lord to Job, "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?" begins to be answered with these scriptural glimpses from the Old Testament.

One of the recurring themes of the New Testament is the premortal role of Jesus Christ as the "Lamb slain from [before] the foundation of the world" (Rev. 13:8). Numerous references give evidence of Christ's own premortal life. Referring to Christ as the Word, John records that "in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God....And all things were made by him" (John 1:1, 3; see also Rev. 19:13-16; D&C 93:6-9). On at least two occasions, the Savior himself referred to his pre-mortal existence. In speaking to the Jews regarding Father Abraham, Jesus told them that Abraham had seen and rejoiced in Jesus' day and mission. Not understanding, they queried Jesus as to how he could have seen Abraham, who had died long ago. He responded, "Verily, verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am" (John 8:56-58). His use of the term "I Am" is the same as that used in identifying Jehovah in Ex. 3:14. Undoubtedly, Jesus was referring to his premortal role as Jehovah. Therefore his response to the Jews could better be translated as, "Before Abraham, was I, I am [Jehovah]."

In his great intercessory prayer, Jesus once again speaks of his premortal existence when he prays unto the Father to "glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was" (John 17:5). Today, virtually all Christians acknowledge the premortal life and immortal godship of Jesus Christ. Certainly Peter recognized Christ's premortality when he wrote that Christ was "foreordained before the foundation of the world" (1 Pet. 1:19-20). The confusion, however, arises regarding a possible parallel between Christ's premortal life and mankind's. Commenting on the New Testament evidence for premortal existence, another Christian scholar has written:

Implicit in all these [scriptural] statements is the recognition that the majesty and greatness of Christ are of such an order as to precede and outlast secular time. It is perfectly apparent that Christ exists eternally and indestructibly. Nor does his existence in any way depend upon the presence of the body.

The preexistence of Christ does not, of course, guarantee the preexistence of the human soul. However, to the extent that Christ presents himself as an attainable example to mankind, human preexistence is not to be dismissed. If Christ is an example for man in his works, then why not in his stature as well? [^20]

While the premortal life of Christ does not prove the pre-mortal life of all men, there is much scriptural evidence to indicate that others too have existed from before the foundation of the world. Paul, on several occasions, preached that Christ was the "firstborn of every creature" (Col. 1:15), the Father's "firstbegotten into the world" (Heb. 1:6), and the "firstborn among many brethren" (Rom. 8:29). Since Christ was not the firstborn of God's physical or mortal creations, how can Paul be referring to anything other than Christ's preeminent role as firstborn of all of God's spirit children? Elder Orson Pratt summarized the significance of these passages as they refer to man's as well as Christ's premortal existence.

Have you not read, in the New Testament, that Jesus Christ was the first-born of every creature? From this reading it would seem that he was the oldest of the whole human family, that is, so far as his birth in the spirit world is concerned....Have you not also read in the New Testament that he is called our elder brother? Does this refer to the birth of the body of flesh and bones? By no means, for there were hundreds of millions who were born upon our earth before the body of flesh and bones was born whom we call Jesus. How is it, then, that he is our elder brother? We must go back to the previous birth, before the foundation of this earth; we have to go back to past ages, to the period when he was begotten of the Father among the great family of spirits. [^21]

Another episode in the life of Christ gives an interesting glimpse of the doctrine of premortal life in the New Testament. Upon approaching a man who had been born blind, the disciples asked Jesus, "Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" (John 9:2.) The question itself, along with Jesus' answer, implies a premortal life for the blind man. It is interesting to note the commentaries of those both in and out of the Church regarding this episode. One non-LDS scholar acknowledges that the disciples' question demonstrates their belief in a premortal existence of mankind.

In interpreting this episode, commentators have pointed out that the example of the man blind from birth is occasionally used to illustrate the problem of divine justice. How can we grasp the justice of an all-loving God, if he will allow a man to enter into the world with such a crushing handicap?...

The answer that Jesus gives to the question of the disciples shows that he is much more interested in "making manifest the works of God" than he is in the origins or cause of the man's blindness. Nevertheless, there is a glaring inconsistency in the question posed by the disciples. They ask the Lord if the man himself could have committed the sin that led to his blindness. Given the fact that the man has been blind from birth, we are confronted with a provocative question. When could he have made such transgressions as to make him blind at birth? The only conceivable answer is in some prenatal state. The question posed by the disciples explicitly presupposed prenatal existence. It will be also noted that Christ says nothing to dispel or correct the presupposition. Here is incontrovertible support for a doctrine of human preexistence.

It is perfectly reasonable to surmise on the basis of this episode that Jesus and his followers accepted preexistence and thought so little of it that the question of prenatal sin did not even call for an answer. [^22]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has also commented on their obvious acceptance of the doctrine:

Apparently the Jews had some understanding of the doctrine of pre-existence. Among their righteous forebears it had been taught plainly as a basic gospel truth....Such scriptures as were then available to them, however, contained only passing allusions to it....But it was a doctrine implicit in the whole plan of salvation as such was known to and understood by them. They had, for instance, no more occasion to prove the ante-mortal existence of spirits than they did to prove God was a personal Being. Both truths were assumed; concepts to the contrary were heresies which gained prevalence in later ages.

Jesus' disciples-probably as a direct result of his teach-ings-knew and believed that men were the spirit children of God in preexistence and that in such prior estate they were subject to law and endowed with agency. Otherwise they never would have asked nor would there have been any sense or reason to a question which is predicated upon the assumption that men can sin before they are born into mortality. [^23]

There are many other teachings and examples in the New Testament which afford glimpses of man's spiritual origins and which are implications of his premortal life. Most of the Christian world either ignores or grossly misinterprets these biblical passages. Examples include Paul's teachings on God's foreknowledge and foreordination of men and nations (see Acts 17:26; Rom. 9:4-11; Eph. 4:1), his controversial use of the term "predestinate" (Rom. 8:29), and his explanation of the "election" of Israel and the doctrine of adoption (Rom. 11). Paul's statements that man is the "offspring of God" (Acts 17:29; Rom. 8:16) and that God is the "Father of spirits" (Heb. 12:9; Eph. 4:6) are also important indications of man's spiritual lineage which cannot be fully comprehended without a belief in the premortal existence. In addition to Paul, Jude and John have also described the War in Heaven where angels "kept not their first estate" (Jude 1:6) and where Michael and his angels fought against Lucifer (Rev. 12:7; see also Isa. 14:13; Luke 10:18).

While these many references may only be shadowy remnants of a doctrine lost from Christianity, they help to bring the doctrine of man's premortal existence out of scriptural obscurity when coupled with modern scriptures and the teachings of latter-day prophets.

Plain and Precious Truths Restored

Just as Nephi foresaw the loss of many of the plain and precious teachings in the Bible, he also envisioned the latter-day restoration of those truths. He saw "other books, which came forth by the power of the Lamb... unto the convincing of the Gentiles and the remnant of the seed of my brethren, and also the Jews who were scattered upon all the face of the earth, that the records of the prophets and of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are true" (1 Ne. 13:39). An angel informed Nephi that these "last records" would not only establish the truth of the ancient scriptures, but would also "make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them" (1 Ne. 13:40).

When the heavens were opened to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the floodgates of knowledge concerning man's pre-mortal relationship to a Heavenly Father were likewise opened. Previously there were only glimpses, but the restoration of the gospel opened the windows of heaven to a vivid view of man's premortal life. The Book of Mormon, latter-day revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, and the visions of Moses and Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price contributed much indeed to the restoration of this "plain and precious" doctrine.

The Nephite prophet Alma taught that those holding the priesthood had been "called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God." He further taught that this foreordination in the "first place" came as a result of their "exceeding faith and good works" (Alma 13:3). This concept of foreordination will be examined in greater detail in chapter 7, but this passage demonstrates how the Book of Mormon illuminates this important doctrine which was only suggested in the teachings of Jeremiah and the Apostle Paul.

Moses saw in vision that God "created all things... spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth" (Moses 3:5). Later Moses also described Satan's premortal rebellion and expulsion from heaven. This latter-day revelation provided the lost details of this premortal event which had only been alluded to in the prophecies of Isaiah and John the Revelator (see Moses 4:1-4).

Enoch saw the "spirits that God had created" (Moses 6:36). Abraham beheld a glorious vision of the spirits or "intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones" (Abr. 3:22). Abraham also discovered, as did Jeremiah, that he was known and chosen by God even before he came to earth. "And God saw these souls that they were good," records Abraham, "and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born" (Abr. 3:23; italics added).

Joseph Smith also received many revelations that included insight and information pertaining to man's premortality. We learn that "the devil was before Adam" and that as a result of his premortal rebellion "a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away" from God, and "they were thrust down and thus became the devil and his angels" (D&C 29:36-37).

Joseph learned from the Savior himself that man was created "before the world was made" (D&C 49:17) and was among "all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made" (D&C 38:1). He later learned that just as Christ, the Word, was with God in the beginning, "man was also in the beginning with God....For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected." (D&C 93:29, 33.)

President Joseph F. Smith provided additional prophetic insight in his vision of the redemption of the dead (D&C 138). While seeing the departed spirits of faithful men and women, he also learned that these same spirits were "among the noble and great ones who were chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God." He further learned that these spirits had "received their first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men" (D&C 138:55-56).

While theologians and philosophers continue to speculate about man's premortal existence, latter-day prophets and apostles have emphatically confirmed the doctrine with their inspired utterances. Virtually every prophet in this dispensation has spoken plainly of man's premortal life and has provided valuable glimpses of that premortal realm.

The Prophet Joseph Smith spoke of the eternal nature of the spirit of man. He taught that "the spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal....The Father called all spirits before Him at the creation of man, and organized them.Â [^24]

President Wilford Woodruff later confirmed that all mankind dwelt with God prior to this life. "With regard to our position before we came here," recorded President Woodruff, "I will say that we dwelt with the Father and with the Son....We dwelt in the presence of God before we came here.Â [^25] President Brigham Young also agreed not only that our spirits lived prior to our physical birth but also that we were all intimately familiar with God. "I want to tell you, each and every one of you, that you are well acquainted with God our heavenly Father, or the great Eloheim. You are all well acquainted with Him, for there is not a soul of you but what has lived in His house and dwelt with Him year after year; and yet you are seeking to become acquainted with Him, when the fact is, you have merely forgotten what you did know." [^26] President Joseph F. Smith has reminded us that we were with Job and the other children of God prior to our birth when "all the sons of God shouted for joy" and that we had good reason to rejoice. "Where did we come from? From God. Our spirits existed before they came to this world. They were in the councils of the heavens before the foundations of the earth were laid. We were there. We sang together with the heavenly hosts for joy, when the foundations of the earth were laid, and when the plan of our existence upon this earth and redemption were mapped out. We were there; we were interested, and we took a part in this great preparation.Â [^27]

The theological mystery of man's spiritual origins was resolved by the First Presidency of the Church in this official statement of doctrine:

Inquiries arise from time to time respecting the attitude of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon questions which... are closely connected with the fundamental principles of salvation. The latest inquiry of this kind that has reached us is in relation to the origin of man. It is believed that a statement of the position held by the Church upon this important subject will be timely and productive of good ....

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, basing its belief on divine revelation, ancient and modern, proclaims man to be the direct and lineal offspring of Deity ....

By His almighty power He organized the earth, and all that it contains, from spirit and element, which exist co-eternally with Himself....

Man is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes. [^28]

The doctrine of man's premortal relationship to and existence with Deity might well be compared to a giant jigsaw puzzle. There are hundreds, if not thousands, of pieces in the picture. References to the doctrine in literature, philosophy, and theology provide only a very few glimpses of the entire scene. Teachings of the early Christian leaders and apocryphal writings supply a few more pieces of the puzzle. The biblical references and allusions to this important truth fill in yet a few more of the gaps. But, still, there are only isolated and scattered glimpses. So scanty are the references that many do not see any details of the picture; or they misinterpret what they see, as if they are viewing a giant puzzle with only a handful of pieces fitted together. It is not until the "plain and precious" pieces are added that the picture becomes clearer. Elder Boyd K. Packer has explained that "there is no way to make sense out of life without a knowledge of the doctrine of premortal life. The idea that mortal birth is the beginning is preposterous. There is no way to explain life if you believe that. The notion that life ends with mortal death is ridiculous. There is no way to face life if you believe that. When we understand the doctrine of premortal life, then things fit together and make sense.Â [^29]

With the restoration of the gospel, many additional pieces of the puzzle have been fitted together. The picture that was only partially distinguishable has now become clear. To Latter-day Saints, there is no question that we did, indeed, live before this life. There are, however, many questions in the minds of Latter-day Saints concerning the nature of that existence.

What is intelligence?

Is man literally a child of God? How can that be?

What was the premortal existence like? What did we do there?

What laws and conditions prevailed there? Was there really a premortal war in heaven?

Were there differences among the spirits? What accounted for those differences?

What is foreordination? How does it operate?

Why can't I remember anything about that premortal world?

How does my experience there affect my life here?

Why is it so important to understand the nature of the premortal existence?

These and many other aspects of our premortal life are part of the overall picture of man's premortal life. While not all of the pieces of the puzzle have been revealed, there is much in scripture, in modern revelation, and in the teachings of the living prophets that provides us with additional glimpses of the premortal existence.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, The Words of Joseph Smith, compiled and edited by Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 9; quoted from the "Willard Richards Pocket Companion," dated "before 8 August 1839."
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. 1972 [12th edition]), pp. 352-354.
[^3] Donald Q. Cannon and Larry E. Dahl, The Prophet Joseph Smith's King Follett Discourse: A Six-Column Comparison of Original Notes and Amalgamations (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1983), pp. 48-53.
[^4] Blake Ostler, "The Idea of Pre-existence in the Development of Mormon Thought," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought, Spring 1982, pp. 59-78. See also Brigham Young's views as recorded in Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 47-48. For another perspective of the historical development of this issue, see Kenneth W. Godfrey, "The History of Intelligence in Latter-day Saint Thought," unpublished paper presented at the 1988 Pearl of Great Price Symposium, Brigham Young University.
[^5] Parley P. Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 1:8.
[^6] Charles W. Penrose, in Journal of Discourses, 26:23, 27; italics added.
[^7] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1855), pp. 43-45.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1964), p. 11; italics added.
[^9] Bruce R. McConkie, unpublished lecture transcript of Summer 1967 Seminary and Institute Teacher Seminar, Brigham Young University, in author's file. Audio tape of lecture is available in the BYU Religious Education Audiovisual Library.
[^10] Bruce R. McConkie, unpublished letter to Walter M. Horne, October 2, 1974. Photocopies of Mr. Horne's inquiry and Elder McConkie's reply are in author's file.
[^11] Orson Pratt, The Seer (Washington, D.C., 1855), p. 103.
[^12] The First Presidency, 1865, as quoted in Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965), 2:233.
[^13] B. H. Roberts, The Seventy's Course in Theology, 4 vols. (In dependence, Missouri: Zion's Printing and Publishing, 1907-1911), vol. 4 (1911), pp. 13-14. For a full examination of Elder Roberts's views on "intelligences," see also "Immortality of Man," Improvement Era, April 1907, pp. 403-423, and The Seventy's Course in Theology, vol. 4, lessons 1-5, pp. 1-23.
[^14] Improvement Era, April 1907, p. 403.
[^15] B. H. Roberts, "Immortality of Man," Improvement Era, April 1907, p. 406.
[^16] Bruce R. McConkie, unpublished letter to Walter M. Horne, October 2, 1974. Photocopies of Mr. Horne's inquiry and Elder McConkie's reply are in author's file. p. 1.
[^17] Bruce R. McConkie, unpublished letter to Walter M. Horne, October 2, 1974. Photocopies of Mr. Horne's inquiry and Elder McConkie's reply are in author's file. p. 5.
[^18] Harold B. Lee, "The Place of the Living Prophet, Seer, and Revelator," chapter 15 of Stand Ye in Holy Places (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), pp. 162-63.
[^19] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1964), p. 11.
[^20] Howe, Reincarnation for the Christian, pp. 96-97.
[^21] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 18:290.
[^22] Quincy Howe, Jr., Reincarnation for the Christian (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1974), pp. 92-93.
[^23] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 1:480.
[^24] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), 3:387.
[^25] Wilford Woodruff, Millennial Star, 56:229, as quoted in Doctrines from the Prophets, compiled by Alma P. Burton (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1970), p. 265.
[^26] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 4:216.
[^27] 27. Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 25:57.
[^28] 28. First Presidency statement, Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund, in Improvement Era, November 1909, pp. 75-81.
[^29] 29. Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1983, p. 22.
