Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

3 Intelligence or Intelligences?

In 1833 the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith that "man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." (D&C 93:29.) Several years later, with the publication of the book of Abraham, additional information about the immortality of the soul of man came to light. Abraham says that he was shown by the Lord "the intelligences that were organized before the world was" (Abr. 3:22). The Lord also told Abraham that these intelligences or spirits "have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal" (Abr. 3:18).

The Prophet Joseph often refuted the ex nihilo ("creation out of nothing") doctrine that was popular among the sects of his day. The Prophet suggested that just as the earth could not be created out of nothing, neither could man. In 1839, he taught, "The Spirit of Man is not a created being; it existed from Eternity and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be Eternal. And earth, water, etc.-all these had their existence in an elementary State from Eternity.Â [^1]

The Prophet had previously learned by way of revelation that "the elements are eternal" (D&C 93:33). No doubt he understood this to apply to both the physical creation of the earth and the physical bodies of men, but what about the immortal "Spirit of Man" of which Joseph spoke? What was meant by the phrase "in an elementary state"?

In April of 1844, the Prophet Joseph once again addressed the subject of the immortality of the spirit of man and its relationship to God. This address has come to be known as the King Follett Discourse.

The soul-the mind of man-the immortal spirit. Where did it come from? All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the beginning; but it is not so: the very idea lessens man in my estimation ....

We say that God himself is a self-existent being. Who told you so? It is correct enough; but how did it get into your heads? Who told you that man did not exist in like manner upon the same principles? Man does exist upon the same principles ....

The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal [co-eternal] with God himself....

I am dwelling on the immortality of the spirit of man. Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, and yet that it had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end ....

Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit from age to age, and there is no creation about it. [^2]

It is interesting to note the various terms used by the Prophet in this discourse in referring to the immortal spirit of man. Earlier, he had taught that man had existed eternally in "an elementary state." The King Follett Discourse seems to define more precisely what that "elementary state" means. Present in Nauvoo when Joseph delivered this sermon were four eminent recorders-Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, William Clayton, and Thomas Bullock. A careful examination of the recorded notes of each of these men reveals the many terms used by the Prophet to refer to man's immortality. These terms include "soul," "mind of man," "spirit," "intelligent part," and "first principles of man." Only Wilford Woodruff recorded that Joseph used the plural term "intelligences [^3]

This portion of the discourse has generated considerable discussion and debate from 1844 to the present. Many interpretations have arisen. Even today it is not precisely clear what Joseph meant by "intelligence," "mind of man," or "elementary state." There is, at least, no question that the Prophet Joseph taught that there is an element of man that was not created but has existed eternally-the same eternal element identified in D&C 93:29.

From the days of Nauvoo to this day, questions remain concerning the nature of that eternal existence of man. What is "intelligence"? Did we exist as "intelligences" prior to our spirit birth? Did individual entities possess unique characteristics, personalities, and intellectual and spiritual capacities prior to being spirits? Was there individual agency in a "pre-spirit" existence?

These questions have been discussed and debated at great length by some of the greatest theologians, scholars, and critical thinkers in the history of the Church. While there is agreement on most of the important doctrinal points pertaining to man's eternal nature and premortal life, differing views continue on the nature of "intelligence" versus "intelligences." Today there are two basic schools of thought on the question of the eternal mind of man as generated by the Prophet's Nauvoo discourse.

School of Thought No. 1: Intelligence, the Primal Element

Man did not exist as a separate, individual intelligence prior to spirit birth; the spirit was "organized" from uncreated eternal elements known as "intelligence.Â

Early leaders of the Church, including Brigham Young, felt that man was "organized" by God from an eternal, uncreated "spirit element." The teaching prevailed that man, as an individual, premortal entity, did not exist prior to a literal spiritual birth. [^4]

This interpretation is seen in the writings and sermons of some of the early leaders of the Church. One such leader who reflected this view was Parley P. Pratt. He wrote that man as an individual entity or "organized intelligence" was brought forth from an uncreated, eternal, primal spiritual matter. "They are organized intelligences. What are they made of? They are made of the element which we call spirit. ... Let a given quantity of this element, thus endowed, or capacitated, be organized in the size and form of man... what would we call this individual, organized portion of the spiritual element? We would call it a spiritual body, an individual intelligence, an agent endowed with life, with a degree of independence, or inherent will, with the powers of motion, of thought, and with the attributes of moral, intellectual, and sympathetic affections and emotions.Â [^5]

In 1884, Elder Charles W. Penrose, commenting on the eternal nature of God, made an interesting observation that also has important bearing on the eternal nature of man. He said:

If God is an individual spirit and dwells in a body, the question will arise, "Is He the Eternal Father?" Yes, He is the Eternal Father. "Is it a fact that He never had a beginning?" In the elementary particles of his organism, He did not. But if He is an organized Being, there must have been a time when that being was organized. This, some one will say, would infer that God had a beginning. This spirit which pervades all things, which is the light and life of all things, by which our heavenly Father operates, by which He is omnipotent, never had a beginning and never will have an end. It is the light of truth; it is the spirit of intelligence.

Applying this same concept to the eternal nature of man, Elder Penrose went on to sag that "the individual, the organized person may have had a beginning, but that spirit of which and by which they [were] organized never had a beginning....The primal particles never had a beginning. They have been organized in different shapes [as individual entities]; the organism [individual spirit] had a beginning, but the elements or atoms of which it is composed never had....The elementary parts of matter as well as of spirit, using ordinary terms, never had a beginning.Â [^6]

Taking Elder Penrose's comments further, it may be appropriate to use a scientific analogy to summarize his views. Man's physical body is comprised of numerous elements or "elementary parts of matter." The scriptures teach that these "elements are eternal" (D&C 93:33). Even though the elements of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and many others that have been "organized" to form the body of man have always existed, it would be unreasonable to assume that they have eternally existed only as elements unique to that person.

What is this spirit element that is often referred to as "intelligence" or the "mind of man"? It is interesting to note Elder Penrose's description of intelligence as the primal element of man. He used phrases such as "pervades all things" and "light of all things." This corresponds with the Lord's own description of the "light of Christ" as seen in D&C 88:7-13. "The light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings; ... The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God."

This eternal power, the Light of Christ, may be the power that works upon that primal spirit element from which man's spirit was created. The Light of Christ as a power that enlightens and quickens the mind may also be the "mind of man" of which the Prophet Joseph spoke as being eternal and uncreated. Parley P. Pratt also spoke of "inherent properties" of the Light of Christ that may relate to the primal part of the mind and spirit of man. Referring to the Light of Christ, he said: "Its inherent properties embrace all the attributes of intelligence and affection. It is endowed with wisdom, knowledge, truth, love, charity, justice, and mercy, in all their ramifications. In short, it is the attributes of the eternal power and Godhead?Â [^7] "We know, however, that there is something called intelligence which always existed," wrote President Joseph Fielding Smith more recently. "It is the real eternal part of man, which was not created or made. This intelligence combined with the spirit constitutes a spiritual identity or individual.Â [^8]

In 1967, Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught a summer seminar for religious educators at Brigham Young University. In his lecture, Elder McConkie addressed the topic of intelligence and its relationship to the eternal nature of mankind.

... If I evaluate this correctly, this spirit matter or spirit element-the revelation used the word "matter"-it would be in effect the equivalent of elements as we use the terms, and we are trying to get words to get the concept over. This spirit element was born as a spirit being or offspring. Or in other words, this thing that is called intelligence was organized into intelligences who were spirits....Now what I am saying is that intelligence and spirit matter seem to be equated as the same thing, and that intelligences and spirits seem to be the same thing, and the organization of intelligence into intelligences, and the birth of spirit matter, which is the same thing, is a birth into a state of spirits. [^9]

While not officially speaking for the Church, Elder McConkie later gave additional information concerning this matter. In response to a letter from Walter Horne, Elder McConkie answered the following question: "Is it official Church doctrine, affirmed by the living prophet and all of the presiding Brethren, that we had no identity, that we were not individual intelligent entities before we were born into the spirit world?"

As to official Church pronouncements on doctrinal points, they are almost nonexistent ....

As far as I know there is no official pronouncement on the subject at hand ....

In my judgment, spirit element exists and it was organized into spirit beings, or in other words intelligence exists and it became the intelligences that were organized. In my judgment there was no agency prior to spirit birth and we did not exist as (individual) entities until that time. I do know that this matter has arisen perhaps six or eight times that I have been here and have been involved in reading and approving priesthood and auxiliary lessons. In each of these instances, the matter was deleted from the lesson. In each case it was expressly stated that we have no knowledge of any existence earlier than our existence as the spirit children of God. [^10]

As Elder McConkie carefully pointed out in this letter, the Church has not officially resolved this issue. It has never officially or specifically clarified what the Prophet Joseph Smith meant in the King Follett Discourse when he referred to the immortal "intelligence of spirits" and the "co-equal [co-eternal] mind of man." Lacking this official doctrinal clarification, many continue to hold differing views on the subject. Despite the fact that Elder McConkie's views represent the traditional views of the Church and its early leaders, there has been and continues to be a second view or school of thought regarding the eternal nature of the spirit of man.

School of Thought No. 2: Intelligences, the Pre-Spirit Entities of Man

Each person has existed eternally. Prior to spirit birth people existed as individual intelligences with unique characteristics and capacities, inherently able to be enlarged upon through agency.

Elder Orson Pratt often argued eloquently, though controversially, that neither God nor man was created, but that both God and man have always existed. Basing his views on the earlier statements of the Prophet Joseph, Elder Pratt felt that man, as an individual entity or intelligence, had always existed, but in a different-more basic or primal-state. He differed with Brigham Young with respect to the nature of that primal state. While President Young, Elder Penrose, and others argued that this state of "intelligence" was a collective elementary state, Orson Pratt felt strongly that it was indeed a highly individualized existence. He proposed that "each particle [or intelligence] eternally existed prior to this organization; each was enabled to perceive its own existence; each had the power of self-motion; each was an intelligent, living being of itself....In this independent, separate condition, it was capable of being governed by laws adapted to the amount of knowledge and experience it had gained during its past eternal experience." [^11]

In 1865 the First Presidency issued a statement which stated that Elder Pratt's views of the eternal nature of God and man were not to be construed as the official doctrine of the Church. They made the statement that members of the Church, along with all the "Prophets and Apostles," would have to be "content with the knowledge that from all eternity there had existed organized beings, in an organized form." [^12]

This seemed to settle the issue-at least temporarily. The accepted doctrinal view was that man, as an individual entity, came about from the organization of the primal element, intelligence, at the time of his spirit birth. This view prevailed, virtually unchallenged until the early twentieth century. Elder B. H. Roberts, President of the First Quorum of the Seventy, articulated a view somewhat similar to the views of Orson Pratt. This idea has sometimes been labeled as "Personal Eternalism." Elder Roberts claimed that man existed as a personal, individual, self-conscious entity prior to spirit birth. He identified these entities as "intelligences." These intelligences were different from the intelligences that Abraham saw in vision, however, in that the scriptural intelligences were organized spirits (see Abr. 3:22). Elder Roberts wrote:

There is a complex thing we call man, an intelligent entity, uncreated, self-existent, indestructible, he-for that entity is a person; because as we shall see he is possessed with powers that go with the person....

Under this concept, the eternal ego of man was, in some past age of the other world dim to us, clothed with a spiritual body. That was man's spiritual birth and his entrance into the spiritual world.... The term "an intelligence" is then applied to the eternal ego of man existing even before the spiritual creation....

The difference then between "spirits" and "intelligences," as here used, is this: Spirits are uncreated intelligences inhabiting spiritual bodies; while "intelligences," pure and simple, are intelligent entities, but unembodied in either spirit bodies or bodies of flesh and bone. They are uncreated, self-existent entities.... [^13]

The views of Elder Roberts, a gifted and prolific writer, were published in several different sources and disseminated widely throughout the Church. While Elder Roberts never claimed that his views were anything but his own ideas, they nonetheless took on a "quasi-official" status. Perhaps this status can be attributed primarily to his article "Immortality of Man" which was published in the April 1907 Improvement Era. An editorial comment prefaced this article which may have made it somewhat difficult for some readers to deter mine whether or not Elder Roberts's views officially represented the Church. The editors commented, "Elder Roberts submitted the following paper to the First Presidency and a number of the Twelve Apostles, none of whom found any thing objectionable in it, or contrary to the revealed word of God, and therefore favor its publication." [^14]

Although the Brethren favored the publication of this article, it was not to be construed as an endorsement of Elder Roberts's views. In fact, Elder Roberts himself specifically stated that the ideas he presented were not official doctrine.

Undoubtedly, if the Lord has anything further just now to reveal to the Church upon that or any other subject, it will, of course, be revealed through the . . . President of the Church. My purpose in mentioning the foregoing remark at this point is that I may correct any idea that may be entertained by anyone, and in howsoever slight degree, that what I have written, or what I shall now write, on this or any other subject, is given out as the doctrine of the Church. I am in no way deluded with the idea that my writings are setting forth in any authoritative way the doctrines of the Church. [^15]

While Elder Roberts's views may not have been "contrary to the revealed word of God," they were not necessarily in harmony with the revelations, either. As he stated, he was merely presenting his own personal view or interpretation of the revelations concerning the immortality of man. Despite Elder Roberts's own specific cautions, however, many members of the Church felt that because this idea had been published in a Church magazine it was the official doctrine of the Church. In the succeeding years many of these views found place in Church curriculum and in books by prominent LDS philosophers and educators. Many forgot that Elder Roberts himself had said, "What I have written ... are my views." As Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "As far as I know there is no official pronouncement on the subject at hand, but that applies also to a thousand other subjects.... We are not going to say categorically that this is true or this is false. But I will suggest that some of the things that are said in the Church are in the realm of speculation and can't be definitely and categorically known so far as the revelations are concerned." [^16]

Referring specifically to the school of thought promoted by the views of Elder B. H. Roberts, Elder McConkie gave this cautious assessment: "I don't say it is false, I just say it is in the realm of speculation.Â [^17]

Conclusion

There are many things connected with man's premortal origin that the Lord has not yet seen fit to reveal. However, he has revealed, in modern scriptures and through his chosen prophet Joseph Smith, many important truths. One of those precious morsels of truth was that in some unspecified way, man has always existed. He taught us that there is in deed something called "intelligence, or the light of truth," which is an intrinsic part of that eternal existence (D&C 93:29). The scriptures and the living prophets further teach that man is literally a spiritually begotten child of God. These are revealed, known truths. The schools of thought discussed in this chapter are man's attempts through diligent scripture study and deep personal ponderings to reach a clearer understanding of the revealed doctrines. Inherent in those attempts, however, are limitations.

Elder Harold B. Lee in an address to religious educators cautioned against ascribing authority to any views that go beyond the revealed word.

It is not to be thought that every word spoken by the General Authorities is inspired, or that they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost in everything they write. Now, you keep that in mind. I don't care what his position is, if he writes something or speaks something that goes beyond any thing you can find in the standard Church works, unless that one be the prophet, seer, and revelator-please note that one exception-you may immediately say, "Well, that is his own idea.Â [^18]

Amidst the questions and ponderings, it is wise to remember a caution given by President Joseph Fielding Smith. "Some of our writers have endeavored to explain what an intelligence is, but to do so is futile, for we have never been given any insight into this matter beyond what the Lord has fragmentarily revealed.Â [^19]

This chapter has attempted to illustrate historically and doctrinally what is known and also what is not known on this subject. While it is wise to reserve final judgment on doctrines that have not been fully revealed, it is certainly permissible to ponder, question, and seek understanding and greater insight. As we do it, it is always better to be intellectually cautious, clinging to even fragmentary revealed truth rather than being superficially sure of "doctrines" that are based solely on logic, philosophy, or speculation. We may never know in this lifetime the specific role of intelligence in the eternal nature of man, but one thing we can know assuredly through scriptural insights, prophetic utterances, and personal revelation is that we are truly children of God.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), 6:308-309.
[^2] Joseph Smith, The Words of Joseph Smith, compiled by Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Salt Lake City: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 382. This statement of the Prophet was recorded in the George Laub journal on 16 June 1844.
[^3] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 1:50.
[^4] John Taylor, "The Mormon," as cited in Daniel H. Ludlow, comp., Latter-day Prophets Speak (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1951), p. 8.
[^5] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 24:2-3.
[^6] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 18:32; 24:53.
[^7] Lorenzo Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 14:300, 302.
[^8] Joseph F. Smith, in Young Women's Journal, 6:371-372.
[^9] Heber J. Grant, in Improvement Era, September 1925, p. 1090.
[^10] David O. McKay, Treasures of Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1962), p. 413.
[^11] Joseph Fielding Smith, Man: His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), p. 268.
[^12] Harold B. Lee, Youth and the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1953), pp. 123-125.
[^13] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, Edward L. Kimball, ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 24-25.
[^14] Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 1.
[^15] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 4:216.
[^16] The First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund) "The Origin of Man," Improvement Era, November 1909, pp. 75-81. Reprinted in James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965), 4:203, 205, 206.
[^17] Eliza R. Snow, "O My Father," Hymns, no. 292.
[^18] Erastus Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 26:214.
[^19] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), 3:142-144.
