Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

4 "I Am a Child of God"

The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith many important truths concerning the Creation. One of those truths was that there were really two creations-one spiritual and the other temporal or physical. In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said, "For by the power of my Spirit created I them; yea, all things both spiritual and temporal-first spiritual, secondly temporal" (D&C 29:31-32). Later, the Prophet Joseph was given additional information concerning these two creations. When he received the Lord's revelation given to Moses, Joseph learned that "the Lord God ... created all things ... spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth" (Moses 3:5). Concerning man, the Lord also said that even before Adam was created in the flesh, "all things [including mankind] were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word" (Moses 3:7). To Adam, the Lord specifically stated, "I made the world, and men, before they were in the flesh" (Moses 6:51).

In the King Follett Discourse, Joseph Smith refuted the notion that God created the world ex nihilo-out of nothing- and explained that, instead, God organized the world.

Now, I ask all who hear me, why the learned men who are preaching salvation, say that God created the heavens and the earth out of nothing? The reason is, that they are unlearned in the things of God, and have not the gift of the Holy Ghost....

You ask the learned doctors why they say the world was made out of nothing, and they will answer, "Doesn't the Bible say He created the world?" And they infer, from the word create, that it must have been made out of nothing. Now, the word create came from the word baurau, which does not mean to create out of nothing; it means to organize; the same as a man would organize materials and build a ship. Hence we infer that God had materials to organize the world out of chaos-chaotic matter, which is element, and in which dwells all the glory. Element had an existence from the time He had. The pure principles of element are principles which can never be destroyed; they may be organized and re-organized, but not destroyed. They had no beginning and can have no end. [^1]

As previously discussed, the Prophet also taught that man was immortal, as is element. Was man organized out of "chaotic matter" as were God's other creations? The scriptures and inspired utterances of the prophets indicate clearly that there was a unique spiritual creation of man-different from all of God's other creations-wherein the immortal element or spirit matter was organized into a spirit being.

Man-the Spiritual Offspring of God

While speaking to ancient Athenian intellectuals about the unknown God whom they worshipped in ignorance, Paul told those gathered on Mars' hill that "we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device." Paul taught these philosophers that God was not an idol nor a creation of man's art or intellect, but rather a real, personal being "not far from every one of us." Paul knew the real nature of God because, as he stated, "we are the offspring of God" (Acts 17:27-29). Later, Paul reminded the Roman Saints of their unique relationship with God: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God" (Rom. 8:16). To the Hebrew Saints, Paul gave another glimpse of man's spiritual origin when he referred to God as "the Father of spirits" (Heb. 12:9).

The Prophet Joseph, in bearing witness of Christ and his creative role, distinguished between the spiritual creation or organization of all things in general and man specifically. He records, "We heard the voice bearing record that he [Jesus] is the Only Begotten of the Father-that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the in habitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:23-24).

With the restoration of the gospel and the priesthood keys through the Prophet there came also a renewed under standing of man's literal relationship to God. Every prophet in this dispensation has emphatically declared that man is truly a child of God.

Joseph Smith:

The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirits that we are the children of God. [^2]

Brigham Young:

Our Father in Heaven begat all the spirits that ever were, or ever will be, upon this earth; and they were born spirits in the eternal world. Then the Lord by His power and wisdom organized the mortal tabernacle of man. We were made first spiritual, and afterwards temporal. [^3]

John Taylor:

Whence comest thou? Thine origin? What art thou doing here?... Knowest thou not that thou art a spark of Deity, struck from the fire of His eternal blaze, and brought forth in the midst of eternal burning?

Knowest thou not that eternities ago thy spirit, pure and holy, dwelt in thy Heavenly Father's bosom and in His pres ence, and with thy mother, one of the queens of heaven, surrounded by thy brother and sister spirits in the spirit world, among the Gods? [^4]

"Our Father, who art in heaven." What, is He indeed my Father? Yes. Is He our Father? Yes.... We are children of God; that is the relationship we sustain to him. [^5]

Wilford Woodruff:

We know that we are created in the image of God, both male and female....

[God] is our Eternal Father. [^6]

Lorenzo Snow:

We believe that we are the offspring of our Father in heaven, and that we possess in our spiritual organizations the same capabilities, powers and faculties that our Father possesses....

We were born in the image of God our Father; he begot us like unto himself. [^7]

Joseph F. Smith:

Every spirit that comes to this earth to take upon it a tabernacle is a son or daughter of God and possesses all the intelligence and all the attributes that any son or daughter can enjoy. [^8]

Heber J. Grant:

The doctrine of pre-existence pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. [^9]

David O. McKay:

Man is a dual being-he is human, physical, of the earth, earthly, but he is, also, divine, the offspring of God. [^10]

Joseph Fielding Smith:

We are informed that man was created in the image of God.... This is the answer to the evolutionist in relation to the descent of man, and to all religionists as well as scientists who ridicule the anthropomorphic nature of God. Man was created in the likeness of the body of God. We call him Father ... he is literally the Father of the spirits of all men, and in the spirit they were created or begotten, sons and daughters unto him. [^11]

Harold B. Lee:

Let us take a brief glimpse of our premortal life.... You were the sons and daughters of God in the pre-existent world of spirits.... Spirits are organized intelligences that were so prepared before the foundations of the earth were laid, and ... they were organized by our Heavenly Father and dwelt with him while the earth was being formed. But now may I ask you a simple question: Could there have been a Father in heaven without a Mother?... If you consider carefully those in whose image and likeness male and female were created, I wonder if you will not also discover the organizers of intelligences in the world of spirits. [^12]

Spencer W. Kimball:

We are eternal beings. We have no way of comprehending how long we dwelt in the presence of God as his spirit children....

God made man in his own image and certainly he made woman in the image of his wife-partner.... You [women] are daughters of God. You are precious. You are made in the image of our heavenly Mother. [^13]

Ezra Taft Benson:

Knowledge is power, but the most vital and important knowledge is a knowledge of God-that he lives, that we are his children, that he loves us, that we are created in his image, that we can in faith pray to him and receive strength and inspiration in time of need.... But in all of our searching for truth, we must remember that the knowledge of our God, our Father, and his plans for us his children is of supreme importance. [^14]

Implicit and explicit in each of these prophetic declarations are the words "offspring," "children," and "begotten." These words are fundamental to a precise understanding of the nature of the spiritual creation or organization of the spirits of mankind.

President Brigham Young taught that in order to better understand how to return to God's presence, it is imperative that we understand our relationship to the Eternal Father.

The Scriptures which we believe have taught us from the beginning to call Him our Father, and we have been taught to pray to Him as our Father, in the name of our eldest brother whom we call Jesus Christ.... If I am not telling you the truth, please to tell me the truth on this subject, and let me know more than I do know. If it is hard for you to believe, ... admit the fact as I state it, and do not con tend against it. Try to believe it, because you will never become acquainted with our Father, never enjoy the blessings of His Spirit, never be prepared to enter into His presence, until you most assuredly believe ... this great mystery about God.

What is this great mystery about God? Why do we call him Father? What does this mean about our spiritual origin? President Young continues:

I want to tell you, each and every one of you, that you are well acquainted with God our heavenly Father, or the great Eloheim. You are all well acquainted with Him, for there is not a soul of you but what has lived in His house and dwelt with Him year after year....

There is not a person here to-day but what is a son or a daughter of that Being. In the spirit world their spirits were first begotten and brought forth, and they lived there with their parents for ages before they came here. This, perhaps, is hard for many to believe, but it is the greatest nonsense in the world not to believe it. If you do not believe it, cease to call Him Father; and when you pray, pray to some other character. [^15]

A Heavenly Father and Mother

The First Presidency of the Church issued an official declaration concerning the spiritual as well as temporal origin of man. Presidents Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund wrote in 1909:

All men and women are in the similitude of the universal Father and Mother, and are literally the sons and daughters of Deity....

The doctrine of the pre-existence-revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner ....Man is the child of God. [^16]

It is interesting and significant to note the First Presidency's referral to both a Father and a Mother in heaven as literal parents of all of the spirits of mankind. It is most pro found that they clarified the relationship of the spiritual creation of man by using words such as "begotten" and "born." This official statement of the First Presidency answers the question. How was the spirit of man organized or born? Just as mortal beings take on their physical bodies in a procreative process involving both an earthly father and an earthly mother, the birth of spirits came about "in like manner." This important truth implies that not only a Heavenly Father is needed in the spiritual procreative process but also a heavenly mother. It was this eternal logic that caused Eliza R. Snow in 1843 to write in her inspired hymn, "O My Father":

In the heav'ns are parents single? No, the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason; truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there. [^17]

Other latter-day leaders of the Church have spoken concerning the role of both a Heavenly Father and Mother in this process of spirit birth. Elder Erastus Snow said:

Now, it is not said in so many words in the Scriptures, that we have a Mother in heaven as well as a Father. It is left for us to infer this from what we see and know of all living things in the earth including man. The male and female principle is united and both necessary to the accomplishment of the object of their being, and if this be not the case with our Father in heaven after whose image we are created, then it is an anomaly in nature. But to our minds the idea of a Father suggests that of a Mother.... Hence when it is said that God created our first parents in His likeness ... it is intimated in language sufficiently plain to my understanding that the male and female principle was present with the Gods as it is with man. [^18]

President Joseph Fielding Smith, in answering a question about a "Mother in Heaven," gave this response:

In answer to your question about a mother in heaven, let us use reason.... If we had a Father, which we did, for all of these records speak of him, then does not good common sense tell us that we must have had a mother there also?...

If we are his offspring, then how did we become such, if we had no mother to give us spirit birth?...

Moreover, the Doctrine and Covenants definitely teaches the eternity of the marriage covenant and that those so married who are faithful will have claim on each other in eternity. Their children will belong to them, and they will have the gift of "a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever.Â [^19]

As President Smith related, the latter-day revelations indicated that exalted men and women who have been faithful to the covenants of celestial marriage will have the opportunity to give birth to spiritual offspring. This part of the plan is no doubt patterned after that heavenly order which pro vided spirit bodies for all of mankind. Elder Orson Pratt commented on this pattern when he said:

Before the earth was rolled into existence we were his sons and daughters. Those of his children who prove them selves during this probation worthy of exaltation in his presence, will beget other children, and, precisely according to the same principle, they too will become fathers of spirits, as he is the Father of our spirits; and thus the works of God are one eternal round-creation, glorification, and exaltation in the celestial kingdom. [^20]

More recently Elder Bruce R. McConkie summarized the Church's teachings on the role of a heavenly mother in the spiritual creation of mankind and the relationship of this doctrine to the ultimate destiny of exalted men and women.

Implicit in the Christian verity that all men are the spirit children of an Eternal Father is the usually unspoken truth that they are also the offspring of an Eternal Mother. An ex-aired and glorified Man of Holiness (Moses 6:57) could not be a Father unless a Woman of like glory, perfection, and holiness was associated with him as a Mother. The begetting of children makes a man a father and a woman a mother whether we are dealing with man in his mortal or immortal state....

Mortal persons who overcome all things and gain an ultimate exaltation will live eternally in the family unit and have spirit children, thus becoming Eternal Fathers and Eternal Mothers. (D&C 132:19-32.) [^21]

Spiritual Capacities Inherited at Spirit Birth

Thus we see how closely our earthly existence is patterned after our premortal one. The similarities can be extended even further. Each child that is born into mortality inherits certain qualities and characteristics from his or her physical parents. Often a great athlete is referred to as a "born athlete" or it is said that he inherited certain gifts and skills from his parents or other progenitors. However, this inheritance can be more than just physical. It is also common to inherit: musical talent, other artistic or intellectual gifts, and even personality traits. "It's in his blood" and "It's in her genes" are common expressions. In a real yet spiritual sense each child of Heavenly Father likewise inherited characteristics and capacities from his divine parents. These capacities may not necessarily be talents such as athletic ability or artistic gifts, but no doubt all spirit sons and daughters of God inherited the potential-all the spiritual capacities-necessary to enable them to become like their Father or Mother. "There is the nature of deity in the composition of our spiritual organization," said President Lorenzo Snow. "In our spiritual birth our Father transmitted to us the capabilities, powers and faculties which he himself possessed, as much so as the child on its mother's bosom possesses, although in an undeveloped state, the faculties, powers and susceptibilities of its parents.Â [^22]

It should be significant to each of us to know that by virtue of our divine lineage, we possess innate spiritual capacities which, if developed and nurtured properly, will lead to godhood-godhood like that of the Father who endowed each of his spirit offspring with that inheritance. The key phrase used by President Snow was "although in an undeveloped state." This implies that though a spirit is endowed with inherited potential and spiritual capacities, they must still be faithfully developed. This principle is much the same in mortality. A person may be born with genetically endowed gifts or abilities, but if they remain undeveloped or unrefined that person will never rise to his or her potential. Each spirit child is truly a "god in embryo," but the development of that embryo is dependent upon continued spiritual growth and effort. President John Taylor, in 1892, elaborated on this concept in his classic work The Mediation and Atonement:

If we take man, he is said to have been made in the image of God, for the simple reason that he is a son of God; and being His son, he is, of course, His offspring, an emanation from God, in whose likeness, we are told, he is made. He did not originate from a chaotic mass of matter, moving or inert, but came forth possessing, in an embryotic state, all the faculties and powers of a God.... As the horse, the ox, the sheep, and every living creature, including man, propagates its own species and perpetuates its own kind, so does God perpetuate His. [^23]

Elder Orson Pratt explained it in this way:

Will we ever become Gods? ... In our imperfect state, being the children of God, we are destined, if we keep his commandments, to grow in intelligence until we finally become like God our Father. By living according to every word which proceeds from the mouth of God, we shall attain to his likeness, the same as our children grow up and become like their parents; and, as children through diligence attain to the wisdom and knowledge of their parents, so may we attain to the knowledge of our Heavenly Parents. [^24]

Spiritually Created in God's Image

Not only do we inherit spiritual potential from our Heavenly Father but also, according to numerous passages of scripture, we were created in the very image of God (see Gen. 1:26-27; Moses 2:26-27; Abr. 4:26-27; Mosiah 7:27; Ether 3:15). "In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; in the image of his own body, male and female, created he them" (Moses 6:8-9). These references to man's creation in the image of God's body apply just as much to the spirit bodies of mankind as to their physical bodies. The First Presidency's statement entitled "The Origin of Man" reiterates this principle.

"God created man in His own image." This is just as true of the spirit as it is of the body, which is only the clothing of the spirit, its complement; the two together constituting the soul. The spirit of man is in the form of man, and the spirits of all creatures are in the likeness of their bodies....

Man is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes, and even as the infant son of an earthly father and mother is capable in due time of be coming a man, so the undeveloped offspring of celestial parentage is capable, by experience through ages and aeons, of evolving into a God. [^25]

There are examples in the scriptures that illustrate this concept. When the premortal Christ appeared to the brother of Jared, he learned that the Savior's earthly body would be in the likeness of his spirit body.

And the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood....

Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image?...

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. (Ether 3:6, 15-16.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith likewise learned through revelation from God that "that which is spiritual [is] in the like ness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person" (D&C 77:2). The Prophet Joseph Smith further taught concerning not only the likeness of these premortal spirits but also the characteristics of spirit matter. "The spirit, by many, is thought to be immaterial, without substance. With this latter statement we should beg ...to differ, and state the spirit is a substance; that it is material, but that it is more pure, elastic and refined matter than the body; that it existed before the body, can exist in the body; and will exist separate from the body, when the body will be mouldering in the dust; and will in the resurrection, be again united with it.Â [^26]

Elder Parley P. Pratt explained that the spiritual elements were organized into a spirit being "in the likeness and after the pattern of the fleshly tabernacle. It [the spirit] possesses, in fact, all the organs and parts exactly corresponding to the outward tabernacle.Â [^27]

Despite these scriptural examples and doctrinal teachings, there remain some questions regarding the nature of the pre-mortal spirit of man. How closely does the spirit resemble the body? What about genetic or racial characteristics that are apparent in mankind's earthly bodies-were these also present in the premortal spirit bodies? We often see children in a family who look remarkably like each other or closely resemble a parent. What does this imply about our premortal relationships?

Elder Orson Pratt made some interesting comments pertaining to the resemblance between spirit and body. He said:

We, as Latter-day Saints, believe that the spirits that occupy these tabernacles have form and likeness similar to the human tabernacle. Of course there may be deformities existing in connection with the outward tabernacle which do not exist in connection with the spirit that inhabits it. These tabernacles become deformed by accident in various ways, sometimes at birth, but this may not altogether or in any degree deform the spirits that dwell within them, therefore we believe that the spirits which occupy the bodies of the human family are more or less in the resemblance of the tabernacles. [^28]

As Elder Pratt has pointed out, the revelations teach that the spirits of mankind resemble their respective earthly bodies generally rather than expressly. As a result, differences among peoples on earth such as racial distinctions, genetic imperfections, and inherited physical characteristics may not be due to any differences in the spirits. President David O. McKay said, in reference to the racial distinctions among the peoples of the earth, "There were no national distinctions among those [premortal] spirits such as Americans, Europeans, Asiatics, Australians, etc.Â [^29] He further stated that those distinctions came about only after these spirits entered their earthly existence. Similarly, the children in a family who resemble each other or a parent closely do so be cause of the natural, biological laws of genetics rather than by virtue of some premortal relationship, choice, or covenant. However, it must be emphasized that every person's spirit was created literally in the image of God and that the form and likeness of that spirit is due to divine parentage and "spiritual genetics." What, then, does the spirit look like? The answer is, like a child of God in the general form and likeness of the physical body. Why, then, do the spirits of men who leave mortality recognize the spirits of their de ceased family members or friends? There is no doubt that spirits have the ability to recognize each other, both before and after earth life; but that recognition is not due exclusively to the earthly or physical characteristics of each per son. Rather, spirits may also recognize others and be recognized by others because of their spiritual relationships -associations as brothers and sisters, children of God.

So What?

Elder Boyd K. Packer wisely counselled all teachers of the gospel in his book Teach Ye Diligently, to apply the "So What?" test in their teaching of gospel principles. The "So What?" test involves imagining students of the gospel asking "So what?" regarding the principle or doctrine being taught. Nephi used this same principle when he taught his own people to "liken all scriptures" unto themselves (1 Nephi 19: 23). The Lord has revealed many important truths through his prophets concerning man's relationship to his Father in Heaven. No doubt the Lord had a greater purpose in mind when revealing these truths than merely answering intellectual or spiritual inquiry or settling doctrinal disputes. There are great blessings accompanying the revealed knowledge that we are literally children of God, endowed with his spiritual capacities and created in his image. These blessings include greater understanding of ourselves and our eternal destiny, renewed respect and reverence for ourselves, increased acceptance and understanding of God's dealings with his children, and greater confidence in and assurance of the existence of a caring, loving, and listening Father in Heaven. Having this knowledge of our literal relationship to God can profoundly enhance the esteem, reverence, and love in our three most important relationships-our relationships with self, others, and God.

Self-Respect

The Prophet Joseph Smith often said, "Would to God, brethren, I could tell you who I am." [^30] Implicit in the Prophet's statement is an understanding that as literal children of God there are significant things about our spiritual identity that may be hidden from view but that, if fully known, would heighten our self-respect and inspire us to a greater realization of our spiritual potential. This sense of heritage has certainly proven effective in mortality. Think, for instance of the deep pride and certitude of identity some feel in knowing that they have descended from famous noble ancestors; or think of the sense of purpose, duty, and belonging so often bred into those who bear the names of well-known and respected families. President Harold B. Lee, speaking in his last general conference, emphatically taught that an understanding of our relationship to God as literal spirit children can bring increased self-respect, which in turn leads us to greater righteousness and away from sin and despair.

As I have prayerfully thought of the reasons why one chooses this course [of wickedness] ... it seems to me that it all results from the failure of the individual to have self-respect....

... when one does not have that love for himself ... other consequences can be expected to follow. He ceases to love life. Or if he marries, he has lost his love for his wife and children-no love of home or respect for the country in which he lives, and eventually he has lost his love of God. Rebellion in the land, disorder and the lack of love in the family, children disobedient to parents, loss of contact with God, all because that person has lost all respect for him self....

Well, then, "Who am I?" Those lacking in that important understanding, and, consequently, in some degree [those] failing to hold themselves in the high esteem which they would have if they did understand, are lacking self-respect....

... may I ask each of you again the question, "Who are you?" You are all sons and daughters of God. Your spirits were created and lived as organized intelligences before the world was....

If we can get a person to think what those words mean, then we can begin to understand the significance of the words of the renowned psychologist, MacDougall,... "The first thing to be done to help a man to moral regeneration is to restore, if possible, his self-respect." How better may that self-respect be restored than to help him to fully understand the answer to that question, "Who am I?"...

What a difference it would make if we really sensed our divine relationship to God, our Heavenly Father, our relation ship to Jesus Christ, our Savior and our elder brother, and our relationship to each other....

Now ... I trust that I might have given to you and others who have not yet listened to such counsel, something to stimulate some sober thinking as to who you are and from whence you came; and, in so doing, that I may have stirred up within your soul the determination to begin now to show an increased self-respect and reverence for the temple of God, your human body, wherein dwells a heavenly spirit. I would charge you to say again and again to yourselves ... "I am a [son or daughter] of God" and by so doing, begin today to live closer to those ideals which will make your life happier and more fruitful because of an awakened realization of who you are. [^31]

Our Father in Heaven has revealed through scriptures and prophets the fundamental truth that we are truly his children. This he has done to instill self-respect in the hearts of his children. President Thomas S. Monson has stated that by virtue of the increased self-respect that comes from this important knowledge, we also gain increased spiritual power to resist temptations, face life's adversities, and perform acts of righteousness, service, and charity.

To live greatly, we must develop the capacity to face trouble with courage, disappointment with cheerfulness, and triumph with humility. You ask, "How might we achieve these goals?" I answer, "By getting a true perspective of who we really are!" We are sons and daughters of a living God, in whose image we have been created. Think of that truth: "Created in the image of God." We cannot sincerely hold this conviction without experiencing a profound new sense of strength and power, even the strength to live the commandments of God, the power to resist the temptations of Satan. [^32]

Knowing that we are literally children of God not only be gets greater love and respect for ourselves but should also, logically, induce within us a stronger reverence and love for all mankind. Elder Boyd K. Packer asked, "What could in spire one to purity and worthiness more than to possess a spiritual confirmation that we are the children of God? What could inspire a more lofty regard for oneself, or engender more love for mankind?Â [^33]

Universal Brotherhood

Knowing that all men are the offspring of God also means knowing that all mankind are literally spiritual brothers and sisters. This universal brotherhood is not merely a symbolic or literary dictum but rather a spiritually significant reality. Just as a knowledge of our celestial lineage can positively affect our self-esteem and personal behavior, so does it affect our attitude of love and our actions of service toward our fellowmen-our brothers and sisters. Universal brotherhood is more than just world citizenship; it truly is a divine family relationship. As George Bernard Shaw is quoted as writing: "If we all realized that we were the children of one father, we would stop shouting at each other as much as we do." [^34]

There Is a God in Heaven: He Is My Father

This knowledge of God not only builds self-respect, a greater desire to be righteous, and stronger feelings of universal brotherhood but also, most important, it teaches us that there really is a God in Heaven who is truly and literally our loving and caring Father. Understanding his nature and our relationship to him builds our faith and can bring us to a more meaningful communication with him. President David O. McKay once said, "A belief in God brings peace to the soul. An assurance that God is our Father, into whose presence we can go for comfort and guidance, is a never-failing source of comfort.Â [^35]

Because we find it easier to commune with such a God, we can attain greater spirituality, firmer faith, more resolute repentance, and a stronger commitment to fulfill our spiritual destiny. As we grow in these things, we gain a clearer understanding of the Father's plan for his children. Elder Boyd K. Packer spoke of the blessing of understanding that comes from an enlightened and enhanced relationship with the Father of all spirits.

When we understand the doctrine of premortal life, then things fit together and make sense. We then know that little boys and little girls are not monkeys, nor are their parents, nor were theirs, to the very beginning generation.

We are the children of God, created in his image.

Our child-parent relationship to God is clear.

The purpose for the creation ... is clear.

The testing that comes in mortality is clear.

The need for a redeemer is clear.

When we do understand that principle of the gospel, we see a Heavenly Father and a Son; we see an atonement and a redemption. [^36]

Many people become discouraged in their quest to know God, finding him incomprehensible and impersonal. Such confusion often creates spiritual roadblocks to personal prayer. It is not uncommon for one lacking this knowledge to feel that God does not really know him or listen to his prayers. With this discouragement, he often ceases to communicate with God and thus further estranges himself from his Father. On the other hand, knowing that he is truly the child of a personal God-spiritually begotten of Him and created in His image-brings him a clearer vision of the type of being that God is, and thus brings him closer to his heavenly parent. Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated that under standing God comes hand in hand with the knowledge of our personal relationship to him.

How can we conceive of such an Omnipotent God? How can mere man ever hope to know him whom it is eternal life to know? Can man comprehend God?

Strangely, marvelously, wondrously, the answer is found in the simple declaration that God is our Father. Our finite minds cannot comprehend his infinite laws. But we can en vision him as a Father, as a personal, loving being filled with tenderness and compassion. He is more than the Father of the Firstborn; more than the Father of the Only Begotten in the flesh; more than the Father in the sense that he created the first mortal man. He is, in deed and in fact, the Father of the spirits of all men in the literal and full sense of the word. Each of us was begotten by him in the premortal life. We are his spirit children. [^37]

Knowing that all men everywhere are in reality the spiritual children of God, created in his image, endowed with his characteristics and capacities, gives rise not only to increased knowledge but also to enhanced respect and reverence for self, fellowmen, and God. The words of the familiar Primary song "I Am a Child of God" may be simple, but they are pro found.

I am a child of God. Rich blessings are in store; If I but learn to do his will I'll live with him once more.

Lead me, guide me, walk beside me, Help me find the way. Teach me all that I must do To live with him someday. [^38]

There is a message of hope and inspiration in that simple, familiar refrain. The Lord has revealed this knowledge as motivation to his children to live in such a way that they might return to their heavenly home. Someday, as Brigham Young foresaw, there will be a happy homecoming reunion with our Heavenly Father.

He is the Father of our spirits; and if we could know, under stand, and do His will, every soul would be prepared to re turn back into His presence. And when they get there, they would see that they had formerly lived there for ages, that they had previously been acquainted with every nook and corner, with the palaces, walks, and gardens; and they would embrace their Father, and He would embrace them and say, "My son, my daughter, I have you again;" and the child would say, "O my Father, my Father, I am here again." [^39]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young, Journal History, February 23, 1847, as cited in Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), p. 122.
[^2] Heber C. Kimball, funeral address for Jedediah M. Grant, December 4, 1856; as quoted in Doctrines from the Prophets, compiled by Alma P. Burton, (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1970), p. 423.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), pp. 50-51.
[^4] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), pp. 166-167.
[^5] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 21:318.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954), 3:81.
[^7] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:139.
[^8] John Taylor, Millennial Star, 9:321.
[^9] Stephen L Richards, as quoted by Ezra Taft Benson, in Conference Report, April 1979, p. 121.
[^10] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 181.
[^11] Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses, 25:57.
[^12] The First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund), "The Origin of Man," Improvement Era, November 1909, pp. 75-81.
[^13] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd edition (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 26.
[^14] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), pp. 308, 324-325.
[^15] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 8:28.
[^16] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 4:268.
[^17] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:58-59.
[^18] Several scriptural passages state that "no unclean thing can dwell in God's presence" (see 1 Ne. 15:34; Alma 7:21; 11:37; 40:26; Hel. 8:25; 3 Ne. 27:19), but none of these passages have authoritatively been interpreted to have application to the premortal world. A careful examination of the context of these passages shows their specific reference to the postmortal judgment, resurrection, and salvation of God's children. In other words, no unclean or unsanctified person can be "saved" or exalted in God's kingdom, the celestial kingdom. D&C 76:51-52, 62 and D&C 84:14-21 clearly teach that dwelling in God's presence refers to postmortal exaltation.
[^19] Orson Pratt, The Seer, vol. 1, no. 4, p. 55.
[^20] Orson Pratt, The Seer, vol. 1, no. 4, p. 54.
[^21] David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay, compiled by Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 109.
[^22] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 4:268.
[^23] Heber C. Kimball, funeral address for Jedediah M. Grant, as quoted in Doctrines from the Prophets, comp. Alma P. Burton, pp. 423-424.
[^24] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 18:292.
[^25] The First Presidency, "The Origin of Man," Improvement Era, November, 1909, p. 77.
[^26] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 207.
[^27] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 79.
[^28] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 15:242-243.
[^29] David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay, compiled by Llewelyn R. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), p. 228.
[^30] 30. Joseph Smith, quoted in Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1945), p. 322.
[^31] 31. Harold B. Lee, "Understanding Who We Are Brings Self-Respect," Ensign, January 1974, pp. 2-6.
[^32] 32. Thomas S. Monson, in Conference Report, April 1973, p. 62.
[^33] 33. Boyd K. Packer, Conference Report, October 1984, p. 85.
[^34] 34. George Bernard Shaw, as quoted by Harold B. Lee, Ensign, January 1974, p. 6.
[^35] 35. David O. McKay, Secrets of Happy Life, compiled by Llewelyn R. McKay (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1967), p. 114.
[^36] 36. Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1983, p. 22.
[^37] 37. Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), pp. 61-62.
[^38] 38. "I Am a Child of God" Hymns, no. 301.
[^39] 39. Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 4:268.
