Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

5 What Was It Like?

Questions often arise regarding the conditions that prevailed in the premortal existence. What was it like? Did it look much different than this world? What did spirits do there? Was there sin and opposition there? How long were we there? How much did we know about earth life and what to expect here? These and many other questions cannot be fully answered, because the Lord has not seen fit to reveal many of the details of our premortal home. He has, however, revealed through the scriptures and through his latter-day prophets some important information that sheds significant doctrinal light on the general conditions in the premortal life. Much of what is known about these conditions is learned indirectly, by inference from scriptural passages about important gospel principles and by transferring and applying that knowledge to the premortal realm. For example, we can gain some in sights by examining the teachings of the scriptures on related issues such as the War in Heaven, agency, progression, and the postmortal spirit world. This chapter will examine the doctrinal teachings concerning premortal conditions and will also make appropriate inferences and assumptions when they can be supported by revelations and teachings of the prophets. Specific questions may remain unanswered, but the scriptures and prophets have given enough inspired information to help us understand the general, fundamental conditions of the premortal world.

God's House Is a House of Order

Numerous scriptural passages set forth an important principle of God's house, both heavenly and earthly, as being order. God's house is a house of order (see D&C 132:8). The Lord also speaks of the order that prevails in his heavenly and earthly houses as "everlasting order" (D&C 82:20). His counsel to his earthly servants reflects the order and harmony that must also have prevailed in his house where his premortal offspring dwelt with him. In establishing his latter-day Church, the Lord said that it was essential "that all things ... be done in order" (D&C 20:68). The order that prevailed in the premortal home can be seen in the three main ways-organization, priesthood, and instruction.

Organization

From scripture and prophetic utterance we can learn that there was organization in the premortal world. Such organization was designed to most effectively meet the Father's objectives of instruction and preparation of his children. It would not be unreasonable, then, to think that the following counsel and charge from the Lord to his latter-day servants was in fact similar to or based upon the premortal charge of the Father to his spirit children to prepare themselves for their earthly ministry and experience.

Assemble yourselves together, and organize yourselves, and prepare yourselves ... that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom.

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God...

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you. (D&C 88:74, 77-78, 80.)

In speaking of the Creation, the Lord revealed that "that which is temporal [is] in the likeness of that which is spiritual" (D&C 77:2). Could this passage also have a broader meaning which may indeed apply to spiritual organizations and orders that serve as the pattern for the temporal or earthly? In light of this musing, it is interesting to compare the Lord's pattern for his earthly house with the conditions that may have existed in his heavenly house. He said, "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God" (D&C 88:119).

President Brigham Young reported that some time after the Prophet Joseph Smith's death, the Prophet Joseph re turned to Brigham and instructed him, giving him certain counsels to be shared with the Saints. Joseph then told Brig-ham to "be sure to tell the people to keep the spirit of the Lord; and if they will, they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world. Our father in Heaven organized the human family, but they are all disorganized and in great confusion." [^1]

The Prophet Joseph Smith counseled the Saints to live the gospel and stay in tune with the Spirit and they would eventually find themselves organized in the perfect order arid union of God as they were before this life. It may be possible to gain a glimpse of that premortal order and organization by understanding better the organization God provides for his children both in this life and in the post-earth spirit world. While Joseph referred to a future organization and order patterned after the premortal order, President Heber C. Kimball recounted a vision of Jedediah M. Grant of the order and organization in the post-earth spirit world. It is interesting to note how his description might apply to a similar premortal house of order.

He said to me, "Brother Heber, I have been into the spirit world two nights in succession, and, of all the dreads that ever came across me, the worst was to have to again return to my body, though I had to do it. But O," says he, "the order and government that were there! When in the spirit world, I saw the order of righteous men and women; beheld them organized in their several grades, and there appeared to be no obstruction to my vision; I could see every man and woman in their grade and order. I looked to see whether there was any disorder there, but there was none; neither ... darkness, disorder or confusion." ... All were organized and in perfect harmony. [^2]

Wherever the kingdom of God exists-premortally, on earth, and postmortally-there have been order and organization, priesthood keys, offices, and assignments. While it is not fully clear how the premortal world was organized, there is ample evidence to show that there were councils organized to instruct, plan, prepare, and make important decisions for the implementation of the plan of salvation. As with the kingdom of God on earth, the order and organization of heaven is everlastingly intertwined with priesthood. President Joseph Fielding Smith illustrated how all things were done in order and organization under the direction of God's eternal power.

There must be leaders, presiding officers, and those who are worthy and able to take command. During the ages in which we dwelt in the pre-mortal state we not only developed our various characteristics and showed our worthiness and ability, or the lack of it, but we were also where such progress could be observed. It is reasonable to believe that there was a Church organization there. The heavenly beings were living in a perfectly arranged society. Every person knew his place. Priesthood, without any question, had been conferred and the leaders were chosen to officiate. Ordinances pertaining to that pre-existence were required and the love of God prevailed. [^3]

Priesthood in the Premortal Life

The prophet Alma spoke of "those priests [who] were ordained after the order of his Son.... And this is the manner after which they were ordained-being called and prepared from the foundation of the world." (Alma 13:2-3.) Prophets of the Restoration have declared, as did Alma of old, that priesthood authority and organization existed in the premortal courts of the Father. The Prophet Joseph Smith stated:

The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent....

... [The Melchizedek Priesthood] holds the highest authority which pertains to the priesthood, and the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the earth; and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven.

Its institution was prior to "the foundation of this earth.Â [^4]

The Prophet clearly states that priesthood is eternal and that through that eternal channel comes the knowledge and instruction necessary to prepare the spirit children of God for eventual exaltation. This pattern of priesthood instruction applies to the premortal life as well as to this life and to the postmortal world of the spirits.

Counselling men of the priesthood, President Wilford Woodruff said: "I feel that we should humble ourselves be fore God, that we should labor to magnify our callings, and honor this priesthood which we received before we came here." [^5]

President Joseph Fielding Smith further declared, "In regard to the holding of the priesthood in pre-existence, I will say that there was an organization there just as well as an organization here, and men there held authority. Men chosen to positions of trust in the [premortal] spirit world held priesthood. [^6]

Priesthood, then, as the power of God, was the basis for the order and organization of the premortal heavenly home. It is truly the "perfect system of government" described by President Brigham Young. [^7] President John Taylor also commented on the role of priesthood in the premortal organization of heaven.

What is priesthood? Without circumlocution, I shall briefly answer that it is the government of God, whether on earth or in the heavens, for it is by that power, agency, or principle that all things are governed on earth and in the heavens, and by that power all things are upheld and sustained. It governs all things-it directs all things-it sustains all things-and has to do with all things that God and truth are associated with. It is the power of God delegated to intelligences in the heavens and to men on the earth; and when we arrive in the celestial kingdom of God, we shall find the most perfect order and harmony existing, because there is the perfect pattern, the most perfect order of government. [^8]

The premortal home was, indeed, the celestial kingdom for our heavenly parents. No doubt, its priesthood organization and order was the pattern for all other councils and organizations designed to bring about God's purposes. President Ezra Taft Benson has taught that councils organized under the priesthood authority play an important role in Church government in "correlating, coordinating, planning, and resolving." Quoting Stephen L Richards, President Benson continued, "As I conceive it, the genius of our Church government is government through councils.... I have had enough experiences to know the value of councils.... I see the wisdom, God's wisdom, in creating councils... to govern his Kingdom. [^9]

The scriptures also refer to a premortal council. The plan of salvation and its attendant laws and principles were "ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was" (D&C 121:32). Abraham also saw in vision that prior to the formation of the earth, "the Gods took counsel among themselves" (Abr. 4:26).

Many of the latter-day prophets have referred to the preparations that took place in the premortal Grand Council. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "At the first organization in heaven we were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it.Â [^10] No doubt instruction was a primary purpose of the Grand Council. The spirits were once again taught the principles of the plan of salvation, the need for a Savior, and the blessings of the Atonement. President Joseph F. Smith also stated that the spirits of all men were also present at other times when the plans were presented and the principles taught.

Our spirits existed before they came to this world. They were in the councils of the heavens before the foundations of the earth were laid.... We sang together with the heavenly hosts for joy, when the foundations of the earth were laid, and when the plan of our existence upon this earth and redemption were mapped out We were unquestionably present in those councils We were, no doubt, there, and took a part in all those scenes; we were vitally concerned in the carrying out of these great plans and purposes; we understood them, and it was for our sakes they were decreed and are to be consummated. [^11]

It is interesting to note that President Smith used the plural term "councils," which implies that there were perhaps many councils, in addition to the Grand Council. These many councils, functioning under priesthood direction, were a time for organization and preparation and for formal instruction and counsel which led us to greater understanding of the laws of God, the role of mortality in the plan of salvation, and any other principle designed to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). It might be appropriate to compare these premortal councils to latter-day general conferences-formal meetings to instruct, to edify, and to "do whatever church business is necessary" (D&C 20:62).

Instruction

Lehi taught his son Jacob that in order for men to be able to "choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Media tor of all men, or to choose captivity and death" (2 Ne. 2:27) they must be "instructed sufficiently that they know good from evil. And the law is given unto men." (2 Ne. 2:5.) Alma wrote that those priests "after the order of [God's] son" who were foreordained in the premortal world had been "prepared from the foundation of the world" (Alma 13:2-3). No doubt the premortal preparation process included instruction and diligence much the same as mortal priesthood preparation. Alma also states that those foreordained priests were called "to teach his commandments unto the children of men" (Alma 13:6; italics added). Although Alma is specifically referring to their earthly priesthood service, teaching the gospel was surely a central part of their premortal priest hood assignments as well.

President Joseph F. Smith learned in his vision of the redemption of the dead (D&C 138) that some were "the noble and great ones who were chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God. Even before they were born they, with many others, received their first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in ... due time." (D&C 138:55-56.) These "first lessons" were administered in God's premortal house of order and organization in much the same way as the gospel is taught and the work of God is overseen in mortality.

Just as modern-day general conferences or councils are not the exclusive means of instructing the Saints, neither were the premortal councils. It is logical to assume that there was much informal instruction in gospel laws and principles in addition to instruction in the formal councils. In the 1909 First Presidency statement entitled "The Origin of Man," it is stated that "man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father.Â [^12] As discussed in an earlier chapter, this statement certainly applies to the maturing of the actual spirit personage, but it is also logical to assume that the word reared has a broader meaning as well. Just as, in mortality, rearing by loving, caring parents means infinitely more than merely watching the child grow in physical stature, so it seems to imply more in relationship to a premortal upbringing. While not explicitly stated, it could well be that one of the primary purposes for the extended stay of spirits in the premortal world was that they might be taught and prepared in all necessary ways-by instruction, observation, and experience -for their mortal sojourn.

A House of Agency

The scriptures show clearly that one of the fundamental conditions in the premortal existence for all of the Father's spirit children was that of agency. Agency is an eternal principle and essential to the entire plan of salvation. In one of the most profound, consequential decisions of all eternity, the spirit offspring of God exercised this agency as they chose either to follow the plan of salvation outlined by the Father, with Christ as the Savior, or to reject that plan and follow Lucifer in premortal rebellion (see D&C 29:36-37; Moses 4:3). Since the children of God exercised their agency in choosing to follow Christ or to rebel with Lucifer, it is also logical to infer from the scriptures that the premortal spirits exercised their agency in myriad other ways. In fact, their use of agency, as evidenced by their choice of Christ or Lucifer and their level of commitment to that choice, was the result of many other previous choices made by virtue of that agency.

Knowing that men exercised agency in the premortal world can tell us something about other premortal conditions. Certain circumstances must have prevailed in order to effect this freedom of choice. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote that four fundamental principles must always exist for agency to operate.

Four great principles must be in force if there is to be agency: 1. Laws must exist, laws ordained by an Omnipotent power, laws which can be obeyed or disobeyed; 2. Opposites must exist-good and evil, virtue and vice, right and wrong -that is, there must be an opposition, one force pulling one way and another pulling the other; 3. A knowledge of good and evil must be had by those who are to enjoy the agency, that is, they must know the difference between the opposites; and 4. An unfettered power of choice must prevail. [^13]

Laws

As previously mentioned, part of the order and organization of the premortal house of God was the establishment of laws-the eternal laws and the principles of the plan of redemption. We know these laws were in force in premortal realms because the Lord taught the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning "all covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations" that are part of the "new and everlasting covenant" of the restored gospel: "For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world.... Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?" (D&C 132:4, 5, 7, 9-11, italics added; see also D&C 130:20-21.) Later in the same revelation, Joseph was told that the Lord would give to the Saints "the law of my Holy Priesthood, as was ordained by me and my Father before the world was" (D&C 132:28). Earlier the Lord had commanded Joseph to build a temple "that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was....

For I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world." (D&C 124:38, 41.) The Prophet Joseph Smith clearly taught that the laws, principles, and ordinances of the gospel were ordained and established before the earth came into existence.

It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world.... Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priest hood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles....

... Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject.

We are only capable of comprehending that certain things exist, which we may acquire by certain fixed principles. If men would acquire salvation, they have got to be subject, before they leave this world, to certain rules and principles, which were fixed by an unalterable decree before the world was....

The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. Hence the importance of em bracing and subscribing to principles of eternal truth by all men upon the earth that expect eternal life. [^14]

Jacob taught the necessity of these laws and principles when he said, "Wherefore, he has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation" (2 Ne. 9:25). In order for the plan of salvation to be operative, there must be laws established and taught to the children of God. The premortal councils ensured that all were instructed sufficiently in the laws in order that they might be able to use their agency to choose wisely.

Opposition

Lehi taught his son Jacob "that there is an opposition in all things. If not so ... righteousness could not be brought to pass" (2 Ne. 2:11). In order for agency to operate in the premortal world, as well as on earth, there was a need for op posites, otherwise, "man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other" (2 Ne. 2:16). This is as much an eternal verity as is agency. "What can you know except by its opposite?" queried Brigham Young. "Who could number the days, if there were no nights to divide the day from the night? Angels could not enjoy the blessings of light eternal, were there no darkness. All that are exalted and all that will be exalted will be exalted upon this principle.... No person, either in heaven or upon earth, can enjoy and understand these things upon any other principle" [^15]

Opposition is more than merely good and evil or virtue and vice. Sin and righteousness, which surely did exist there, are only two of numerous examples. Just as there is a variety of opposition in mortality, so it was in the premortal home. Not all choices were merely between good and evil, but all contributed to our schooling in the use of our agency.

Knowledge of Good and Evil

Closely associated with the principle of opposition is the necessity for men to know the difference between opposites. In the premortal world, this knowledge came in two ways-by instruction and by experience. Not only were our fledgling spirits tutored in gospel principles and a cognitive knowledge of good and evil but also consequences for choices were clearly laid out. Complete understanding of good and evil could not be obtained by instruction alone. The capstone of this knowledge was gained by virtue of experience-by making choices between the opposites and by experiencing the consequences for those choices. The premortal experience of good and evil was limited, however. We could not, as spirits, experience all aspects of righteousness and wickedness. Some things could only be learned and experienced with physical bodies in a temporal world. We did, nevertheless, gain knowledge in our premortal home of good and evil by effective instruction coupled with important, though limited, experience.

Unfettered Power of Choice

The great Lamanite prophet Samuel taught the relation ship between knowledge of good and evil and the freedom to choose when he said, "Ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free. He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good ... or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you." (Hel. 14:30-31.)

This freedom of choice operated in much the same way premortally as it does here on earth. Agency could not fully function if the Father did not allow his children the freedom to make choices based on the principles of law, opposites, and knowledge of good and evil. Man must not be compelled in any way, but conditions must exist in which he could make his own choices and be held accountable. These four principles required for the operation of agency can best be understood by looking at the results of the exercise of agency in the premortal life.

Various Levels of Righteousness and Progression

Because of individual agency and accountability there has always been diversity among the children of God-varying levels of obedience, faithfulness, service, and devotion; differing degrees of understanding and acceptance of and adherence to gospel principles. Because infinite possibilities of right and wrong and greater and lesser choices exist, individual agency produces great differences among the children of God. The scriptures give examples of the differences among spirits. Abraham saw in vision the premortal children of God. He saw the various spirits and observed that they were not equally intelligent (see Abr. 3:18-19). "Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; And God saw these souls that they were good" (Abr. 3:22-23).

Implicit in Abraham's description of the premortal spirit world is the fact that not all of the spirits were among "the noble and great ones," and neither were all of the spirit children of God equally worthy of the appellation "good." Their differences were due to the eternal principle of agency. President Brigham Young stated that just as there are vast differences between men on earth, there are likewise differences among spirits.

Can any man tell the variety of the spirits there are? No, he cannot even tell the variety that there is in the portion of his dominions in which God has placed us, on this earth upon which we live.... You may observe the people, and you will see an endless variety of disposition.... Where can you point out two precisely alike in every particular in their temperaments and dispositions? Where can you find two who are so operated upon precisely alike by a superior power that their lives, their actions, their feelings ... are alike? I conclude that there is as great a variety in the spiritual as there is in the temporal world. [^16]

The prophet Alma, in speaking of those high priests who had received the priesthood before their mortal birth, identified some of the reasons for their selection and their higher level of progression. They were "called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceedingly great faith, are called with a holy calling" (Alma 13:3-4; italics added). President Joseph Fielding Smith also stated that individual agency led to different levels of obedience, diligence, and righteousness, which, in turn, resulted in varying levels of progression, of capacities, and ultimately of authority and responsibility.

God gave his children their free agency even in the spirit world, by which the individual spirits had the privilege, just as men have here, of choosing the good and rejecting the evil, or partaking of the evil to suffer the consequences of their sins. Because of this, some even there were more faithful than others in keeping the commandments of the Lord. Some were of greater intelligence than others, as we find it here, and were honored accordingly....

The spirits of men had their free agency, some were greater than others.... The spirits of men were not equal. They may have had an equal start, and we know they were all innocent in the beginning; but the right of free agency which was given to them enabled some to outstrip others, and thus, through the eons of immortal existence, to become more intelligent, more faithful, for they were free to act for themselves, to think for themselves, to receive the truth or rebel against it. [^17]

The Effects of Opposition in the Premortal Life

Note in the previous statement from President Joseph Fielding Smith the phrases "just as men have here" and "as we find it here." From these phrases and the scriptural references already cited, we can infer that the premortal spirits had opportunities and requirements to be obedient, diligent, and faithful as do mortals on earth. They were expected to study and learn, as previously discussed. They were expected to be faithful in whatever commandments and duties the Father required of them. They were to develop talents, skills, and abilities that would enable them to live more productive and fulfilling lives, both there and here. They were to show love, kindness, patience, and consideration to their brothers and sisters. Each of these expectations is the same "as we find it here." Whatever other specific expectations and requirements existed there is not revealed. It certainly is logical to assume, however, that premortal spirits were expected to live the same gospel principles, with the exception of earthly ordinances, as men in the flesh. Scriptural passages such as Alma 13:3-4 seem to indicate that they exercised faith in Christ and the plan of redemption and repented there as men do here.

Since there must be opposition in order for agency to operate fully and since there was premortal goodness, there was also premortal wickedness. If there was premortal diligence and faithfulness, there must also have been premortal sloth fulness, laziness, and disobedience just as there is in men here. For, as Lehi explains, "it must needs be that there was an opposition.... Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other." (2 Ne. 2:15-16.)

Undoubtedly, then, sin was possible because of agency and because of the enticements of opposition. The scriptures indicate that there were not only a variety of sins of omission, such as failure to be as faithful or as diligent as possible, but also sins of commission, such as Lucifer's blatant rebel lion. Some have attempted to portray the premortal home as a glorious celestial kingdom wherein no unclean thing can dwell, where there is only goodness, righteousness, and obedience-a place in the constant presence of God where the spirits would have no desire or outlet for anything less than celestial thoughts or actions. [^18] Such a view would not allow for an unfettered power of choice, or for the need for faith and continual diligence, and would eliminate the diversity among the spirits. Under such illogical conditions, how would some be "noble and great," and yet not all? Orson Pratt asked this question: "If all the two-thirds who kept their first estate were equally valiant in the war, and equally faithful, why should some of them be called and chosen in their spiritual state to hold responsible stations and offices in this world, while others were not? If there were none of those spirits who sinned, why were the Apostles, when they existed in their previous state, chosen to be blessed 'with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ?Â Â [^19]

No doubt, the spirit children of Heavenly Father dwelt in his presence, saw him, and conversed with him, but that does not negate the need for them to exercise "exceedingly great faith" and to do good works, nor does it diminish the role of agency in the premortal realm. Even though children of earthly parents live in their parents' presence and earthly home, they still have agency to choose to disobey their parents' teachings, to be less than diligent in service and in family or church responsibilities, or to be persuaded by peers to do things that are not in harmony with the teachings of the gospel. It seems logical to assume that in some respects the spirit children of Heavenly Father exercised their agency in a manner similar to earthly children. To say that a spirit who dwells in the Father's presence could not or did not need to exercise faith in God denies what Alma wrote speaking of those priests who were chosen premortally because of their "exceedingly great faith." To assume that there was no sin in God's presence among the millions of his spirit children would be to minimize the indispensable roles of agency, opposition, and the knowledge of good and evil in the premortal world.

The scriptures and statements of the prophets indicate that there is, indeed, much similarity between the conditions of and expectations for mankind premortally and on earth. That gospel principles were taught and practiced in both places also implies that the atonement of Jesus Christ was in full effect in premortal world. Orson Pratt, speaking of sin in the premortal world, wrote that "among the two-thirds who remained, it is highly probable that there were many who were not valiant ..., but whose sins were of such a nature that they could be forgiven through faith in the future sufferings of the Only Begotten of the Father, and through their sincere repentance and reformation. We see no impropriety in Jesus offering himself as an acceptable offering and sacrifice before the Father to atone for the sins of His brethren, committed, not only in the second, but also in the first estate." [^20] This stimulating thought takes on additional significance when pondered in light of Alma's description of Christ's atonement as "an infinite and eternal sacrifice" (Alma 34:10).

The Lord may also have been referring to the premortal effects of the Atonement in modern revelation to the Prophet Joseph: "Every spirit of man was innocent in the be ginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God" (D&C 93:38). The key word is again. This seems to indicate that men had lost innocence in the premortal world through sin and disobedience, but were once again, through the great plan of redemption, made innocent before God upon entering mortality "in their infant state."

Finally, recognizing the role of agency and its contingent principles is paramount to obtaining a fuller understanding of the significance of man's premortal existence. This principle of premortal agency permeates virtually every aspect of the doctrine of premortal existence. Without it, it would be virtually impossible to understand the impact that a premortal existence had on the mortal sojourn of each child of God.

A House of Glory, a House of Beauty

While nothing has been revealed specifically concerning the appearance of the premortal world, there are some interesting statements from latter-day prophets that shed light on the subject. To the heavenly parents, it was a celestial kingdom. As discussed previously, the premortal estate served as a pattern or type in many ways for this temporal existence as well as for the postmortal spirit world. It is interesting to then "look back" at that premortal home through descriptions of those postmortal realms that are patterned after the first estate.

The Prophet Joseph Smith saw in vision the celestial kingdom and described its beauty and splendor. "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof.... I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; Also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold." (D&C 137:1-4.)

During a tour of the Church in the South Pacific in 1921, President David O. McKay, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, had a remarkable vision of the celestial kingdom. His description provides a glimpse of how the premortal heavenly home probably appeared.

I ... beheld in vision something infinitely sublime. In the distance I beheld a beautiful white city. Though far away, yet I seemed to realize that trees with luscious fruit, shrubbery with gorgeously tinted leaves, and flowers in perfect bloom abounded everywhere. The clear sky above seemed to reflect these beautiful shades of color. I then saw a great concourse of people approaching the city. Each one wore a white flowing robe, and a white headdress. Instantly my attention seemed centered upon their Leader, and though I could see only the profile of his features and his body, I recognized him at once as my Savior! The tint and radiance of his countenance were glorious to behold? There was a peace about him which seemed sublime-it was divine! [^21]

President Brigham Young spoke specifically of the premortal world when he declared that the spirit children of God were indeed "acquainted with every nook and corner, with the palaces, walks, and gardens" of that realm. [^22] President Jedediah M. Grant saw in vision the beauty and grandeur of the postmortal spirit world. His descriptions reflect those conditions spoken of with regard to both the premortal and postmortal Celestial Kingdom. We can only wonder how close his description would apply to the first estate. "He spoke of the buildings he saw there," said Heber C. Kimball, "remarking that the Lord gave Solomon wisdom and poured gold and silver into his hands that he might display his skill and ability, and said that the temple erected by Solomon was much inferior to the most ordinary buildings he saw in the spirit world." Describing the gardens there, President Grant told Heber C. Kimball, "I have seen good gardens on this earth, but I never saw any to compare with those that were there. I saw flowers of numerous kinds, and some with from fifty to a hundred different colored flowers growing upon one stalk." Heber C. Kimball then concluded, "We have many kinds of flowers on the earth, and I suppose those very articles came from heaven, or they would not be here.Â [^23]

Each of these prophetic descriptions portrays cities with magnificent buildings and gardens with spectacular foliage of many colors. There are descriptions of peace and glory in this heavenly home. As with President David O. McKay's description of the Savior, no doubt the appearance of the heavenly parents to their spirit children was equally sublime and glorious to behold. Seeing them in their celestial surroundings clothed with resurrected bodies of glory provided a visual reminder, no doubt, of the ultimate objective of the plan of redemption. While the actual physical description of the premortal heavenly home may not hold the same theological significance as the existence of such principles as agency or priesthood, the glory and beauty of the first estate must have served as a profound reminder of the eternal reward for those who would faithfully keep their second estate. Living in a heavenly house of beauty and glory may have created in us an innate spiritual "homesickness" and a desire to return to that celestial habitat.

Summary

Myriad unanswered questions remain concerning specific conditions in and the appearance of the premortal home. The Father has purposely withheld from his children a complete view of the premortal world, but he has given enough enlightenment to understand certain basic conditions. From the revealed words of prophets we begin to gain a clearer view of the first estate as a house of order and organization. This order in God's house is a type for his kingdom on earth; and that same order facilitates the important work that is conducted in the spirit world. It is clear that the guiding power and directing influence in that house of order was, as it is on earth, the priesthood of God.

God's house is a house of agency. Agency prevails as an eternal principle that must exist in order for God's children to become exalted like himself. Understanding that agency existed premortally clarifies many other aspects of the pre-mortal world such as the varying levels of progression and the impact of choices made in the premortal world on our mortal existence.

God's house is a house of glory and beauty. No glory or beauty can compare with that found in the presence of the exalted Father. No man can remember the exact scenes of the premortal home. Yet each man, if he will heed it, carries with him a subtle, yet innate, spiritual longing to return to those environs of splendor and glory and to once again experience the peace and sublimity of beholding the face of God.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 354.
[^2] Bruce R. McConkie, "Who Is the Author of the Plan of Salvation?" Improvement Era, May 1953, p. 322.
[^3] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 18:290.
[^4] TheFirst Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund), "The Origin of Man," Improvement Era, November 1909, pp. 75-81; italics added.
[^5] First Presidency and Council of the Twelve, in Improvement Era, August 1916, pp. 940-941. Reprinted in James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1975), 5:33.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the ,Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), p. 66.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. 1978), pp. 53-54.
[^8] Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1981,p. 9.
[^9] Orson F. Whitney, "Elias," as quoted in Richard H. Cracroft and Neal E. Lambert, comp., A Believing People: Literature ofthe Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974), p. 206.
[^10] George Q. Cannon, Millennial Star, 57:563-564.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd edition (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), pp. 192-193.
[^12] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd edition (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 744.
[^13] Mark E. Petersen, The Way of the Master (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974), p. 1.
[^14] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 13:63.
[^15] Orson F. Whitney, "The Fall and the Redemption," Improvement Era, March 1921, p. 378.
[^16] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., as quoted in Readings in Theology: A Syllabus for REL 230, "The Gospel in Principle and Practice," (Provo,Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965-1966), pp. 152-153.
[^17] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 357.
[^18] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), p. 656.
[^19] David O. McKay, Man May Know for Himself, edited by Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), p. 365.
[^20] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 21:288; italics added.
[^21] B. H. Roberts, "The Atonement," The Seventy's Course in Theology, fourth year (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1911), pp. 29-30; italics added.
[^22] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), p. 656.
[^23] Robert J. Matthews, "The Price of Redemption," The 11th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium-New Testament, January 29, 1983 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1983), p. 159; italics added.
