Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

6 The War in Heaven

Both ancient and modern revelation bear record of a profound event wherein all of the previously described conditions of agency, opposition, sin, repentance, and individual accountability were brought to bear. This event has become known as the War in Heaven. The ancient prophet Isaiah poetically described his vision of Lucifer's premortal rebellion. "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit." (Isa. 14:12-15.)

John the Revelator, using symbolic language, also referred to this premortal rebellion of Lucifer and the tragic consequences of the War in Heaven when he wrote that "there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; and the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter" (Rev. 8:10-11).

The significance of these scriptural passages is largely hidden from the world because it lacks the knowledge of the pre-mortal life found in modern revelation. Although the War in Heaven is alluded to in both the Old and New Testaments, it is through the clarity of the modern records that we finally achieve an understanding of this event.

When Abraham saw in vision the premortal spirits, he noted that many were "noble and great ones" who were chosen to be rulers on earth. He saw the plan of salvation presented to the spirits and witnessed the Father's call for a savior to implement that plan on earth. Abraham's description of that event and subsequent events, though sketchy, enlightens us a little more concerning the War in Heaven. "And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first. And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him." (Abr. 3:27-28.)

Abraham begins to identify the great issues of the War in Heaven that are vaguely alluded to in both the Old and New Testaments. But even the inspired account of Abraham, which was received by the Prophet Joseph, did not fully identify the issues nor the participants in this important premortal event. Joseph Smith brought forth another account which provides a few more important details. It came in the form of a revelation received by Moses after his personal encounter with Satan. Coupled with Abraham's vision, this revelation offers a greater understanding of the issues and events.

And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying-Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me-Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be east down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:1-4.)

The Prophet Joseph also saw this great event in vision. The following record of what he saw serves as a preface to his vision of the three degrees of glory recorded in Doctrine and Covenants section 76.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father-

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.

And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God, who re-belied against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son,

And was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him -he was Lucifer, a son of the morning.

And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen, even a son of the morning! (D&C 76:22-27; see also D&C 29:36-38.)

These twelve verses from modern scripture, along with a few other isolated references, contribute a great deal to our grasp of the issues, actions, and characters associated with the War in Heaven. These few verses alone, however insightful and informative they may be, are still incomplete in giving us as meaningful and useful an understanding of the significance of that event as we might have. It is necessary to couple these passages from holy writ with the inspired statements of latter-day prophets. Moreover, we can examine carefully still other scattered scriptural references and ponder their implications to the premortal war in heaven, and consider the impact of that cataclysmic event on all of the children of God.

The Father's Plan

As discussed in a previous chapter, one of the conditions that prevailed in the premortal realm was that of instruction in the laws, principles, and ordinances of the plan of salvation. Some have attempted to promote the idea, by songs, scripts, and sermons, that two opposing plans were presented in the Grand Council for the Father's consideration and for the vote of acceptance by his children. Such an idea is contrary to the revealed word of God found in both the standard works and the writings of the prophets. There was only one plan presented and that plan was the Father's. Each spirit child had heard that plan taught and expounded in clarity and power. The Prophet Joseph affirmed that it was the Father who instituted and presented the plan. "God himself, finding he was in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself.Â [^1]

Addressing himself to the often-stated view in the Church that there were two plans presented at the Grand Council in Heaven, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

Who created and presented the plan of salvation as it was adopted in the pre-existent councils in heaven? Did Christ offer one plan which would allow men their agency, and Lucifer sponsor another founded on compulsion?

Although we sometimes hear it said that there were two plans-Christ's plan of freedom and agency, and Lucifer's of slavery and compulsion-such teaching does not conform to the revealed word. Christ did not present a plan of redemption and salvation nor did Lucifer. There were not two plans up for consideration; there was only one; and that was the plan of the Father: originated, developed, presented, and put in force by him....

The chief cornerstone of the whole plan was to be the atoning sacrifice of a Redeemer, one of the Father's spirit sons who was to be born into the world as his literal Son in the flesh. By this means was to be effected a resurrection, a reunion of body and spirit in immortality, the two never again to be separated. [^2]

Thus, the plan that was presented in this Grand Council was the Father's plan-instituted to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). It was not a question of which plan the Father would accept to implement for his children on earth, but rather a question of whom he could send, as Savior and Redeemer of the world, to implement that plan. Even then, there was really no question.

Whom Shall I Send?

When the Father asked, "Whom shall I send?" (Abr. 3:27), was he truly asking for volunteers to explain their personal qualifications and to petition for the right to be the Savior? Or was the question merely rhetorical, with an already determined answer? Were the spirit children of God really unsure about who would be the Savior under the Father's plan or was it already well known? A careful examination of the scriptural account and a study of the qualifications and motives of both Jesus and Lucifer suggest the answer.

Moses records that Jesus was the Father's "Beloved and Chosen from the beginning" (Moses 4:2). Other scriptural passages likewise depict Jesus Christ as the chosen and foreordained Savior of the world. The brother of Jared heard the premortal Christ declare: "Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ." (Ether 3:14.) Peter also referred to Christ as He "who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world" (1 Pet. 1:20). These passages seem to confirm that Jesus was the Chosen of the Father not merely because of his affirmative response to the Father's query "Whom shall I send?" but rather because of who he was for the eons of time prior to that Grand Council.

Jesus Christ, the Firstborn of the Father in the Spirit

Numerous references in both the Old and New Testaments refer to the Messiah as being the "firstborn." In a messianic psalm, God is heard to speak of his Son by saying, "Also I will make him my firstborn" (Ps. 89:27). The Apostle Paul also speaks of Christ as "the firstborn of every creature" (Col. 1:15) and "the firstborn among many brethren" (Rom. 8:29). To the Hebrew Saints, Paul writes that the Father has described his Only Begotten as "the first-begotten" (Heb. 1:6).

The Hebrew word that is translated as "firstborn" is bekor, signifying "preeminent one" or "the attribute or quality of preeminence."

Undoubtedly, Jesus was selected to be the Savior under the Father's plan because he was spiritually preeminent, but the Savior's premortal preeminence takes on additional meaning through modern revelation. To the Prophet Joseph, Jesus declared: "And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn" (D&C 93:21). The literal nature of this statement has been affirmed by prophets in this dispensation. Elder Orson Pratt declared:

Have you not read, in the New Testament, that Jesus Christ was the first-born of every creature? From this reading it would seem that he was the oldest of the whole human family, that is, so far as his birth in the spirit world is concerned.... Have you not also read in the New Testament that he is called our elder brother? Does this refer to the birth of the body of flesh and bones? By no means, for there were hundreds of millions who were born upon our earth before the body of flesh and bones was born whom we call Jesus. How is it, then, that he is our elder brother? We must go back to the previous birth, before the foundation of this earth; we have to go back to past ages, to the period when he was begotten of the Father among the great family of spirits. [^3]

On two separate occasions the First Presidency of the Church confirmed that Jesus was indeed the firstborn of the spirit family of God. In 1909, President Joseph F. Smith, in "The Origin of Man," a statement by the First Presidency, declared that "the Father of Jesus is our Father also. Jesus Himself taught this truth, when He instructed His disciples how to pray: 'Our Father which art in heaven,' etc. Jesus, however, is the firstborn among all the sons of God-the firstbegotten in the spirit, and the only begotten in the flesh. He is our elder brother, and we, like Him, are in the image of God." [^4]

And in 1916 a statement from the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve appeared in the Improvement Era: "Among the spirit children of Elohim the firstborn was and is Jehovah or Jesus Christ to whom all others are juniors.Â [^5]

Jesus, then, as the firstborn of all of the spirit children of God, was the Chosen of the Father, not only because of his preeminence among the spirits but also by virtue of his birthright as the firstborn. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote of the Savior: "Our Blessed Lord is the firstborn spirit child of the Father of spirits; all others are junior to him. His is the eternal birthright and the everlasting right of presidency.Â [^6]

While we do not fully know to what extent this primogeniture operated in the premortal world, it appears that Jesus was the Chosen of the Father even prior to the Father asking, "Whom shall I send?" It was his right to be chosen as the Savior. Yet, as illustrated many times in the Old Testament, there is more to birthright responsibilities and blessings than just birth order. In the case of the great Jehovah, he received the birthright responsibility of redemption not only because of his status as firstborn of the spirits but also, as suggested by the Hebrew word bekor, because of his spiritual preeminence among the children of God.

Jesus Christ, "Like unto God"

In Abraham's vision of the premortal spirit hosts of heaven, when he saw "many of the noble and great ones" (Abr. 3:22), Jehovah stood foremost among them all. Of him Abraham records, "There stood one among them that was like unto God" (Abr. 3:24). Jesus was so outstanding among the spirits that Abraham characterizes him as "like unto God." This premortal preeminence was also alluded to in the writings of John the Beloved when he wrote that Christ, or the Word, was with God in the beginning, "and the Word [Christ] was God" (John 1:1). Of this godlike stature of Christ, Elder Bruce R. McConkie asked:

Like unto God-how and in what way? Like him in length of days or the possession of progeny or the exalted nature of his tangible body? No, for the Son of the Father had yet to pass through a mortal probation, to overcome the world, to attain a resurrection, and to come back to his Father with his own glorious and tangible body. But like him in intelligence, in knowledge and understanding, in the possession of truth, in conformity to divine law, and therefore in power. Like him in plan and purpose, in desires for righteousness, in a willingness to serve his brethren, in all things that lead to that fulness of the glory of the Father which none can receive until they live in the eternal family unit as he does.... Like him as a Creator of worlds and planets innumerable. [^7]

Through eons of premortal time, Jehovah exercised his agency in such ways as to bring about godlike obedience and faithfulness. His diligence and devotion resulted in godlike intelligence and wisdom. His premortal life radiated purity and perfection, submission and sinlessness. He was first among the spirit children of God in service and sacrifice. His spiritual preeminence encompassed not only characteristics of righteousness and obedience, but also the qualities of love and compassion. Both mortally and premortally, Jesus did "not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him" (2 Ne. 26:24). Jesus was the Chosen One not only because he was the firstborn spirit child of God and like unto God in righteousness and obedience but also because of his preeminent "loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men" (1 Ne. 19:9).

In light of the premortal stature of Christ, it appears more likely that the Father's question "Whom shall I send?" was an invitation for Jesus to publicly and voluntarily accept the calling and appointment that was his by birthright as the Firstborn, the Preeminent One. It was a call for our commitment and common consent rather than a request for resumes. The call was issued, "Whom shall I send?" All eyes fell expectantly upon one spirit-the Firstborn, the one that was "like unto God." Not only did the Father, in his omniscience, know who the Chosen was to be, but each spirit man and woman saw Jesus as the foreordained Redeemer-"prepared from the foundation of the world." He was the best and most qualified of all the spirits; in fact, no other came close. He was there as he is now, as Elder Neal A. Maxwell characterized, "utterly incomparable in what He is, what He knows, what He has accomplished, and what He has experienced.... In intelligence and performance, He far surpasses the individual and the composite capacities and achievements of all who have lived, live now, and will yet live!... He rejoices in our genuine goodness and achievement, but any assessment of where we stand in relation to Him tells us that we do not stand at all! We kneel!Â [^8]

Man's memory of this monumental moment is veiled by a divinely imposed forgetfulness. Even the scriptures cannot completely convey its spiritual significance and eternal consequence. Elder Orson F. Whitney attempted to visualize this event in his epic poem Elias. He imagined not only the events but also the emotions associated with the Savior's loving and voluntary submission to the Father's will.

A stature mingling strength with grace Of meek though Godlike mien, The love-revealing countenance Lustrous as lightning sheen. Whiter his hair than ocean spray, Or frost of alpine hill. He spake;-attention grew more grave, The stillness e'en more still.

"Father!"-the voice like music fell, Clear as the murmuring flow Of mountain streamlet trickling down From heights of virgin snow. "Father," it said, "since one must die, Thy children to redeem, Whilst earth, as yet unformed and void, With pulsing life shall teem;

And thou, great Michael, foremost fall, That mortal man may be, And chosen Saviour yet must send, Lo, here am I-send me! I ask, I seek no recompense, Save that which then were mine; Mine be the willing sacrifice, The endless glory, Thine! [^9]

"Here am I, send me," was Jehovah's response. This was no egotistical request for greater power or responsibility, but rather a humble acceptance of the Father's will-though that required a most awesome and agonizing obligation. His response, at the time of his premortal acceptance of his divine calling and foreordained mission, was the same as it was much later in its fulfillment in Gethsemane: "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt" (Matt. 26:39). With Jehovah's acceptance, the heavenly home was filled with sounds of jubilation; for as Job records, "The morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" (Job 38:7).

Lucifer's Rebellion

Not all were filled with joy and rejoicing, for there was one consumed with jealousy and resentment. The shouts of joy were soon shattered by the resonance of rebellion. The scriptures record that "an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God... rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father.... He was Lucifer, a son of the morning." (D&C 76:25-26.) From this brief scriptural statement, a picture of Lucifer as the instigator of rebellion and as a major combatant begins to emerge. In order to understand more fully, what he proposed, why he proposed it, and how he led away so many, it is important to see who Lucifer was and is.

From his vision recorded in Doctrine and Covenants section 76 the Prophet Joseph Smith learned two major characteristics of Lucifer. First, Lucifer was "an angel of God who was in authority." No doubt he possessed great talents and abilities, for the name Lucifer literally means "the Shining One" and "lightbringer" (see Bible Dictionary, LDS edition of the Bible, p. 726). This certainly connotes that he was a leader among the spirits, possessing powers of persuasion. He had obtained great knowledge and no doubt was articulate and impressive. How much authority and power had been entrusted to him, the records do not say; but he was "in authority" and thus respected by others. President George Q. Cannon said, "This angel was a mighty personage, without doubt. The record that is given to us concerning him clearly shows that he occupied a very high position; that he was thought a great deal of, and that he was mighty in his sphere." [^10]

Through his exercise of agency and his adherence to the laws and principles of the premortal world, Lucifer also "gained for himself great executive and administrative ability" and possessed a "compelling personality.Â [^11]

The second thing the Prophet Joseph learned from the vision recorded in Doctrine and Covenants section 76 was that Lucifer was called "a son of the morning." While this term is usually associated with Lucifer's prominence and authority, there may also be another meaning, though of lesser significance. In this secondary sense, "son of the morning" has been interpreted to have reference to his place in the birth order of the spirit offspring of God. He was a "son of the morning," meaning one of the early spirit children. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has defined the term "son of the morning" thus: "This name-title of Satan indicates he was one of the early born spirit children of the Father. Always used in association with the name Lucifer, son of the morning also apparently signifies son of light or son of prominence, meaning that Satan held a position of power and authority in pre-existence. (D&C 76:25-27; Isa. 14:12-20.)" [^12] Although he was indeed "a son of the morning," the idea that Lucifer was second only to Jehovah in authority and spiritual age is not substantiated in the revelations. He was, however, one of the older spirit children and thus, by virtue of his authoritative prominence and spiritual age, he commanded an element of respect from his younger spirit siblings.

Despite Lucifer's prominence and authority in the pre-mortal realms, he would not sustain the Father's plan. With Jesus' acceptance of his apparently preordained calling as "the Lamb... slain from the foundation of the world" (Moses 7:47), Lucifer rebelled. In lieu of consent, there was contention. Modern revelation specifically shows the direction in which Lucifer's anger was aimed. "And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God... rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father" (D&C 76:25; italics added).

Why would Lucifer, the "Shining One" who had been taught the Father's plan of salvation and who had risen in authority by virtue of his apparent faithfulness, now rebel against Him whom the Father had chosen and "prepared from the foundation of the world" (Ether 3:14)? Elder Mark E. Petersen indicates that despite his strengths, Lucifer's weaknesses brought about his rebellion and resentment. Foremost among his character defects were his pride, selfishness, and jealousy. Elder Petersen suggests that Lucifer "coveted honor, prestige and glory; he wanted the adulation and praise of others; he sought to be lifted up above the rest. What an egotist! Lucifer hated his elder brother, Jehovah....Blinded by jealousy...he sought to thwart everything that Jehovah stood for, everything Jehovah did.Â [^13]

Had Lucifer deceived the Father all along? Had he obtained his authority in the presence of God by fraud? Had his faithfulness and obedience been feigned for so long? While there are no authoritative answers to such questions, it seems unlikely that any spirit obtained authority or rose in prominence by deception. The omniscient Father was not fooled. It is more likely that Lucifer had indeed been faithful and thus had been rewarded with greater authority and responsibility. Perhaps latent in Lucifer, as in some during mortality, were the tendencies to "aspire to the honors of men," to "gratify... pride,... vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men" (D&C 121:35, 37). It may be that Lucifer, in the pre-mortal pride of his own prominence, experienced the lesson the Lord later taught: "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion" (D&C 121:39). With this conceited sense of self-importance, Lucifer deceived himself and thus became "a liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25).

It was in this spirit of self-deception, pride, and arrogant ambition that Lucifer boldly declared to the Father, "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor" (Moses 4:1; italics added). For Lucifer to even suggest a change in the plan was the ultimate arrogance. This is especially evident in the fact that Lucifer did not advocate that he be the Savior under the Father's plan, as Jesus had been chosen so to do. Neither did he ask to be considered to be the redeemer based solely on his own spiritual qualifications and worthiness. Since there was no comparison between him and Jehovah, he offered an alternative that would discredit the Father's plan and repudiate the divine appointment of Christ. So self-deluded was Lucifer that his counterproposal contained two egotistical elements-"Give me thine honor" and "I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost." Elder Orson F. Whitney sought to depict this diabolical moment also in another segment of the previously quoted poem Elias.

Silence once more. Then sudden rose Aloft a towering form, Proudly erect as lowering peak 'Lumedbythegatheringstorm! Apresencebrightandbeautiful, With eye of flashing fire, A lip whose haughty curl bespoke A sense of inward ire.

"Give me to go!" thus boldly cried, With scarce concealed disdain; "And hence shall none, from heaven to earth, That shall not rise again. My saving plan exception scorns; Man's agency unknown; As recompense, I claim the right to sit on yonder throne!"

"Give Me Thine Honor"

Lucifer's demand that he be given all of the Father's power, honor, and glory was evidence of his consummate conceit. The general principle of honor and glory, however, was not the issue of Lucifer's demand. Even Jesus recognized that synonymous with eternal life are the blessings of power, glory, and honor. Praying in Gethsemane, Jesus petitioned the Father "Glorify thou me with. thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was" (John 17:5; italics added). To all of his children, including Jesus, the Father had promised as a blessing of exaltation "all that [the] Father hath" (D&C 84:38), which would include "thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths... and glory in all things" (D&C 132:19). Of the faithful Saints, who through obedience and sanctification would obtain crowns of eternal life, the Lord said, "Then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power." (D&C 132:20.) Lucifer, however, rejected this honor, glory, and power that could have been his through faithful adherence to the Father's plan. He desired something

more-something defiantly devilish.

The prophet Isaiah accurately portrayed the real meaning of Lucifer's demand for God's honor when he lamented, "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High." (Isa. 14:12-14; italics added.) The Lord himself confirmed this to Moses when he told him through revelation that Satan "rebelled against me" and sought "that I should give unto him mine own power" (Moses 4:3).

Lucifer rejected the glory and honor and power of eternal life with the Father and desired instead to exalt himself above the Father. He had seen the glory of the Father and the esteem in which the Father was held by his children, and Lucifer desired that adulation even if it meant the elimination of the Father. He desired to supplant the Father and the Father's plan with his own fiendish, egocentric designs. Of this, Elder Orson Pratt wrote Lucifer "considered that his plan was so good before the heavens, and so much superior to the plan that God had devised, said he, 'Surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor, which is the power of God.' That is, he sought to obtain the throne of the Almighty, and to carry out his own purposes in preference to yielding to the purposes and power of the Almighty." [^14] Lucifer was seeking something that neither was nor ever could be his. Elder Orson F. Whitney affirmed that "this 'Son of the Morning' had become darkened to that degree that he demanded, in recompense for his proposed service, the honor and glory that belong only to the Highest.Â [^15] President J. Reuben Clark suggested that Satan wanted Heavenly Father to "abdicate," "disappear," "get out of the picture," so that he could "take over all the spirits in the great council and save them all." [^16]

Implicit in Lucifer's demand for God's glory and honor was his plan for exaltation without effort. "I will exalt my throne [myself] above the stars of God," he declared. His declaration of self-exaltation exposed anew his jealousy of and resentment of Jesus the Redeemer. He would exalt himself without the redemptive blood of the great Jehovah. In his deluded and grandiose scheme of self-exaltation, he vainly imagined that he could, without the Savior's sacrifice, "redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost."

"I Will Redeem All Mankind"

The Prophet Joseph Smith clearly identified that the methodology of salvation was the major issue in the Grand Council. "The contention in heaven was-Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he could save them all, and laid his plans before the grand council, who gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ. So the devil rose up in rebellion against God, and was cast down, with all who put up their heads for him.Â [^17]

The scriptures record that when Lucifer offered to save all, he "sought to destroy the agency of man" (Moses 4:3). This destruction of God-given agency was to be the result, not the proposition itself. Lucifer purposely and deceptively withheld any mention of the negative side effects of his prescription for salvation. By virtue of the claim that he would save all, Lucifer was covertly seeking to destroy the agency of man. The logic of his plan, or lack of it, is exposed in this statement by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

[Under Lucifer's plan], none would be damned; damnation would not be a viable alternative to salvation; there would be no agency-no freedom of choice, no election to serve God or to flee from evil and turn to righteousness. But if there is no freedom of choice between damnation and salvation how can either exist? They are opposites; without one you cannot have the other....

... To be like him [God] is to gain eternal life. To gain this greatest of all rewards, the seeker of salvation must be free to choose between the Lord and Lucifer, for without the damnation of the devil, there can be no salvation with the Savior. [^18]

Motives: Why Lucifer Sought to Destroy Agency

It is important to emphasize that Lucifer did not offer himself to be the savior under the Father's plan. When he responded, "Here am I, send me," he was in essence saying, "He am I, send me. I will be the redeemer of the world, but not under the conditions of the Father's plan. I will redeem all, but it must be on my terms and I must receive all glory and honor."

To understand the motives behind this proposal, one must understand the expectations and requirements facing that future Redeemer. Jesus knowingly and willingly accepted the demands to which he would be subjected in his redemptive role. He understood that to fulfill that magnificent mission, justice would require that he suffer "the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature" (2 Ne. 9:21). No doubt he foresaw the scourging and the taunts of ridicule inflicted by his persecutors. Undoubtedly, the chosen Savior and all spirits knew that the Redeemer must be "in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin" (Heb. 4:15).

In stark contrast to the courage and compassion shown in Christ's acceptance of his status as Savior, Lucifer's demand to be a savior on his own terms conveys his own cowardice and contempt for man. In his selfishness and cowardice, Lucifer sought to destroy agency because he understood that with agency and opposition there would inevitably be sin. If man because of agency committed sin, justice required a painful payment. Lucifer cowered at the prospects of such supreme suffering. For the demands of justice to be met, the sufferer must also be sinless. Despite his self-deception, Lucifer knew that he could not be sinless because he had not thus far been sinless. Jesus was willing to do all this because of his love for us. Lucifer, on the other hand, rejected the Father's plan not only because of his own cowardice but also because he lacked the love for his siblings that was so abundant in Jehovah. It seems Lucifer knew that if mankind had agency, he, Lucifer, could not be the redeemer, for he recoiled from the responsibilities of redemption. He was a coward, a liar, an egotist; and thus, through his cleverly worded plan, he "sought to destroy the agency of man." President David O. McKay identified the "impelling motives" that were hidden in the heart of Lucifer.

Man's free agency is fundamental to progress. An attempt to rob him of his free agency caused contention even in heaven.

In that rebellion Lucifer said in substance: By the law of force I will compel the human family to subscribe to the eternal plan, but give me thine honor and power. To deprive an intelligent being of his free agency is to commit the crime of the ages.

Impelling motives of this arch-enemy to liberty were pride, ambition, a sense of superiority, a will to dominate his fellows, and to be exalted above them, and a determination to deprive human beings of their freedom to speak and to act as their reason and judgment would dictate. [^19]

How Lucifer Proposed to Redeem All Men

Other statements of latter-day prophets also confirm that Lucifer's agency-destroying proposition would indeed have caused men to be acted upon rather than to act for themselves. Perhaps one element of this proposal was even more insidious than the implied compulsion of men. Both Elder Orson Pratt and Elder B. H. Roberts have highlighted that important element. "An agency was given to all intelligent beings," wrote Elder Pratt, "and without a proper agency, intelligent beings could not receive glory and honor, and a reward and a fullness of happiness in the celestial kingdom. There must be an agency wherever intelligence exists, and without agency no intelligent beings could exist; and... Satan sought to destroy this... and to redeem them all in their sins." [^20] Elder B. H. Roberts added:

Under this plan, Intelligences were to have an earthlife in which there would be no losses; a world where there was nothing adventurous and dangerous, a "game" in which there are no real stakes; all that was "hazarded" would be given back. All must be saved; and no price is to be paid in the work of salvation.... There could be no seriousness attributed to life under such a plan, since there were to be no insuperable "noes" and "losses"; no genuine sacrifices anywhere;... Man was to have nothing to do in the achievement, all was to be done for him. He was to be passive, merely. Not a thing to act, but something to be acted upon. Such only could be the outcome of a world where all mankind would be saved, "that not one soul should be lost.Â [^21]

To implement a plan where there would be guaranteed salvation, exaltation without effort, and a life without sacrifice or suffering was theologically impossible. Lucifer's plan flew in the face of eternal laws and could not have worked even if all of the spirit offspring of God had "voted" for it. Elder Bruce R. McConkie confirmed that despite his powers of persuasion, "Lucifer's proposal to amend the Father's plan could not be; it was philosophically impossible to accomplish. He could not save all mankind, because unless some were damned, there would be no salvation, for nothing can so much as exist unless it has an opposite. Agency and freedom of worship are just that basic and important in the eternal plan of salvation." [^22]

Since Lucifer's proposal was illogical, unworkable, and contrary to the laws of heaven, one must consider some important questions. How could such a "philosophically impossible" plan cause so much contention and consternation in heaven? Abraham records that "many followed after him" (Abr. 3:28). One cannot help but wonder how so many could be led away. These spirit children had been carefully and systematically taught the principles of the plan. Amidst such teachings, which were accompanied by power and authority, how could so many of the spirits see Lucifer's hodgepodge of heresy as a viable alternative to the Father's plan? Perhaps even more important than his motives, Lucifer's methods provide the answer.

Methods: Why Lucifer's Plan Was So Alluring

The Book of Mormon sheds valuable light on the methodology of Lucifer. Contained in that ancient record are accounts of three separate "anti-Christs" who had been tutored in their cunning crafts by Lucifer, "the father of all lies." All three of these notorious characters from the Book of Mormon were like Lucifer in their desires to disrupt and destroy the Father's plan. Each, in his own unique way, was also rebelling against the Only Begotten. The doctrines and characteristics of two of these anti-Christs, Sherem and Nehor, show remarkable similarities to the premortal preaching and persuading of Lucifer. By examining the scriptural sketches of these characters, we can expose the often subtle yet cunning tactics of Lucifer. In addition, we can better understand Lucifer's premortal duplicity.

The prophet Jacob wrote that Sherem "began to preach among the people, and to declare unto them that there should be no Christ. And he preached many things which were flattering unto the people; and this he did that he might overthrow the doctrine of Christ." (Jacob 7:2; italics added.) Another striking resemblance to Lucifer emerges in Jacob's further description of Sherem. "And he was learned, that he had a perfect knowledge of the language of the people; wherefore, he could use much flattery and much power of speech, according to the power of the devil" (Jacob 7:4; italics added).

Nehor, another anti-Christ, "testified unto the people that all mankind should be saved at the last day, and that they need not fear nor tremble... for the Lord... had also redeemed all men; and, in the end, all men should have eternal life" (Alma 1:4; italics added). Mormon's character description of Nehor reflects many of the same traits that were evident in Lucifer. "And it came to pass that he did teach these things so much that many did believe on his words .... And he began to be lifted up in the pride of his heart... and even began to establish a church after the manner of his preaching." (Alma 1:5-6; italics added.) It is also interesting to note that Alma says that Nehor was attempting to force or compel the people, even "by the sword," to believe his doctrine.

Undoubtedly Lucifer far surpassed even Sherem and Nehor in this knowledge and eloquence and flattery. It seems likely that through his powers of persuasion he magnified the trials and pitfalls of mortality that would be inevitable under the Father's plan. He may have painted, through his "power of speech," such a scene of suffering that many spirits doubted and despaired-doubted they would be able to be valiant under such conditions of agency and opposition, and despaired that they would ever be able to return to the Father's presence. It seems unlikely that Lucifer advocated force or compulsion; but probably, after creating a scenario of fear and misery, he introduced a most interesting and enticing plan. His easy, effortless plan must have seemed a stark contrast to the frightful description he would have given of the Father's plan, and those who wanted a smooth and simplified path through life must have been attracted to it. Regarding the attraction and enticement of Lucifer's plan, Robert J. Matthews, dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University, has provided this valuable insight:

When we talk about our relationship to the Savior and our redemption, we must begin with the premortal life. I think we often miss the real issue of the contention in the spirit world that eventually led to the War in Heaven. We talk about it as though Lucifer were going to force everybody to obey. Most people don't want to be forced. As I see it, the real issue is that Lucifer would guarantee their salvation. He promised salvation without effort, without excellence, without hard work, without individual responsibility. That's the lie that he promulgated in the pre-earth councils. That so-called shortcut to salvation captivated many gullible and lazy spirits. They wanted something for nothing. We have certain aspects of that in our life today where things are awkward, something for nothing-a free lunch, we sometimes call it-with certain kinds of subsidies which promise to guarantee the reward without the effort. On that basis Lucifer led away many spirits. [^23]

It begins to make sense that many could be lured away when Lucifer's plan is portrayed not so much as one of force but as one of freedom from accountability. In contrast to the inevitable casualties under a plan of agency and opposition, Lucifer's guarantee of salvation without effort was indeed attractive and enticing. So powerful were Lucifer's arguments about the dangers of mortality that the spirits could perhaps graphically visualize the stressful scenes of mortality. It was under the conditions of stress and fear that Lucifer's methods were most effective. Rabbi Harold S. Kushner, the author of such best-selling books as When Bad Things Happen to Good People and When All You've Ever Wanted Is Not Enough, made this interesting observation which parallels the premortal situation:

There is a part of us, especially in times of stress, that wants to be cuddled and taken care of, to be told, "There's nothing to worry about; I'll take care of everything for you." ...There is a part of us that wants somebody else to step in and do all the hard things that we are supposed to do, relieving us of responsibility....

...Erich Fromm, after fleeing from Nazi Germany to the United States, tried to understand how a cultured, educated people like the Germans could have let a man like Hitler come to power. In his book Escape from Freedom, he suggests an answer. Sometimes, he says, the problems of life become so overwhelming that we despair of ever solving them. Should someone come along and say in a loud, confident voice, "Follow me without question, do everything I tell you to, and I will lead you out of this," many of us would find that a very tempting offer. When life becomes difficult, we want someone to say to us, "Don't worry your little head about it. Let me do it for you, and all I want in return is your gratitude and total obedience." [^24]

However attractive and alluring Lucifer's plan was, it was nonetheless an assault on the Father's plan and a futile attempt to redeem all mankind. "If you undertake to save all," wrote Brigham Young, "you must save them in unrighteousness and corruption." [^25] Lucifer's plan was at odds with all the laws of heaven. He sought, as President John Taylor said, to "introduce something that was contrary to the law of God and to the counsel of God." His great sin was not just in his plan, but, more important, in his "departure from God and his laws, and because [he] sought to pervert the counsel of God, and violate those principles which [God] had introduced for the salvation of the world which was to be." [^26]

Lucifer and His Followers Are Cast Out of Heaven

The scriptures and the prophets are silent regarding the actual nature and length of this event called the War in Heaven. "In regard to the battle in heaven," said Brigham Young, "... how much of a battle it was I have forgotten. I cannot relate the principal circumstances, it is so long since it happened." [^27] Although the Lord has not directly revealed the particulars regarding this event, there are important inferences that can be made from careful examination of significant scriptural passages.

John the Revelator described his vision of Lucifer's rebellion and his ultimate banishment from God's presence. Several key words and phrases in his description illuminate the manner of warfare that prevailed in the War in Heaven.

And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.

And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is case down, which accused them before our God day and night.

And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death. (Rev. 12:7-11; italics added.)

It is interesting that John refers to Lucifer as "the accuser of our brethren." The Greek word from which "accuser" was translated in the New Testament had a broader meaning in classical Greek, which could connote "a betrayer," "a denouncer," or one who "speaks evil of another." This insight certainly shows that Lucifer's rebellion may have begun merely with his proposal but ended with his total rebellion, his betrayal and denouncement of both the Father and His Beloved and Chosen Son.

Nothing could be further from the truth than to portray the banishment of Lucifer and "a third part of the hosts of heaven" (D&C 29:36) as the result of a simple vote for Lucifer's plan. It seems unthinkable that a merciful and loving Father would banish a third of his spirit children to an everlasting punishment simply because they "voted wrong" and chose Lucifer's proposal. The War in Heaven involved much more than just voting for plans of salvation. It undoubtedly involved a war of words, a war for the hearts, minds, souls, and strength of all of God's children. It was the ultimate pre-mortal test of each spirit's valiance, commitment, and love for the Father. Those who, with Lucifer, were cast out, were cast out because they had been, figuratively and literally, accusers of their brethren.

In the literal sense, it may have been that Lucifer and his followers "accused" Jehovah and the brethren before the Father, much like Korihor, the third anti-Christ mentioned in the Book of Mormon, denounced and accused the prophet Alma. Korihor accused Alma of oppressing the people and not allowing them to think for themselves. He said their religious beliefs were "the effect of a frenzied mind; and this derangement of your minds comes because of the traditions of your fathers, which lead you away into a belief of things which are not so" (Alma 30:16).

Almost like echoes from eternity past, one can logically hear Lucifer using the same types of arguments as he denounced Jehovah. He may have accused him of oppressing and misleading the spirit children of God so that he might have power over them. Perhaps, because of the perils inherent in the Father's plan, Satan could cleverly (though falsely) accuse Jehovah of indifference towards his brothers and sisters, since many would be lost. On the other hand, he would have upheld himself as compassionate and concerned by virtue of his liberal plan of non-salvation. Like Korihor in his assault on Alma, Satan would have twisted the truth, calling good evil and evil good. He was the prototype for those whom the Lord has unequivocally denounced in the scriptures: "Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith the Lord, but have done that which was meet in mine eyes, and which I commanded them. But those who cry transgression do it because they are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves. And [cursed are] those who swear falsely against my servants, that they might bring them into bondage and death." (D&C 121:16-18.) How perfectly this description fits both Korihor and Lucifer in their efforts to discredit and accuse God's "anointed." Furthermore, Lucifer and his ardent and zealous supporters, in their efforts to win the war for souls, accused, denounced, swore falsely against, and spoke evil of not only Jehovah but also the Father and all who supported the true plan of salvation.

In the figurative sense, Lucifer was the "accuser" in that he was, in verity, a betrayer. He not only betrayed the Father and Jehovah but also openly and defiantly betrayed and sought to undermine all those laws, principles, and teachings that he, himself, previously had known to be true. He became Perdition, and his followers, sons of perdition, in the same way that mortals can descend to such depths. The scriptures explain this descent, which applies to premortal souls much the same as to mortals. The Prophet Joseph learned that those who are cast out to "eternal punishment" in a place "where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched" (D&C 76:44) are those who have "denied the Holy Spirit after having received it" and have also "denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame" (D&C 76:35). They have, as the Prophet Joseph declared of those who suffer this fate, denied Jesus Christ after they have understood in clarity and surety the Father's plan. They have refused the plan of salvation with their "eyes open to the truth of it." They are determined to make "open war" against the plan of salvation. [^28]

While we may not know fully what happened in this war, we can see that it was of such severity that many lost their hope for salvation as a result of their sins. Elder Orson Pratt made this illuminating statement on the nature and duration of the war, and also on the nature of the sins that resulted in the expulsion of Lucifer and a third part of the spirits.

It is not likely that the final decision of the contending armies took place immediately. Many, no doubt, were unsettled in their views, unstable in their minds, and undecided as to which force to join: there may have been, for aught we know, many deserters from both armies: and there may have been a long period before the division line was so strictly drawn as to become unalterable. Laws, without doubt, were enacted, and penalties affixed, according to the nature of the offences or crimes: those who altogether turned from the Lord, and were determined to maintain the cause of Satan, and who proceeded to the utmost extremities of wickedness, placed themselves without the reach of redemption: therefore, such were prohibited from entering into a second probationary state, and had no privilege of receiving bodies of flesh and bones....

Among the two thirds who remained, it is highly probable that there were many who were not valiant in the war, but whose sins were of such a nature that they could be forgiven through faith in the future sufferings of the Only Begotten of the Father, and through their sincere repentance and reformation. [^29]

Lucifer and his followers were not cast out of heaven merely because they had unwittingly proposed and supported an illogical plan, but through their open rebellion, their betrayal of the Father and Son, and because their sins were of the "utmost extremities of wickedness," the redemptive power of Christ's atonement could have no claim on them. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

Because of their open rebellion against light and truth, because they defied God and his government, knowing perfectly what the will of the Father was, they were cast out of heaven onto this earth. Their punishment: eternal damnation. Progression ceased for them. No mortal bodies would ever house their spirit forms. For them there was to be no second estate, no probationary experiences, no resurrection, no eternal life-nothing but darkness and defiance; nothing but wickedness and rebellion; nothing but hatred and evil to all eternity, because they came out in open rebellion and with a perfect knowledge of the course they then pursued and of the consequences that attended it; they fought against God. It is an awful thing to defy the Lord, to make open warfare against the Supreme Being. [^30]

Lucifer lost the War in Heaven and "was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son, and was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him" (D&C 76:25-26). Michael and his angels defeated Lucifer and one third of the hosts of heaven by the power of the Only Begotten Son in this premortal war, but the war for the hearts and souls of the other two thirds of God's children rages on.

The War in Heaven Continues on Earth

The Prophet Joseph, who saw the premortal rebellion of Lucifer, also saw and described the continuation of the conflict: "For we beheld Satan, that old serpent, even the devil, who rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his Christ-Wherefore, he maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them round about. And we saw a vision of the sufferings of those with whom he made war and overcame." (D&C 76:28-30.) The war that commenced in the premortal realm of God continues here on earth. The participants are the same. The methods and motives of Lucifer have not changed, for he continues to seek to destroy the agency of man. Since he desires desperately the "full possession, ownership" of all the spirits of men, and since he could not "get them by gift," he has followed us here to earth "trying to get us through the commission of sin. If we sin sufficiently we become his subjects." [^31] While it may not always seem like a battleground, the invisible enemy is real and the efforts needed to defeat him here, as there, have not diminished. President Wilford Woodruff said of this continuing conflict:

[Lucifer] has great influence over the children of men; he labors continually to destroy the works of God in heaven, and he had to be cast out. He is here, mighty among the children of men. There is a vast number of fallen spirits, cast out with him, here on earth. They do not die and disappear; they have not bodies only as they enter the tabernacles of men. They have not organized bodies, and are not to be seen with the sight of the eye. But there are many evil spirits amongst us, and they labor to overthrow the church and kingdom of God....

...Do you suppose these devils are around us without trying to do something?...I say...we have got a mighty warfare to wage with these spirits. We cannot escape it. What will they do to you? They will try to make us do anything and everything that is not right. [^32]

The character and methodology of Lucifer in the premor-tal world can best be understood by observing his warring works as they continue on earth. Elder Mark E. Petersen has fittingly described the War in Heaven that now rages on earth as "the longest war." Satan's premortal motives and methods are now exemplified and amplified with satanic fervor by those spirits who followed him to his newest battleground-earth.

Cast out of heaven, Lucifer and his devilish host turned to the next step in their nefarious warfare-enticement!

They had wanted to become mortals and have physical bodies like ours, but were defeated by their own rebellion. However, they knew that mortals would be subject to sin and would have weaknesses, and that many of them would surrender to enticement.

So Lucifer's army turned to temptation as their most effective weapon. They would induce these mortals to sin and by this means endeavor to defeat the purposes of Jehovah....

Now he sought to prevent all of us from becoming like our Father in heaven as we use the right means, the way provided by Jehovah. Seeing that the gospel plan truly can make mortals perfect like God only added to the frustration of Lucifer....

He knows what exaltation means, for he saw it as he lived in the presence of God....

He knows that "all that my Father hath" shall be given to His faithful children (D&C 84:38), and he knows that such is now forever beyond his reach. So once again in him there arises deeper frustration, sharper resentment, and more vicious anger.

Jealousy against the Savior and all of his Saints increases in his evil heart. He uses every tool of enticement and temptation to accomplish his wicked ends. Inasmuch as he himself now can never be exalted, he tries to prevent all others from achieving that goal.

What does he care about us, except to destroy us? We are his targets, we are his prey. With ties and intrigue he would persuade us that happiness may be found in sin, that gain may be had through fraud, deception, licentiousness, and even murder.

By his glamor he would blind us to the end result of sin. He would make it seem attractive, even though he knows that its wage is death.

He lures us by the lust of the flesh. He resents "the flesh" because he knows that he himself can never have it....

He therefore tempts us according to the flesh with sex, money, greed, worldly prestige, ease, comfort, and a loose and carefree life.

With it he introduces philosophies to counteract the teachings of Christ....

With every conceivable device he wages war with the Saints, endeavoring to make them miserable like himself, always seeking to thwart the purposes of Jehovah against whom his jealousy and resentment know no end. [^33]

The War in Heaven, as set forth in the scriptures, was not merely a figurative event but was a literal occurrence with very real consequences of spiritual death and destruction. Likewise, the continuation of that conflict here on earth is every bit as real as the wars fought by mortal men and is correspondingly littered with graphic scenes of eternal spiritual carnage. Though Lucifer vainly persists in his efforts to overthrow the Father's plan, his assaults on the spirit children of the Father are not so futile. He continues to destroy agency and to lead some to believe that there is exaltation without effort and salvation without sacrifice; that good is evil, and evil good. Just as Lucifer was defeated in the premortal battleground, he will yet be bound again. By each individual, however, the battle must be won personally, on the same conditions as it was in heaven-"by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony" (Rev. 12:11). The war continues. The dangers are the same, but so are the defenses.

Wherefore, lift up your hearts and rejoice, and gird up your loins, and take upon you my whole armor, that ye may be able to withstand the evil day, having done all, that ye may be able to stand.

Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, having on the breastplate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, which I have sent mine angels to commit unto you;

Taking the shield of faith wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked;

And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of my Spirit, which I will pour out upon you, and my word which I reveal unto you, and be agreed as touching all things whatsoever ye ask of me, and be faithful until I come, and ye shall be caught up, that where I am ye shall be also. Amen. (D&C 27:15-18.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd edition (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 290.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith, compiled by N.B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: N.B. Lundwall, n.d.), Lecture 4, p. 43.
[^3] See Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, Co. 1983), pp. 188-193,262-263. Definitions from the original Greek are found in A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, edited by William F. Arndt and F. Wilbur Gingrich (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957) and Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, edited by Gerhard Kittel and Gerhard Friedrich, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1967), vol. 5, p. 456. For an extensive discussion of the translation problem associated with Paul's usage of the word "predestinate," see Richard L. Anderson, "Misleading Translations of Paul," in The 11th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium—New Testament (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1983), pp. 17-26.
[^4] John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, translated by Henry Beveridge (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1979), 3, 21, 5.
[^5] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd edition (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), pp. 588-589.
[^6] C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1952), pp. 148-149.
[^7] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 10:324.
[^8] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1977), p. 191. For an additional discussion of the role of God's foreknowledge, see James E. Talmage, The Great Apostasy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1953), pp. 19-20.
[^9] Neal A. Maxwell, "Meeting the Challenges of Today," Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1978), pp. 152, 154.
[^10] Harold B. Lee, "Understanding Who We Are Brings Self-Respect," Ensign, January 1974, p. 5; italics added.
[^11] Melvin J. Ballard, "The Three Degrees of Glory," as cited in Melvin J. Ballard-Crusader of Righteousness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), pp. 218-219; italics added.
[^12] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), pp. 512-513; italics added.
[^13] Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1985, p. 22.
[^14] Parley P. Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 1:258-259.
[^15] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 513.
[^16] Alvin R. Dyer, The Meaning of Truth (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961), p. 19.
[^17] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 34.
[^18] Dallin H. Oaks, Pure in Heart (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 63.
[^19] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 2:159-160. See also Alvin R. Dyer, The Meaning of Truth (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961), pp. 33-36.
[^20] Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, October 1973, p. 7.
[^21] David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay, compiled by Llewelyn R. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), pp. 228-230.
[^22] Alvin R. Dyer, The Meaning of Truth (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961), pp. 23-24.
[^23] First Presidency statement, February 15, 1978, as quoted in Spencer J. Palmer, The Expanding Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. v.
[^24] Erastus Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 23:186-187.
[^25] Wilford Woodruff, "Our Lineage," Topical Outline to the Way to Perfection, (Salt Lake City: Genealogical Society of Utah, 1932), p. 4.
[^26] Joseph Fielding Smith, in Church News, July 10, 1971, p. 14.
[^27] Harold B. Lee, Youth and the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 169.
[^28] Ezra Taft Benson, "In His Steps," Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1980), pp. 59-60.
[^29] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 35.
[^30] Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, October 1973, p. 7.
[^31] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:289-290.
[^32] Bruce R. McConkie, "God Foreordains His Prophets and His People," Ensign, May 1974, p. 72.
[^33] John Taylor, "The Origin and Destiny of Woman," in The Mormon , as cited in N. B. Lundwall, compiler, The Vision (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), pp. 145-148.
