Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

7 Called and Prepared from the Foundation of the World

With the War in Heaven finally won, two thirds of our Heavenly Father's spirit children remained in the "first estate." The others, because of their rebellion and extreme wickedness, not only were cast out of their first estate but also lost the privilege of entering the "second estate."

Among those who remained and who would yet be able to enter mortality, there was still great diversity. Not only had the spirits not been equally diligent and obedient to the laws and commandments in the premortal world but also they now had exhibited varying degrees of valiance and faithfulness in the War in Heaven as well. No doubt there were even some who had maintained a close relationship with Lucifer and who had adhered to his apostate teachings, but whose sins and rebellion were of lesser nature and thus did not warrant expulsion. There were probably some who, though they followed the Father's plan and supported the selection of Jehovah, were not necessarily committed and zealous in sustaining and defending the truths of the gospel. They were probably less inclined toward spiritual matters than those who steadfastly and with "an eye single to the glory of God" fought against Lucifer and his hellish host. As previously cited, Abraham saw in vision these spirits who remained in their first estate and saw the diversity that existed among them. "Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born" (Abr. 3:22-23).

Abraham learned what Jeremiah, Peter, Paul, and many others of the prophets and apostles would learn-that God, in the premortal world, chose individuals and groups of his spirit offspring and predesignated them for special responsibilities and blessings. All of these predesignations were "according to the foreknowledge of God the Father" (1 Pet. 1:2). These premortal designations represent the doctrine known among Latter-day Saints as foreordination. Elder Bruce R. McConkie defined this doctrine as follows:

To carry forward his own purposes among men and nations, the Lord foreordained chosen spirit children in pre-existence and assigned them to come to earth at particular times and places so that they might aid in furthering the divine will. These pre-existence appointments, made "according to the foreknowledge of God the Father" (1 Pet. 1:2), simply designated certain individuals to perform missions which the Lord in his wisdom knew they had the talents and capacities to do. [^1]

As Elder McConkie pointed out, foreordination is simply the premortal selection of individuals and/or nations to come forth in mortality at specified times and under certain conditions. Each of these selections is based on the omniscience and eternal wisdom of the Father. Although the doctrine is really rather fundamental, supported by numerous references and examples in the scriptures, the doctrine and its application to mankind have been misunderstood. The confusion results from a failure to recognize the true relationship between the foreknowledge of God and his foreordinations.

Foreordination Is Not Predestination

The scriptures clearly attest to the omniscience of God. The Apostle Paul said, "Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world" (Acts 15:18). Nephi also taught that "the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men" (1 Ne. 9:6). Nephi, son of Helaman, also taught that God "knoweth as well all things which shall befall us as he knoweth of our iniquities" (Hel. 8:8). Numerous other passages attest to the infinite knowledge of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that God's ability to save his children is directly related to his omniscience: "Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures;... and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him." [^2]

Foreordinations are based on God's knowledge of man-of both his premortal characteristics and propensities and his ultimate course of life. The prophet Alma taught that those chosen in the premortal world to be leaders on earth were "called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God" (Alma 13:3). The Apostle Paul also taught that premortal elections and appointments were made according to God's foreknowledge. It was Paul's use of the word predestinate in connection with the doctrine of election that has caused theological differences concerning the nature of God's foreknowledge and the re-suiting election of his children. "For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified." (Rom. 8:29-30. Note that in his inspired translation, the Prophet Joseph Smith rendered these two verses to apply specifically to Jesus Christ only. Several important words are changed. See JST Rom. 8:29-30.) To the Ephesian Saints, who understood the doctrine of premortal foreordinations, Paul wrote: "According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will" (Eph. 1:4-5).

In each of these passages the word predestinate could also be translated foreordain or appoint. In fact, the Greek word from which the King James translators chose the word predestinate has a variety of meanings. The emphasis in the Greek suggests the foreknowledge of God, but not in an ultimate determination of all things excluding man's agency. For this reason many Bible revisions and newer translations replace the word predestinate with words such as foreordain or appoint. [^3]

Without an understanding of the premortaI world and the doctrine of foreordination through latter-day revelation, some may understandably interpret predestinate and God's foreknowledge to mean that there is absolute determinism in all things. One theologian who came to this conclusion was John Calvin. He went beyond what Paul taught on the doctrine of election or foreordination and interpreted these passages to mean that God not only foreknew events but also actually caused them to happen. Thus, God became the causal agent, negating man's agency in the matter. With his acceptance of the doctrine of ex nihilo creation, it would seem natural for Calvin to conclude that predestination implied causation by God. Calvin claimed that "by predestination we mean the eternal decree of God, by which he determines with himself whatever he wished to happen with regard to every man. All are not created on equal terms, but some are preordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation. And accordingly, as each has been created for one or the other of these ends, we say that he has been predestinated to life or to death." [^4]

Thus Calvin taught that God determined in advance, according to his omniscience, who would be saved and who would be damned. Such predestination, according to Calvin, was not due to acts of individual agency or righteousness but solely due to God's foreknowledge. Elder Bruce R. McConkie characterized this doctrine as a "sectarian substitute for the true doctrine of foreordination."

Just as Lucifer "sought to destroy the agency of man" in the pre-existence (Moses 4:3), so through his ministers here he has taught a doctrine, based on scriptural distortions, of salvation and damnation without choice on the part of the individual. Predestination is the false doctrine that from all eternity God has ordered whatever comes to pass, having especial and particular reference to the salvation or damnation of souls. Some souls, according to this false concept, are irrevocably chosen for salvation, others for damnation; and there is said to be nothing any individual can do to escape his predestined inheritance in heaven or in hell as the case may be....

It is true that the words predestinate and predestinated are found in the King James translation of some of Paul's writings,... but Biblical revisions use the words foreordain and foreordained, which more accurately convey Paul's views. However, even as the King James Version renders the passages, there is no intimation of any compulsion or denial of free agency, for one of the dictionary definitions of foreordination is predestination, meaning the prior appointment (in pre-existence) of particular persons to perform designated labors or gain particular rewards. [^5]

While the doctrine of predestination was adopted by some Protestant denominations, there were also many who parted company with Calvin over his view of "absolute determinism." There continue to be diverse views on the relationship between God's foreknowledge and predestination. C. S. Lewis, a Christian writer and theologian, took an interesting approach to predestination when he taught that God's foreknowledge need not imply causation.

Everyone who believes in God at all believes that He knows what you and I are going to do tomorrow. But if He knows I am going to do so-and-so, how can I be free to do otherwise? Well, here once again, the difficulty comes from thinking that God is progressing along the Time-line like us: the only difference being that He can see ahead and we cannot. Well, if that were true, if God foresaw our acts, it would be very hard to understand how we could be free not to do them. But suppose God is outside and above the Time-line. In that case, what we call "tomorrow" is visible to Him in just the same way as what we call "today." All the days are "Now" for Him. He does not remember you doing things yesterday; He simply sees you doing them, because, though you have lost yesterday, He has not. He does not "foresee" you doing things tomorrow; He simply sees you doing them: because, though tomorrow is not yet there for you, it is for Him. You never suppose that your actions at this moment were any less free because God knows what you are doing. Well, He knows your tomorrow's actions in just the same way-be-cause He is already in tomorrow and can simply watch you. In a sense, He does not know your action tilt you have done it: but then the moment at which you have done it is already "Now" for Him. [^6]

While the theological debate continues in some religious circles, modern prophets have consistently taught the true relationship between foreknowledge and agency. President Brigham Young said:

I will here say that it is a mistaken idea, as entertained by the Calvinists, that God has decreed all things whatsoever that come to pass, for the volition of the creature is as free as air. You may inquire whether we believe in foreordination; we do, as strongly as any people in the world. We believe that Jesus was foreordained before the foundations of the world were built, and his mission was appointed him in eternity to be the Savior of the world, yet when he came in the flesh he was left free to choose or refuse to obey his Father. Had he refused to obey his Father, he would have become a son of perdition. We also are free to choose or refuse the principles of eternal life. God has decreed and foreordained many things that have come to pass, and he will continue to do so; but when he decrees great blessings upon a nation or upon an individual they are decreed upon certain conditions. [^7]

Elder James E. Talmage also taught emphatically that foreordination based on the foreknowledge of God does not imply compulsion.

The doctrine of absolute predestination, resulting in a nullification of man's free agency, has been advocated with various modifications by different sects. Nevertheless, such teachings are wholly unjustified by both the letter and the spirit of sacred writ. God's foreknowledge concerning the natures and capacities of His children enables Him to see the end of their earthly career even from the first.... Many people have been led to regard this foreknowledge of God as a predestination whereby souls are designated for glory or condemnation even before their birth in the flesh, and irrespective of individual merit or demerit. This heretical doctrine seeks to rob Deity of mercy, justice, and love; it would make God appear capricious and selfish, directing and creating all things solely for His own glory, caring not for the suffering of His victims. How dreadful, how inconsistent is such an idea of God! It leads to the absurd conclusion that the mere knowledge of coming events must act as a determining influence in bringing about those occurrences. God's knowledge of spiritual and of human nature enables Him to conclude with certainty as to the actions of any of His children under given conditions; yet that knowledge is not of compelling force upon the creature. [^8]

It is difficult, if not impossible, to comprehend with our finite minds the nature of God's foreknowledge. We cannot help but wonder how God can know all things about us, including our ultimate destiny, and yet not interfere with our agency. Despite our limitations, it is important to recognize the interweavings of God's foreknowledge with man's agency in order to understand the scenario of premortal selection. Elder Neal A. Maxwell used the symbol of a university as an analogy to teach this difficult concept. He explained that universities can often predict with unusual levels of accuracy the future collegiate grades of an incoming freshman student. These predictions are based on certain empirical tests and careful observation of the student's past performance. Although the university may be able to predict a student's eventual output, this prediction does not compel that student or interfere with his actual academic behavior. Elder Maxwell relates this carefully calculated forecast to God's foreknowledge of our future conduct. And though, unlike the predictions from a university, God's knowledge of our future is absolute and not merely a prediction, we still must use our agency to demonstrate our faithfulness or lack of it. Elder Maxwell summarized the relationship between foreknowledge and foreordination this way:

God, the Father, who knows us perfectly, surely can foresee how we will respond to various challenges. While we often do not rise to our opportunities, God is neither pleased nor surprised. But we cannot say to him later on that we could have achieved if we had just been given the chancel This is all part of the justice of God.

...When we mortals try to comprehend, rather than merely accept, foreordination, the result is one in which finite minds futilely try to comprehend omniscience. A full understanding is impossible; we simply have to trust in what the Lord has told us, knowing enough, however, to realize that we are not dealing with guarantees from God but extra opportunities-and heavier responsibilities. If those responsibilities are in some ways linked to past performance or to past capabilities, it should not surprise us.

...It should not disconcert us, therefore, that the Lord has indicated that he chose some individuals before they came here to carry out certain assignments and, hence, these individuals have been foreordained....

Foreordination is like any other blessing-it is a conditional bestowal subject to our faithfulness. Prophecies foreshadow events without determining the outcomes, because of a divine foreseeing of outcomes. So foreordination is a conditional bestowal of a role, a responsibility, or a blessing which, likewise, foresees but does not fix the outcome [^9]

Our Heavenly Father, in his infinite knowledge and wisdom, has thus called and prepared many of his spirit children from the foundation of the world for important responsibilities and blessings. The fulfillment of these foreordination is dependent upon our own faithfulness. There are several types of foreordinations. There are foreordinations of entire nations to significant blessings, and there is the foreordination of a specific individual to a very unique and important responsibility or mission. Whatever the type of foreordained mission or blessing, its realization remains contingent upon individual agency and accountability.

Foreordination to Lineages, Nations, and Families

Foreordination to the House of Israel

We most often think that foreordination applies to a pre-mortal calling conferred upon individuals, but perhaps the most important meaning of foreordination is in reference to the blessings and responsibilities that were foreordained to an entire group. Moses spoke of this type of foreordination as he spoke of all the house of Israel. "Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee. When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance." (Deut. 32:7-9; italics added.)

Commenting on this Old Testament passage and its implications to the doctrine of foreordination generally and to the house of Israel specifically, President Harold B. Lee said:

It would seem very clear, then, that...Jacob, who was later to be called Israel, and his posterity, who were known as the children of Israel, were born into the most illustrious lineage of any of those who came upon the earth as mortal beings.

All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth life was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here? [^10]

Also, as previously cited, the Apostle Paul taught the doctrine of election to the Saints in Rome and Ephesus. Election, in this instance, is a type of collective foreordination-a selection of spirits to form an entire favored group or lineage. Although it is a collective foreordination it is nonetheless based on individual premortal faithfulness and spiritual capacity. Elder Melvin J. Ballard, in a classic address given in 1922 entitled "The Three Degrees of Glory," explained how some were foreordained to be of the house of Israel.

There was a group of souls tested, tried, and proven before they were born into the world, and the Lord provided a lineage for them. That lineage is the house of Israel, the lineage of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and their posterity. Through this lineage were to come the true and tried souls that had demonstrated their righteousness in the spirit world before they came here. Our particular branch is the house of Joseph through his son Ephraim. That is the group whence shall come the majority of the candidates for celestial glory. [^11]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie further explained:

All men are the spirit children of the Eternal Father; all dwelt in his presence, awaiting the day of their mortal probation; all have come or will come to earth at an appointed time, in a specified place, to live among a designated people. In all of this there is no chance. A divine providence rules over the nations and governs in the affairs of men. Birth and death and mortal kinship are the Lord's doings. He alone determines where and when and among what people his spirit children shall undergo their mortal probation....

All of these things operate by law; they are the out. growth of long years of personal preparation in preexistence on the part of each individual; they come to pass according to the laws that the Lord has ordained. This second estate is a continuation of our first estate; we are born here with the talents and capacities acquired there. Abraham was one of the noble and great spirits in the premortal life. He was chosen for his mortal ministry and position before he was born, and as with the father of the faithful, so with all of the spirits destined to be born as his seed.

The greatest and most important talent or capacity that any of the spirit children of the Father could gain is the talent of spirituality. Most of those who gained this talent were chosen, before they were born, to come to earth as members of the house of Israel. They were foreordained to receive the blessings that the Lord promised to Abraham and to his seed in all their generations. This foreordination is an election, Paul tells us, and truly it is so, for those so chosen, selected, or elected become, in this life, the favored people. Though all mankind may be saved by obedience, some find it easier to believe and obey than others. [^12]

The doctrine of the election of Israel, or its foreordination to certain blessings, is a major though often misunderstood theme of Paul in the New Testament. It appears that this foreordination to birthright blessings in the house of Israel is a more significant foreordination than the more frequently cited examples of preappointment to specific Church callings. As Elder McConkie stated, premortal inclinations make some more believing and spiritual in mortality and thus more likely to accept the blessings and responsibilities of being members of the Church and of the house of Israel. This concept gives greater meaning to the Savior's statement that his sheep know his voice and will follow him (see John 10:4-5, 14). Once again, this foreordination does not predestinate or guarantee their acceptance of the gospel or their admission into the earthly kingdom of God. They must accept the earthly responsibilities of the house of Israel through their mortal agency as well. Yet their recognition of the familiar strains of the gospel message and their acceptance of gospel ordinances may come easier by virtue of their foreordination to the house of Israel. "Thus, when we now say 'I know,'" said Elder Neal A. Maxwell, "that realization is rediscovery; we are actually saying 'I know-again!' From long experience, His sheep know His voice and His doctrine.Â [^13] Elder Parley P. Pratt also spoke of the significance of this premortal election or foreordination to the house of Israel.

...When [God] speaks of nobility, He simply means an election made, and an office or a title conferred, on the principle of superiority of intellect, or nobleness of action, or of capacity to act. And when this election, with its titles, dignities, and estates, includes the unborn posterity of a chosen man, as in the case of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it is with a view of the noble spirits of the eternal world coming through their lineage, and being taught in the commandments of God. [^14]

In addition to the far-reaching foreordination to the lineage of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, there is yet another, more specific aspect of this foreordination spoken of in the scriptures: to be "a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people" (1 Pet. 2:9; see also Ex. 19:5-6; Lev. 20:22-26). Paul taught, "They are not all Israel, which are of Israel" (Rom. 9:6). Paul was teaching that lineage did not insure salvation. Rather, acceptance of and obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel were more important qualifications for being "of Israel." To become a covenant people, Paul taught that each one must accept the Mediator of the Covenant-Jesus Christ (see Heb. 8 and 9). It appears that among the foreordained lineage of Israel, those who were covenant Israel were also foreordained to "all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ" (Eph. 1:3), and to "the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises" (Rom. 9:4). In light of Paul's teachings, then, the most important aspect of this foreordination to the house of Israel was the accompanying foreordination to the ordinances of salvation and the spiritual blessings attending membership in the earthly kingdom of God. Of these foreordained spiritual blessings and ordinances Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

All Israel, according to the doctrine of foreordination, have it in their power to gain exaltation; to be like the Son of God, having gained his image; to be joint-heirs with him; to be justified and glorified; to be adopted into the family of God by faith; to be participators with their fathers in the covenant that God made with them; and to be inheritors, to the full, of the ancient promises. Implicit in all this is the fact that they are foreordained to be baptized, to join the Church, to receive the priesthood, to enter the ordinance of celestial marriage, and to be sealed up unto eternal life. [^15]

It is certainly not to be thought that those spirits who were less faithful in the prernortal world and were not foreordained to the blessings of the house of Israel have no chance on earth to yet gain those blessings and ultimately qualify for eternal life. Elder Alvin R. Dyer wrote:

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have come to know by divine revelation in our modern time the importance of the house of Israel and its relationship to the plan of the gospel. They have come to know that the house of Israel represents the chosen of the Lord. There is a chosen people-there is a royal lineage among men here upon the earth. Many are born into it by virtue of their pre-mortal worthiness, and others may obtain it through adoption, by virtue of accepting the gospel here in mortality. [^16]

This foreordination was the natural consequence or blessing for premortal compliance with eternal laws. Joseph Smith taught: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated-And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21). Elder McConkie explained that the blessing for those "elected" there was that "it is easier for them to believe the gospel than it is for the generality of mankind." He went on to say, "Every living soul comes into this world with sufficient talent to believe and be saved, but the Lord's sheep, as a reward for their devotion when they dwelt in his presence, enjoy greater spiritual endowments than their fellows." [^17]

The scriptures proclaim that all mankind are commanded, expected, and able to abide the principles of salvation. The Lord taught Alma that "all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God" (Mosiah 27:25-26; see also 2 Ne. 26:33; Moses 6:52-57). While the commandment is the same for all mankind in all ages of eternity, those spirits who developed greater predispositions for righteousness were rewarded with "the believing blood of Israel" and become foreordained heirs to the blessings associated with the favored lineage.

This inclination toward spirituality may make it easier for them to recognize the gospel message, but it does not preclude others from also repenting and receiving an inheritance in the house of Israel. These others, through their earthly faithfulness, become, as Paul taught, "adopted" into the favored lineage-receiving all of the blessings and responsibilities to which they are entitled-and their apparent lack of a premortal foreordination is overcome when they become as though they had been foreordained. In the Abrahamic covenant the Lord promises, "For as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father" (Abr. 2:10). This seems to open the door for any who can qualify. The scriptures are replete with invitations to all to partake of his salvation. Nephi reasons, "Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not partake of his goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all men are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are forbidden." (2 Ne. 26:28.) On the other hand, the premortal foreordination of a spirit to the house of Israel with its attendant blessings becomes effective only as that spirit obediently and faithfully responds to the earthly laws and ordinances of the gospel. Elder Dallin H. Oaks wrote:

What does it mean to be an "heir" of the celestial kingdom? An heir is one who has a rightful claim to an inheritance. But his inheritance is not automatic. An heir must perfect his claim by complying with certain formalities. In the secular law, these formalities include such requirements as filing a proof of heirship within the required time and showing that all the debts of the estate are paid. In the gospel law, the formalities include the required ordinances of the gospel. [^18]

To the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord reiterated that righteousness and obedience, not merely foreordination and lineage, are required in order for one to truly be of "covenant Israel." "For, verily I say that the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim" (D&C 64:36). Many may be born into the house of Israel on the basis of a premortal foreordination, but many may still lose the covenant blessings through rebellion.

Foreordination to Nations of the Earth

In addition to foreordination to the lineage of Israel, there is also a premortal designation as to both the time and place of our birth which constitutes a foreordination. Teaching the Athenian intellectuals on Mars' hill, the Apostle Paul explained, "God that made the world and all things therein ... hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:24, 26). Elder Bruce R. McConkie, commenting on Paul's statement, explained how our place and time in mortality was foreordained. "God sends his spirit children to earth on a regular, organized schedule. There is nothing haphazard or accidental about the peopling of the earth or the assignment of various land areas to the races of men. The race and nation in which men are born in this world is a direct result of their pre-existent life. All the spirit hosts of heaven deemed worthy to receive mortal bodies were foreordained to pass through this earthly probation in the particular race and nation suited to their needs, circumstances, and talents.Â [^19]

The Father's foreordination of his spirit children to the various nations of the earth was based on three fundamental principles. First, as is always the case, foreordination comes as a blessing or reward for premortal righteousness and valiance. President Harold B. Lee said that we have come into mortality to specific nations "as a reward for the kind of lives [we] lived before [we] came here.Â [^20] President David O. McKay also stated that our lineage was predetermined not only by premortal faithfulness, but also by premortal attraction.

Now if none of these spirits were permitted to enter mortality until they all were good and great and had become leaders, then the diversity of conditions among the children of men as we see them today would certainly seem to indicate discrimination and injustice. But if in their eagerness to take upon themselves bodies, the spirits were willing to come through any lineage for which they were worthy, or to which they were attracted, then they were given the full reward of merit, and were satisfied, yes, and even blessed.

... Our place in this world would then be determined by our own advancement or condition in the premortal state, just as our place in our future existence will be determined by what we do here in mortality. [^21]

President McKay indicates that closely associated with the premortal faithfulness or lack of it in individual spirits is their attraction to other spirits or groups of spirits of like character. This view and its relationship to foreordination to specific lineages and nations is based on the principle of "spiritual attraction" described by the Lord in modern revelation. "For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own" (D&C 88:40).

Second, the placement into certain nations was done by an infinitely wise and compassionate Father for the good of each of his childrenÂ· No doubt each spirit child was assigned to such a nation as would be best for his or her own growth and development. This principle is reflected in the following statement of Elder Alvin R. Dyer:

The very nature of each person ... would require that the lineage of birth would fit the caliber of their person; this, no doubt, entailed a birth into mortality by pre-mortal judgment. Equality of birth is not actually possible, because there is no equality of all spirit persons. Thus to bring about birth into mortality there must have been a plan to calibrate birth in a lineage and manner best suited to the need of potential growth and development in the Second Estate, which is a probationary period ....

In consequence of this, in order for man to come from pre-mortality into mortality, there is a foreordination or assignment... associated with a judgment and assignment to that division to which they are best suited and can make the more effective progress within that realm. [^22]

The third principle that must be emphasized in any discussion of foreordination is that God designates individual spirits to come into mortality through specific nations, races, and cultures at specific times in the world's history to bring to pass his works and to fulfil his plans for all mankind. These plans not only include the salvation of his individual children but also encompass deeds and teachings designed to elevate mankind. Great spirits have come to all nations and races to render service to humanity and contribute to the enlightenment of others. "The great religious leaders of the world," wrote the First Presidency, "such as Mohammed, Confucius, and the Reformers, as well as philosophers including Socrates, Plato, and others received a portion of God's light. Moral truths were given to them by God to enlighten whole nations and to bring a higher level of understanding to individuals.Â [^23] Thousands of other great and noble spirits, who were not as famous but whose service and compassion have been significant, have been and will continue to be sent to all the nations of the earth. Elder Erastus Snow taught of these noble spirits:

They have been first and foremost in everything noble among men in the various nations in breaking off the shackles of kingcraft and priestcraft and oppression of every kind, and the foremost among men in upholding and maintaining the principles of liberty and freedom ... whose efforts are directed in establishing upon the their fellow earth those heaven-born principles which tend directly to blessing and salvation, to ameliorating the condition of their fellow-men, and elevating them in the scale of their being. [^24]

There is no random assignment or chance in these predesignations. Foreordination to the various nations of the earth comes not only as a reward for faithfulness or as an opportunity for individual growth and service but also-and perhaps even more important-as a way to further the works and designs of God for his spirit children. The prophet Alma taught his son Helaman "that by small and simple things are great things brought to pass .... And the Lord God doth work by means to bring about his great and eternal purposes; and by very small means the Lord doth confound the wise and bringeth about the salvation of many souls" (Alma 37:6-7). Later, Alma taught another son, Corianton, that "God bringeth about his great and eternal purposes, which were prepared from the foundation of the world" (Alma 42:26). So it is also with God's foreordinations of his children. Predesignations and assignments to the nations of the earth are a major factor in bringing about the Father's "great and eternal purposes" designed to bless the lives of his children, bring them happiness, and "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

The times, places, and circumstances of our birth into mortality could be determined by any or all of these factors. While we may understand the general principles behind such foreordinations, it is impossible to know which factor or combination of factors applies in each individual case. Therefore we must never attempt to judge an individual's premortal character based on his national origin, race, cultural background, or circumstances in life. We must keep in mind that our Heavenly Father has sent "noble and great ones" to the earth under many circumstances and to virtually all the nations of the earth. Abraham was born in the paganistic society of Ur, where the people's "hearts were set to do evil" and where children were offered as sacrifices to "dumb idols" (Abr. 1:1-7). Moses was born in bondage and raised in the household of a murderous, infidel Egyptian pharaoh. Numerous other examples are found in the scriptures. Even in the latter days, many of those noble and great spirits whom the Lord foreordained to be his "rulers" have been born in diverse racial and cultural backgrounds. They have come into poverty and obscurity and into unbelieving families as well as into situations of faith and freedom, prosperity and prominence. Some of the Father's choicest spirits are born in huts and hogans.

Paul taught that God appointed or foreordained not only the "bounds of their habitation" but also the times. Each of the principles previously discussed also applies to our appointed time of birth into mortality. While it is obvious that God has sent worthy and faithful spirits into mortality in every dispensation, the prophets have taught that God has also reserved many of his choice spirits to come forth in the tumultuous times of the last days. Iniquity abounds as Lucifer's "last-gasp" evil efforts increase and the need for righteous and worthy spirits to carry forth God's purposes and designs increases proportionately. President Wilford Woodruff said, "The Lord has chosen a small number of choice spirits of Sons and Daughters out of all the creations of God, who are to inherit the earth, and the company of choice spirits have been kept in the Spirit World for 6,000 years, to come forth in the last days, to stand in the flesh in the last dispensation of the fulness of times, to organize the Kingdom of God upon the earth, to build it up and to defend it." [^25]

Many years later, two other latter-day prophets, echoing President Woodruff's sentiments, made statements regarding the foreordination of the youth of the Church who would come forth in these last days. President Joseph Fielding Smith observed that "our young people are among the most blessed and favored of our Father's children. They are the nobility of heaven, a choice and chosen generation who have a divine destiny. Their spirits have been reserved to come forth in this day when the Gospel is on the earth, and when the Lord needs valiant servants to carry on His great latter-day work." [^26] President Harold B. Lee also reminded the youth of their foreordained place in the history of the world. "You our youth of today are among the most illustrious spirits to be born into mortality in any age of the world. Yours is a noble heritage and a wonderful opportunity." [^27] In 1980, President Ezra Taft Benson delivered this motivating message to the students of Brigham Young University:

For nearly six thousand years, God has held you in reserve to make your appearance in the final days before the Second Coming of the Lord. Every previous gospel dispensation has drifted into apostasy, but ours will not .... God has saved for the final inning some of his strongest children, who will help bear off the Kingdom triumphantly. And that is where you come in, for you are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God.

All through the ages the prophets have looked down through the corridors of time to our day. Billions of the deceased and those yet to be born have their eyes on us. Make no mistake about it—you are a marked generation. There has never been more expected of the faithful in such a short period of time as there is of us. Never before on the face of this earth have the forces of evil and the forces of good been as well organized ....

... Each day we personally make many decisions that show where our support will go. The final outcome is certain—the forces of righteousness will finally win. What remains to be seen is where each of us personally, now and in the future, will stand in this fight—and how tall we will stand. Will we be true to our last-days, foreordained mission? [^28]

Foreordination to Favored Families

Perhaps no other institution or influence can shape our character or prepare us for life more than the family. It is for this reason that families are an important aspect of the doctrine of foreordination. The family unit is paramount in God's designs. Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated that "the Lord operates through families. He himself lives in the family unit; it is his eternal system of government in heaven and on earth, and he always offers as much of his own system to men as they are willing to receive." [^29] In addition to foreordination to lineage, there is evidence to indicate that there is, at least in certain cases, foreordination to favored families. President Harold B. Lee affirmed that, generally, we come to certain families as a reward or blessing for our premortal lives. [^30] Undoubtedly, premortal assignment to specific families is based also on what is best for individual and familial growth and development and what will best further the works and purposes of God.

This foreordination to families is best illustrated in the noble heritage of the latter-day prophets from Joseph Smith to Ezra Taft Benson. Each was prepared for his monumental ministry from the cradle at the fireside of a favored and faithful family. President Brigham Young spoke of the importance of the parentage of Joseph Smith in preparing Joseph for his foreordained prophetic mantle.

It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. [^31]

On the day that Spencer W. Kimball was sustained as prophet and President of the Church, Elder Bruce R. McConkie similarly remarked:

May I take President Spencer W. Kimball as an illustration and pattern of one who was prepared, foreordained, and called to leadership among the Lord's people. He was, it is true, born in the household of faith ....

But more than mortal birth... [is] involved. He was born in the household of faith for a reason .... The fact is, he is a spirit son of God who was called and chosen and foreordained before the foundations of the earth were laid, and he is now fulfilling the destiny designed for him from the preexistence. [^32]

As important as families are in the great plan of happiness and redemption, it seems unlikely that foreordination to favored families would be limited to prophets. It has not been revealed, however, to what extent this foreordination applies. We can assume with confidence that some predesignation to families took place, but again we must be extremely careful in trying to ascribe this principle of foreordination to specific individuals and families. Responding to one particular inquiry from a Latter-day Saint woman, Elder John Taylor published an article entitled "The Origin and Destiny of Woman" in the August 29, 1857 edition of The Mormon. In this response he advanced the notion that, at least in some specific cases, we chose in the premortal life those who would be our earthly parents, spouses, and even children. "You also chose a kindred spirit whom you loved in the spirit world (and who had permission to come to this planet and take a tabernacle), to be your head, stay, husband and protector on the earth and to exalt you in eternal worlds. All these were arranged, likewise the spirits that should tabernacle through your lineage." [^33] The difficulty with this statement, however, is knowing how far Elder Taylor intended the principle to be applied. The question remains—Did this reference to a pre-mortal choice of companion and family apply specifically to the woman who inquired, or was Elder Taylor teaching a broader application of the principle?

While there is evidence of at least some degree of foreordination to families, President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that there was "no scriptural justification... for the belief that we had the privilege of choosing our parents and our life companions in the spirit world." [^34] Addressing this issue in a talk given to seminary and institute teachers in 1966, Elder Harold B. Lee stated that "we have no revealed word" on the extent to which premortal choices of family members were made. He then cautioned that we should not accept or teach ideas that cannot be firmly established in the standard works or by inspired utterances of the living prophets. In 1971, the First Presidency once again declared that "we have no revealed word to the effect that when we were in the preexistent state we chose our parents and our husbands and wives." [^35]

Because of the eternal significance of marriage and families, it is reasonable to assume that there may have been some covenants or choices made in the premortal life and also that special divine guidance may be given here on earth. However, it is important to remember that this may not apply to all of God's children. As President Joseph Fielding Smith stated: "This belief has been advocated by some, and it is possible that in some instances it is true, but it would require too great a stretch of the imagination to believe it to be so in all, or even in the majority of cases. Most likely we came where those in authority decided to send us. Our agency may not have been exercised to the extent of making choice of parents and posterity." [^36]

Foreordination to favored families may come as a reward for premortal righteousness, but, perhaps more important, such foreordination is based on what will best correspond to the capacities of the individual, provide him or his family with optimal opportunities for growth and service, and fulfill the designs and purposes of God. We must remember that our Heavenly Father often sends some of his noble and great spirits to the least likely families because he knows that they have the spiritual capacities to rise above those conditions and, in turn, bring blessings to that entire family. As the Lord taught Isaiah, "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways .... For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8-9.) It is for this reason that we must never attempt to judge someone's premortal character or performance based on parentage or family conditions. While it is true that we believe in the general concept of foreordination to favored families, we do not fully understand its specific application to individual cases. Until more is revealed we are as Paul said: "For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known" (1 Cor. 13:12).

Foreordination to Priesthood Callings

Among those foreordained to the house of Israel were those who were further ordained to specific callings as ministers in the kingdom of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." [^37] Abraham understood this principle and saw its operation in his vision. "Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born" (Abr. 3:22-23; italics added).

Abraham and these noble and great spirits were not foreordained to be "rulers" in the sense of being monarchs, heads of nations, or leaders in a governmental or political sense, but rather to be spiritual leaders in the kingdom of God on earth. To Jeremiah the Lord said: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations" (Jer. 1:5). The great prototype for all priesthood foreordinations is the Savior himself. He was foreordained in the premortal councils to the greatest of all ministries on earth and to the most significant service ever rendered to the family of God. The Apostle Peter referred to Christ as "a lamb without blemish and without spot: Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world" (1 Pet. 1:19-20). All other priesthood foreordinations were patterned after his, and all those thus foreordained were to bear witness of and bring men to that Lamb who was slain from before the foundation of the earth. President Wilford Woodruff declared, "In every dispensation the Lord has had those who were fore-ordained to do a certain work. We all dwelt in the presence of God before we came here, and such men as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the ancient Prophets, Jesus and the Apostles received their appointments before the world was made. They were ordained before the foundation of the world to come and tabernacle here in the flesh and to work for the cause of God, and this because of their faith and faithfulness." [^38]

Foreordination to priesthood assignments was not reserved solely for heads of dispensations or for prophets, ancient or modern. Numerous other noble and great spirit sons of God were likewise foreordained to "minister to the inhabitants of the world" and render priesthood service of eternal consequence. President John Taylor noted that "there are thousands of men upon the earth to-day, among the Saints of God, of whom it was decreed before they came that they should occupy the positions they have occupied and do occupy, and many of them have performed their part and gone home; others are left to still fulfill the duties and responsibilities devolving upon them." [^39]

Foreordination to a priesthood assignment involves much more than just a premortal calling to be a prophet, Apostle, General Authority, stake president, or bishop. Relatively few of God's sons were foreordained to become prophets or apostles, but all those who receive the Melchizedek Priesthood in mortality were foreordained. The prophet Alma taught that holders of the high priesthood were "called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceedingly great faith, are called with a holy calling ... this holy calling being prepared from the foundation of the world. ... This high priesthood being after the order of his Son, which order was from the foundation of the world; or in other words, being without beginning of days or end of years, being prepared from eternity to all eternity, according to his foreknowledge of all things" (Alma 13:3, 5, 7; italics added).

Sometimes we may lose sight of the fact that these special priesthood foreordinations were not given just to a few prophets, but to all who, through their premortal faithfulness and diligence, would be called on earth to priesthood service. President Wilford Woodruff reminded us of the significance of these priesthood foreordinations. He spoke of the pre-earth appointments of Joseph Smith and Jeremiah who came forth in the Lord's due time to establish his work on earth. Then he continued, "And so it is the case with tens of thousands of the Elders of Israel. The Lord Almighty has conferred upon you the Holy Priesthood and made you the instrument in His hands to build up this kingdom. Do we contemplate these things as fully as we ought? Do we realize that the eyes of all the heavenly hosts are over us? Then let us do our duty. [^40]

Foreordination to Special Missions in Mortality

There is another type of foreordination which Elder Neal A. Maxwell labeled "foredesignation" to distinguish it from a priesthood ordination. [^41] Mary, the mortal mother of Jesus, is an example of one who was foredesignated to a significant and sacred mission in life (see 1 Ne. 11:18). Many other women through the ages and throughout the nations of the earth have shaped the history of the world and furthered the works of God through their service to their families, the Church, and society. Surely many righteous daughters of God were foredesignated to missions of secular as well as spiritual significance. Though not ordained to priesthood callings, their foredesignations to such vital missions in mortality are no less important. President Spencer W. Kimball emphasized that "we had full equality as his spirit children. We have equality as recipients of God's perfected love for each of us .... Within those great assurances, however, our roles and assignments differ. These are eternal differences. ... Remember, in the world before we came here, faithful women were given certain assignments while faithful men were foreordained to certain priesthood tasks. While we do not now remember the particulars, this does not alter the glorious reality of what we once agreed to." [^42]

In addition to applying to faithful women, the principle of foredesignation would likewise apply to men who, though not holders of the priesthood nor members of the kingdom of God on earth, were designated to fulfill special missions and assignments in mortality. This foredesignation of certain men and women was based on talents and abilities acquired premortally that would enable them to further God's work on earth. The prophet Isaiah identified Cyrus of Persia as one thus foredesignated to a special work. Isaiah prophesied of that important mission almost two hundred years before the birth of Cyrus (see Isa. 44:28; 45:1). Others so foredesignated were seen in vision by Nephi. These include Columbus and other great explorers (see 1 Ne. 13:12), the pilgrim founders of America (see 1 Ne. 13:13-16), and those patriots who framed the American constitution and founded a government that would make it possible for the gospel to be restored in the last days (see 1 Ne. 13:17-19). These men, identified in the scriptures, were "called and prepared" and "raised up" by the Lord for these important missions in mortality. It is only logical to assume that much of that preparation was done premortally. President Joseph F. Smith taught that Christ "was the inspirer of the ancient philosophers, Pagan or Israelite, as well as of the great characters of modern times. Columbus, in discovery; Washington, in the struggle for freedom; Lincoln, in emancipation and union; Bacon, in philosophy; Franklin, in statesmanship and diplomacy; Stephenson, in steam; Watts, in song; [and] Edison, in electricity ... found in Christ the source of their wisdom and the marvelous truths which they advocated." He went on to add that "Calvin, Luther, Melanchthon, and all the reformers," were inspired in doing what they did "for the amelioration, liberty and advancement of the human race. They paved the way for the more perfect gospel of truth to come." [^43] No doubt there were numerous other eminent men who, though not priesthood holders, were uniquely qualified and thus, premortally foredesignated to significant missions. [^44] Likewise, even today, we are the beneficiaries of significant service to humanity rendered by honorable men and women with unique talents and qualifications. Elder M. Russell Ballard has suggested that modern technological inventions and innovations "have been inspired and created for the building of the kingdom of God. If others use them, that's fine, but their basic purpose is to help spread the gospel." [^45] It may be that great inventors, scientists, academicians, philosophers, and others, both in and out of the kingdom of God on earth, were also foredesignated to perform such great works on earth as to further God's "work and glory" and to bless humanity.

The fulfillment of these foreordinations and predesignations, whether they be to lineages, nations, families, priesthood callings, or to special missions in life, is dependent upon faithfulness and diligence on earth. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated, "All of the Lord's work is planned and prepared in advance, and those who are called and chosen to do the work receive their commission and ordination from him, first in the preexistence and then, if they remain true and faithful, again here in mortality." [^46]

Fulfilling Our Foreordinations

We may not recognize in this lifetime all of our foreordinations. There may be glimpses given in patriarchal blessings and other inspired statements. We may even experience what Elder Neal A. Maxwell described as "sudden surges of deja vu" wherein intuition and intimations from beyond the veil remind us of who we were and who we may become. It is not as important to identify our specific foreordinations as it is to live in such a manner that the Lord may lead us to fulfill those premortal designations. "Foreordination is like any other blessing," said Elder Maxwell. "It is a conditional bestowal subject to our faithfulness." [^47]

In the October 1973 general conference, President Harold B. Lee utilized D&C 121:34-36 to illustrate the point that earthly faithfulness is required for fulfillment of premortal foreordinations. He taught that "many are called [foreordained], but few are chosen [foreordination fulfilled]." The revelation then asks, "And why are they not chosen?" In other words, why are some premortally foreordained and yet fail on earth to live up to the blessings, responsibilities, and missions that were conferred upon them? The scripture, President Lee explained, suggests two answers—first, "Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world," and second, because they "aspire to the honors of men" (D&C 121:35). [^48] This revelation is true for principles of priesthood power on earth, and it also teaches us that foreordinations can be fulfilled "only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:36). There are many, as the Lord stated, that fail to measure up to their premortal potential and foreordinations because of improper priorities and impure motives. Elder Neal A. Maxwell has also reminded us that "just because we were chosen 'there and then,' surely does not mean we can be indifferent 'here and now.'... Those called and prepared must also prove 'chosen, and faithful.' (See Rev. 17:14; D&C 121:34-36.)" [^49]

The doctrine of foreordination carries with it heavy responsibilities. We cannot neglect those responsibilities but must be constantly vigilant in living so that our foreordinations, whatever they may be, can be fulfilled and God's work may be furthered. President Wilford Woodruff counselled:

We have been raised up of the Lord to take this kingdom and bear it off. This is our duty; but if we neglect our duty and set our hearts upon the things of this world, we will be sorry for it. We ought to understand the responsibility that rests upon us. We should gird up our loins and put on the whole armor of God .... Then let us do our duty. Let us keep the commandments of God, let us be faithful to the end, so that when we go into the spirit world and look back upon our history we may be satisfied. [^50]

As the Church continues its phenomenal growth in the last days, we stand as witnesses of the fulfilling of Nebuchadnezzar's dream that the gospel would "roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth" (D&C 65:2; see also Dan. 2:31-45). We cannot stand on the sidelines of life and merely watch the marvelous unfolding of God's designs. We were not foreordained to be spectators but rather participants in the spectacular scenes of the last days. Lucifer's war of wickedness and efforts to destroy the plan increase proportionately to the spiritual growth and strength of the Church. The "noble and great ones" who were reserved for this day are being tested and tempted. Satan is seeking to shake us from the service which we were foreordained to perform in these most crucial yet perilous times. We must follow the counsel of the living prophets to carefully cultivate those characteristics that will enable us to fulfill our foreordained missions. Speaking to students at Brigham Young University, Elder M. Russell Ballard gave this wise counsel that is relevant to all, regardless of age or station in life:

Do not let one day go by... when you do not demonstrate to the Lord that you are reliable, that you are trustworthy, that you are dedicated .... that you are on his side, for he is getting acquainted with the young men and the young women of this Church today .... Every day of your life he gets acquainted. Then, after he has watched you and after you have demonstrated your faithfulness by your service and by your ability to keep your priorities straight in your life, along comes a need for a high councilor, a Primary president, a Relief Society president, a bishop, or a stake president; and the Lord makes it known to the responsible priesthood leader that you are ready because you have lived up to the commitments and promises that you made before you were ever born.

... I would not be a bit surprised if many of you who are sitting here would be sitting in stake presidencies, in bishoprics, in stake leadership assignments, on high councils, and, yes, there may even be one of you or more sitting in the general councils of the Church. You will only sit there, you will only receive the call, if you are ready ....

Resolve what you have to do to be better and leave... with this commitment: "Heavenly Father, I will be ready in every way—spiritually, physically, emotionally—for whatever it is that thou wouldst have me do in the building of thy Kingdom on the earth." [^51]

An understanding of the doctrine of foreordination can enrich our vision and increase our incentive. However, greater blessings of glory and joy await those who not only know the doctrine, but who do the works of righteousness (see John 13:17).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, "Preexistence of Man," unpublished lecture transcript of Summer 1967 Seminary and Institute Teacher Seminar, Brigham Young University, copy in author's file. Audiotape of lecture is available in the BYU Religious Education Audiovisual Library.
[^2] Larry E. Dahl, "The Preexistence," an unpublished paper in the possession of the author, Brigham Young University, 1987, p. 2.
[^3] George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, 2 vols., edited by Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), 1:7-8.
[^4] Neal A. Maxwell, "Patience," Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1979), pp. 219-220. Devotional address delivered at Brigham Young University, November 27, 1979.
[^5] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 15:245.
[^6] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 51.
[^7] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 17th edition (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), pp. 13-14.
[^8] Neal A. Maxwell, "Patience," Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1979), p. 219. Devotional address delivered at Brigham Young University, November 27, 1979.
[^9] Orson Hyde, in Journal of Discourses, 7:315.
[^10] Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-1981), 1:23, 25.
[^11] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 5th ed., 1972), 5:138-139.
[^12] Joseph P. Blank, "The Miracle of May Lemke's Love," Reader's Digest, October 1982, pp. 81-86. This story can also be seen on 16mm film and video, "May's Miracle," produced by Filmmaker's Library, Inc., New York City, 1981; and it is available from the producers and through BYU Media Services.
[^13] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, edited by Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 149, 173.
[^14] Spencer W. Kimball, as quoted in JoAnn Ottley, "A Musical Stewardship-Teacher of Life," A Woman's Choices (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), p. 97; as quoted in Wilma Gardner, "Finding Joy in the Savior's Plan," Ensign, March 1988, p. 73.
[^15] Joseph Smith, The Words of Joseph Smith, edited by Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 360.
[^16] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954), 1:60.
[^17] Orson F. Whitney and Joseph F. Smith, as quoted in Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), pp. 45-46. See also Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939), pp. 12-13.
[^18] George Q. Cannon, in Deseret Weekly (Salt Lake City, April 7, 1889), 38:676-677; cited also in George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, 1:4.
[^19] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 2:159-160. See also Alvin R. Dyer, The Meaning of Truth (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961), pp. 33-36.
[^20] Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, October 1973, p. 7.
[^21] David O. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay, compiled by Llewelyn R. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), pp. 228-230.
[^22] Alvin R. Dyer, The Meaning of Truth (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961), pp. 23-24.
[^23] First Presidency statement, February 15, 1978, as quoted in Spencer J. Palmer, The Expanding Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), p. v.
[^24] Erastus Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 23:186-187.
[^25] Wilford Woodruff, "Our Lineage," Topical Outline to the Way to Perfection, (Salt Lake City: Genealogical Society of Utah, 1932), p. 4.
[^26] Joseph Fielding Smith, in Church News, July 10, 1971, p. 14.
[^27] Harold B. Lee, Youth and the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 169.
[^28] Ezra Taft Benson, "In His Steps," Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1980), pp. 59-60.
[^29] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 35.
[^30] Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, October 1973, p. 7.
[^31] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:289-290.
[^32] Bruce R. McConkie, "God Foreordains His Prophets and His People," Ensign, May 1974, p. 72.
[^33] John Taylor, "The Origin and Destiny of Woman," in The Mormon , as cited in N. B. Lundwall, compiler, The Vision (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), pp. 145-148.
[^34] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 44.
[^35] The First Presidency, 1971, as cited in Steve F. Gilliland, "I Have a Question," Ensign, June 1977, p. 40.
[^36] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, pp. 44-45. Elder Boyd K. Packer also cautioned against the idea of a "predestined love" in an address entitled "Eternal Love" given at the BYU Tri-Stake Fireside, November 3, 1963.
[^37] Joseph Smith, History of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), 6:364.
[^38] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 18:114.
[^39] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 23:177.
[^40] 40. Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 22:334-335.
[^41] 41. Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1985, p. 21.
[^42] 42. Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, edited by Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 315-316.
[^43] 43. Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939), p. 31.
[^44] 44. See Bruce R. McConkie, "God Foreordains His Prophets and His People," Ensign, May 1974, p. 73. In a speech delivered in 1877, President Wilford Woodruff spoke of the signers of the Declaration of Independence and "fifty other eminent men" who had been raised up by the Lord for their missions. For a complete description of his vision of these men and an account of the temple ordinances completed in their behalf, see Journal of Discourses, 19:229.
[^45] 45. M. Russell Ballard, in Church News, March 8, 1980, p. 4.
[^46] 46. Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, May 1974, p. 73.
[^47] 47. Neal A. Maxwell, "Meeting the Challenges of Today," Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1978), p. 152.
[^48] 48. See Harold B. Lee, "Understanding Who We Are Brings Self-Respect," Ensign, January 1974, p. 5.
[^49] 49. Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1985, p. 21.
[^50] 50. Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 22:334-335.
[^51] 51. M. Russell Ballard, "You—the Leaders in 1988," Ensign, March 1979, pp. 71-73.
