Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

8 "Trailing Clouds of Glory"

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, speaking to religious educators at Brigham Young University, taught, "We just don't realize how much of everything we have in this life is based on preexistence." [^1] We have already seen how the doctrine of foreordination is related to the diversity among spirits in the premortal world and how foreordination subsequently affects many aspects of our situation and experience in life. In addition to foreordination to lineages, nations, families, and earthly missions, it appears from the inspired statements of modern prophets that the premortal life affects our lives in many other ways. We may not even be able to discern all of the effects of that previous life, but we can recognize at least some of the impact that experience has on our lives here. Wordsworth alluded to this thought when he poetically penned that we come into this world "not in entire forgetfulness,/And not in utter nakedness,/But trailing clouds of glory do we come/From God." Our trailing clouds of glory are those attitudes and aptitudes which we bring with us from afar and which influence and shape our lives here on earth. As one LDS scholar observed, "It might be said that we come to earth with a type of spiritual 'luggage,' having to a large extent packed our own bags." [^2] Packed in the "premortal baggage" we bring to earth are individual capacities and characteristics, likes and dislikes, and dispositions and desires. However, all this spiritual luggage we take on our trip through mortality is shrouded by a veil of forgetfulness.

The Veil of Forgetfulness

Each of us comes into this life without a recollection of our former home. There may be several reasons why God imposed this memory block on all of us as we enter mortality, but for now we do not fully understand his reasons. The scriptures offer no explanation. Some significant statements, however, appear in sermons of some of the latter-day seers. By their seeric gift to perceive hidden truths, these prophets assist us in discerning more clearly the role of the veil in our mortal sojourn. President George Q. Cannon taught:

It is not as it was before. We were then in the presence of God. Now there is a veil between us and our Father, and we are left to ourselves, to a certain extent. We are left to be governed by the influences that we invite, and there are any number of evil influences around us, whispering into our ears and hearts all manner of things ....

It is a part of the plan of salvation, I say, connected with man's existence upon the earth that God should thus withdraw Himself, as it were, from man and that a veil should be drawn between Himself and man and that if knowledge of Him be obtained, it should be obtained by the exercise of great faith and continued labor on the part of His children. [^3]

Elder Neal A. Maxwell has further explained how the veil of forgetfulness is a merciful gift from our loving Father in Heaven, drawn over our minds for our benefit and development.

We define the veil as the border between mortality and eternity; it is also a film of forgetting which covers the memories of earlier experiences ....

There are poignant and frequent reminders of the veil, adding to our sense of being close but still outside ....

But mercifully the veil is there. k is fixed by the wisdom of God for our good. It is no use being impatient with the Lord over that reality, for it is clearly a condition to which we agreed so long ago .... Without the veil, we would lose that precious insulation which would constantly interfere with our mortal probation and maturation. Without the veil, our brief mortal walk in a darkening world would lose its meaning-for one would scarcely carry the flashlight of faith at noonday and in the presence of the Light of the World. Without the veil, we could not experience the gospel of work and the sweat of our brow. If we had the security of having already entered into God's rest, certain things would be unneeded ....

Fortunately, the veil keeps the first, second, and third estates separate-hence our sense of separateness. The veil avoids having things "compound in one" to our everlasting detriment (2 Ne. 2:11). We are cocooned, as it were, in order that we might truly choose. Once, long ago, we chose to come to this very setting where we could choose. It was an irrevocable choice. And the veil is the guarantor that our ancient choice will be honored. [^4]

Elder Orson Pratt also taught that the "veil" was a necessary part of our mortal probation. He taught that even Jesus' premortal knowledge was veiled that he might be "left, as it were, in the very depth of humility, beginning at the very first principles of knowledge and growing up from grace to grace, as the Scriptures say, from one degree to another, until he received a fullness from his Father." Elder Pratt then applied this same principle to our own situation in life.

Now if his knowledge was forgotten, and his judgment taken away, why not ours? We find this to be the case. What person among all the human family can comprehend what took place in his first existence? No one, it is blotted from the memory, and I think there is great wisdom manifested in withholding the knowledge of our previous existence. Why? Because we could not, if we had all our preexistent knowledge accompanying us into this world, show to our Father in the heavens and to the heavenly host that we would be in all things obedient; in other words, we could not be tried as the Lord designs to try us here in this state of existence, to qualify us for a higher state hereafter. In order to try the children of men, there must be a degree of knowledge withheld from them, for it would be no temptation to them if they could understand from the beginning the consequences of their acts, and the nature and results of this and that temptation. But in order that we may prove ourselves before the heavens obedient and faithful in all things, we have to begin at the very first principles of knowledge, and be tried from knowledge to knowledge and from grace to grace, until, like our elder brother, we finally overcome and triumph over all our imperfections, and receive with him the same glory that he inherits, which glory he had before the world was. [^5]

As was the case with Jesus, it may also be with us that the more we grow in grace through righteousness and increased spirituality, the more the veil thins and the greater our understanding of the premortal world becomes. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views.Â [^6] Perhaps we will not regain all of the knowledge we possessed in the premortal world until we receive a fulness in the Father's kingdom. We can, however, recapture some of our forgotten premortal understanding through following in the footsteps of Christ, the Great Exemplar. President Joseph F. Smith explained:

I believe that our Savior is the ever-living example to all flesh in all these things ....

... He is our example. The works he did, we are commanded to do .... If Christ knew beforehand, so did we. But in coming here, we forgot all, that our agency might be free indeed, to choose good or evil, that we might merit the reward of our own choice and conduct. But by the power of the Spirit, in the redemption of Christ, through obedience, we often catch a spark from the awakened memories of the immortal soul, which lights up our whole being as with the glory of our former home. [^7]

ÂThis inner serenity," stated Elder Neal A. Maxwell, "which the believer knows as he brushes against the veil is cousin to certitude. The peace it brings surpasses our understanding and certainly our capacity to explain .... Even when the veil is parted briefly, it will be on His terms, not ours.Â [^8]

There are those who are in the world and of the world who may use their lack of remembrance of our premortal home as evidence that we had no such existence. To those who would deny a premortal life simply because they cannot remember it, the following words resound. "The vail is thick between us and the country whence we came," declared Elder Orson Hyde. ÂWe cannot see clearly-we cannot clearly comprehend-we have forgotten!... But our forgetfulness cannot alter the facts.Â [^9]

Talents and Aptitudes

We have learned from modern revelation that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in his life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.) There are two dimensions to this concept-premortal to mortal and mortal to postmortal. This principle also applies to talents and aptitudes that spirits in the premortal world acquired through their "diligence and obedience" there. They bring with them to mortality these aptitudes in much the same way as we will take our intelligence and knowledge with us "in the world to come." Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained the application of this principle to the premortal world in this manner:

Being subject to law, and having their agency, all the spirits of men, while yet in the Eternal Presence, developed aptitudes, talents, capacities, and abilities of every sort, kind, and degree. During the long expanse of life which then was, an infinite variety of talents and abilities came into being. As the ages rolled, no two spirits remained alike. Mozart became a musician; Einstein centered his interest in mathematics; Michelangelo turned his attention to painting ....

The Lord endowed us all with agency; he gave us laws that would enable us to advance and progress and become like him; and he counseled and exhorted us to pursue the course leading to glory and exaltation. He himself was the embodiment and personification of all good things. Every desirable characteristic and trait dwelt in him in its eternal ful-ness. All of his obedient children started to become like him in one way or another. There was as great a variety and degree of talent and ability among us there as there is among us here. Some excelled in one way, others in another ....

... When we pass from preexistence to mortality, we bring with us the traits and talents there developed. True we forget what went before because we are here being tested, but the capacities and abilities that then were ours are yet resident within us. Mozart is still a musician; Einstein retains his mathematical abilities; Michelangelo his artistic talent; Abraham, Moses, and the prophets their spiritual talents and abilities .... And all men with their infinitely varied talents and personalities pick up the course of progression where they left it off when they left the heavenly realms. [^10]

These previously acquired talents and abilities are evident in many ways here on earth. Mozart was an accomplished musician and composer at an age when other children are still playing with building blocks. In addition to child prodigies such as Mozart, there are often people who seem to have special inclinations that enable them to develop talents and skills more readily than others. We usually refer to them as "gifted" people or "naturals." It appears that the mortal manifestation of their abilities is enhanced by some previous experience. President Joseph Fielding Smith made this important statement in response to the question, "Why are some spirits born into the world with more ability than others?":

The spirits of men were created with different dispositions and likes and talents. Some evidently were mechanically inclined, from them have come our inventors. Some loved music and hence they have become great musicians. We evidently brought to this world some if not all of the inclinations and talents that we had there. The fact that one person finds one bent, like mathematics easy and another finds it difficult, may, in my judgment, be traced to the spirit existence. So with other talents and skills .... It is my judgment that thousands of others were chosen for their special fields because they showed talents and dispositions in that spirit world. [^11]

Sometimes we see dramatic evidence of premortal talents and aptitudes emerging in the most interesting and often inexplicable ways. Several years ago the CBS News program 60 Minutes presented a segment dealing with a unique psychological phenomenon known as the "autistic-savant syndrome." People with this condition possess extraordinary intellectual or artistic abilities even though they are severely mentally retarded. Often the feats performed by an autistic-savant surpass those of the most brilliant of "normal" people. Scientists are puzzled by this phenomenon and find the achievements of such individuals so remarkable that they defy belief and explanation. In the 60 Minutes program three men with this condition were highlighted. One was an artist who produced remarkably beautiful and intricately detailed sculptures of horses; the second possessed unusual intellectual skills demonstrated by his complex mathematical skill and his incredible memory. The third, Leslie Lemke, was a most gifted musician with a unique story of his own. In a touching article entitled "The Miracle of May Lemke's Love," Joseph P. Blank has recounted the remarkable story of Leslie Lemke.

The Milwaukee County General Hospital had a serious problem: a six-month-old infant named Leslie. Mentally retarded and without eyes, the baby also had cerebral palsy. He was a limp vegetable, totally unresponsive to sound or touch. His parents had abandoned him.

The hospital staff didn't know what to do-until a pediatrician mentioned May Lemke, a nurse-governess living nearby. A nurse telephoned May and explained that in all likelihood Leslie would die in a short time. "Would you help us by taking care of him while he lives?" the nurse asked.

"If I take him he certainly will not die, and I will take him," May replied ....

When May accepted the baby, she accepted him as just that, a baby-no different from others-to be taught and loved ....

She bathed him, cuddled him for hours, talked to him, sang to him. He never moved or uttered a sound.

Year after year she cared for him, but there was no movement. No smile. No tears. No sound. If May had not tied him to the back of the chair he would have toppled over.

May never stopped talking to him. She massaged his back, legs, arms and fingers. She prayed, and sometimes when she prayed she wept and put Leslie's hands to her cheeks so he could feel the tears. "I feel sad right now and I'm crying," she would say.

May refused to consider the child a burden. I did not seek Leslie, so there has to be a reason why I was picked to raise this child, she told herself. God, in his time, will show me the reason.

May was never reluctant to bring Leslie out in public. He was her boy, her love. She intuitively felt that somewhere in the maze of his damaged brain he was trying, and she was proud of him ....

... May took Leslie to a rehabilitation center in Milwaukee. No one thought anything could be done for the boy. There was not a single word of encouragement.

This professional pessimism didn't deter her. She knew that someday Leslie was going to break out of his prison. She just had to help him. She tried to think of a way to get the concept of walking into his mind. He had never made a move to crawl. He had never seen anyone walk.

... Taking steps, [May] would clasp Leslie's hands to her hips in the hope that he would absorb the walking motion. He just slumped and dangled behind her.

The Lemkes then had a chain-link fence erected along the side of their property, and May stood Leslie next to it, thrusting his fingers through the openings. After several weeks he finally got the idea of letting the fence support him. He stood. He was 16.

Then May tried to get him to move along the fence. She never stopped talking to him, encouraging him: "Come on, love, move just a little bit, a little bit." She said this hundreds of times, moving his hands and feet herself. Finally, he moved on his own ....

It was an interminable, grueling struggle, but May never thought of it as a struggle; she was simply striving to help her boy .... Please do something for Leslie, May prayed time and again. He may be 18 years old, but he's still a baby ....

One day she noticed Leslie's index finger moving against a taut piece of string around a package, as if plucking it. Was this a sign? she wondered. What did it mean?

Music! she exclaimed to herself. That's it. Music. From then on the Lemke house was filled with music .... Hour after hour the music played. Leslie gave no indication that he was listening.

May and Joe bought an old upright piano for $250 and placed it in Leslie's bedroom. Repeatedly, May pushed his fingers against the keys to show him that his fingers could make sound. He remained totally indifferent.

It happened in the winter of 1971. May was awakened by the sound of music. It was 3 a.m. Someone was playing Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No. 1. She shook Joe. "Did you leave the radio on?" she asked.

"No," he said.

"Then where's the music coming from?" She swung out of bed and turned on a living-room light. It dimly illuminated Leslie's room. Leslie was at the piano. May saw a smile glowing on his face.

He had never before got out of bed on his own. He had never seated himself at the piano. He had never voluntarily or deliberately struck the keys with his fingers. Now he was actually playing a concerto-and with deftness and confidence.

... Why the music burst out of him on that early-morning hour in late winter is unknown. But come it did, like a gale. His repertoire ranged through the classics, rock, ragtime, country-western and gospel.

... Leslie's skill at the piano steadily increased. His rendition of Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" is a tour de force, flawless and evocative.

And he sings. Before learning to speak clearly he could readily mimic a variety of singers. He has a big, round voice and, when he pulls out all the stops, it can be heard a block away. He can do Luciano Pavarotti in two Italian operas, Jimmy Durante in "Inka Dinka Doo," Louis Armstrong in "Hello, Dolly!" and both parts of the Jeanette MacDonald-Nelson Eddy duet in "Sweethearts."...

As news of Leslie's talent traveled, groups requested him for concerts ....

Leslie played at churches, civic clubs and schools, and for groups of cerebral-palsy and retarded children and their parents. He went on to college, county fairs, local television and finally network television.

He loves performing. Sometimes he will burst into song while sitting in an airport lounge or airliner. People around him are often startled by his first notes, but his closing always is met with exclamations and applause.

There still are many things that Leslie cannot do. Those fingers that perform so brilliantly at the keyboard cannot use a knife or fork. Conversation does not flow easily. But ask what music means to him and he replies with a voice that is firm. "Music," says Leslie, "is love.Â [^12]

(Excerpted with permission from the October 1982 Reader's Digest. Copyright Â© 1982 by The Reader's Digest Assn., Inc.)

Because of our knowledge of the premortal existence, we can perhaps understand better why there is so much diversity in talent, skill, and intellectual aptitude among the people of the world. This doctrine helps us to see more clearly the actual truth of the statement that someone is a "born" artist, musician, teacher, or possessor of other talents or abilities. It may also reveal the literal nature of the description "wise beyond one's years." It must be remembered, however, that although we may come into mortality with specific talents and aptitudes packed in our spiritual luggage, and although some things in life may come easier by virtue of our premortal accomplishments, those capacities must be nurtured and cultivated in this life, as well, in order to fully blossom. President Spencer W. Kimball stressed that we must not neglect those talents and abilities with which we came into the world.

... God has endowed us with talents and time, with latent abilities and with opportunities to use and develop them in his service. He therefore expects much of us, his privileged children ....

The great calamity, as I see it, is when you or I with so much potential grow very little. That is the calamity-when I could be so much and I am so little; when I am satisfied with mediocrity... in whatever I am going to do with my life; when I am satisfied with this, oh, that is a sad, sad day because it has an everlasting and eternal influence upon me. [^13]

Let us get our instruments tightly strung and our melodies sweetly sung. Let us not die with our music still in us. Let us rather use this precious mortal probation to move confidently and gloriously upward toward eternal life which God our Father gives to those who keep his commandments. [^14]

As President Kimball so eloquently expressed, the Lord expects a great deal from us. We cannot be slothful in developing those skills which may be latent in our spirits, and we must also be diligent in acquiring new talents and aptitudes as well. Not having acquired certain capacities in the premortal life certainly does not preclude us from gaining them here. Indeed, that is part of the reason for our venture into mortality. Since some talents and abilities are not as readily apparent as others, there are those who may think that they did not come into this world with premortally developed abilities or that they have no capacity to develop any. It may not be immediately obvious which talents we packed in our spiritual luggage, but we must be diligent nonetheless, for as the Prophet Joseph taught, "All the spirits that God ever sent into this world are susceptible of enlargement.Â [^15] The Lord also revealed to the Prophet "that every man may improve upon his talent, that every man may gain other talents, yea, even an hundred fold" (D&C 82:18). Therefore, we cannot neglect the fact that the Lord charged all spirits coming into mortality to "seek... earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given;... they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited" (D&C 46:8-9).

Dispositions and Desires

The Book of Mormon prophet Amulek counseled us not to procrastinate repentance, "for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world" (Alma 34:34). Just as the attitudes and inclinations we acquire in mortality follow us into the spirit world at death, it makes sense that propensities, dispositions, preferences, and even personality traits, to an extent, come with us into mortality from our premortal home. President Joseph Fielding Smith affirmed this idea when he said:

Notwithstanding this fact that our recollection of former things was taken away, the character of our lives in the spirit world has much to do with our disposition, desires and mentality here in mortal life. The spirit influences the body to a great extent, just as the body in its desires and cravings has an influence on the spirit .... Environment and many other causes, however, have great influence on the progress and destiny of man, but we must not lose sight of the fact that the characteristics of the spirit, which were developed through many ages of a former existence, play a very important part in our progression through mortal life. [^16]

As President Smith pointed out, other factors such as environment and heredity influence our lives. It is interesting, however, to observe great differences even among people who share the same genetics and environment, as is often the case within families. It is not uncommon for parents to observe vast differences in personality, attitude, ambition, and many other traits among their children. Each is unique, even though he or she may have much in common with the rest of the family. One child may have tendencies to be rebellious or lazy, whereas another may be hardworking and obedient. One may be extremely outgoing and vivacious, and another shy, reserved, or even withdrawn. Even identical twins often exhibit stark differences in personal attributes. Such differences among children often cause parents to wonder, "How can each child be so different when raised by the same parents, in the same home?" No doubt there are many answers to this question. One major reason, however, is the pre-earth development of dispositions and desires that follow children into mortality like "trailing clouds of glory."

There are still other ways that our premortal inclinations may influence our lives here. A somewhat common way is discussed in the following correspondence between Elder Orson F. Whitney and President Joseph F. Smith.

Elder Whitney asked:

Why are we drawn to certain persons, and they to us, as if we had always known each other? Is it a fact that we always have? Is there something, after all, in that much abused term "affinity" and is this the basis of its claim? At all events, it is just as logical to look back upon fond associations, as it is to look forward to them. We believe that ties formed in this life, will be continued in the life to come; then why not believe that... some of them at least, have been resumed in this state of existence?

President Smith responded to Elder Whitney's inquiry:

I heartily endorse your sentiments respecting congeniality of spirits. Our knowledge of persons and things before we came here, combined with the divinity awakened within our souls through obedience to the Gospel powerfully affects, in my opinion, all our likes and dislikes, and guides our preferences in the course of this life, provided we give careful heed to the admonition of the Spirit.

All those salient truths which come so forcibly to the head and heart seem but the awakening of the memories of the spirit. Can we know anything here that we did not know before we came? Are not the means of knowledge in the first estate equal to those of this? I think that the spirit, before and after this probation, possesses greater facilities, aye, manifold greater, for the acquisition of knowledge, than while manacled and shut up in the prison house of mortality. [^17]

So powerful are those predilections acquired in the premortal realm, pointed out President Joseph F. Smith, that even likes and dislikes here in mortality, including our affinity for certain people, are affected. These "memories of the spirit" influence our lives and attitudes here on earth like echoes from eternity. Speaking of an experience of this type, President George Q. Cannon referred to these spirit memories and gave an example of what some may call dÃ©jÃ vu.

I was a boy when my people gathered with the Saints of God. I was very curious to know the Prophet Joseph, having heard a great deal about him. I happened to be in a large crowd of people where the Prophet was, and I selected him out of that large body of people. There were no means of recognition that I know of which would suggest him to me as the Prophet; but I recognized him as though I had always known him. I am satisfied that I had known him and been familiar with him. There are instances which all of us doubtless have known which have proved to us that there has been a spiritual acquaintance existing between us. We frequently say, "How familiar that person's face is to me." In this way kindred spirits are brought together. We are drawn together by this knowledge and this acquaintanceship which, I have no doubt, was formed anterior to our birth in this state of existence. [^18]

There are surely countless other ways in which our acquisitions from the premortal life have bearing on our mortal lives. In most cases, we probably don't recognize them. Yet, as our lives unfold and as we live righteously so that we may begin to know who we truly are, we begin to understand that although there is a testing veil drawn between our first and second estates, it is only a veil and not a wall. Though our memories of that place may be held back, the "principles we attained unto" were packed in our bags and sent with us to earth. If we thoughtfully examine our lives and our inner selves, we will be amazed to discover that many, if not most, of our talents, aptitudes, dispositions, and desires trace their source to our previous existence. Besides recognizing these things in general, many of us would realize other specific situations unique to us as individuals. We not only are what we are-but, to a large extent, we are what we were. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "We just don't realize how much of everything we have in this life is based on preexistence."

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), 1:98.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1984, pp. 82-83.
[^3] Neal A. Maxwell, "Meeting the Challenges of the Day," Speeches of the Year, (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1978), p. 155.
[^4] Neal A. Maxwell, "Meeting the Challenges of the Day," Speeches of the Year, (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1978), p. 156, 151.
[^5] George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, 2 vols., edited by Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), 1:1-2; as quoted in Carolyn J. Rasmus, "Happiness the Lord's Way," Ensign, March 1988, p. 47.
[^6] Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1985, p. 21.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, "God Foreordains His Prophets and His People," Ensign, May 1974, p. 73.
[^8] George Albert Smith, in Conference Report, October 1906, p. 47, as cited in Roy W. Doxey, comp., Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), 3:44.
[^9] James E. Talmage, The Vitality of Mormonism, pp. 280-282, as quoted in Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1978), 3:45-46.
[^10] John A. Widtsoe, "The Worth of Souls," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, October 1934, pp. 189-190.
[^11] Thomas S. Monson, "Status Report on Missionary Work," Ensign, October 1977, p. 11.
[^12] Hyrum M. Smith, in Conference Report, October 1903, pp. 70-71.
[^13] Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, October 1973, p. 10.
[^14] Spencer W. Kimball, "Small Acts of Service," Ensign, December 1974, pp. 2, 5.
[^15] Neal A. Maxwell, "When the Heat of the Sun Cometh," unpublished address delivered at Young Adult fireside, Salt Lake Tabernacle, May 20, 1979; transcript of this talk in the possession of the author.
[^16] Ezra Taft Benson, "Insights: We Seek That Which Is Praiseworthy," Ensign, July 1975, pp. 62-63.
[^17] Orson F. Whitney and Joseph F. Smith, as quoted in Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), pp. 45-46. See also Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939), pp. 12-13.
[^18] George Q. Cannon, in Deseret Weekly (Salt Lake City, April 7, 1889), 38:676-677; cited also in George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, 1:4.
