Brent L. Top, Life Before ( 1988)

9 "Of Him Unto Whom Much Is Given Much Is Required"

The restoration of the true doctrines of the gospel of Jesus Christ was a gradual process rather than a single event. The Prophet Joseph Smith received inspired information "line upon line" from time to time. Upon receiving one such revelation, recorded in the Book of Moses, Joseph gratefully acknowledged that "amid all the trials and tribulations we had to wade through, the Lord, who well knew our infantile and delicate situation, vouchsafed for us a supply of strength, and granted us ‘line upon line of knowledge—here a little and there a little,’ of which the following was a precious morsel."[^1] It could also be said that the restoration of the doctrine of man's premortal existence came to Joseph "line upon line… here a little and there a little." We come to a more acute awareness of the import and impact of this doctrine in our own lives in a like manner. It is to us, today, a most "precious morsel" of truth given to us by a loving Father to be, as Joseph declared, "a supply of strength." While our knowledge and understanding of the premortal life is incomplete, it will continue to expand as other "precious morsels" of the doctrine are unfolded before us. Even from the limited knowledge that we now possess come blessings of insight and inspiration and an enrichment of our earthly experience. We must remember, however, that with such blessings also come important opportunities and weighty responsibilities. The Lord has reminded us, "For of him unto whom much is given much is required" (D&C 82:3).

Blessings

One of the great blessings accompanying the knowledge of the premortal realm and our very real relationship to God is the perspective that we gain regarding the challenges of this life. Without this knowledge it would appear that God is arbitrary or even cruel. But with the restored truth of the premortal life, we can, as Elder Boyd K. Packer stated, "yield to the discipline of a loving Father and accept even the very hard lessons of life.[^2] The enhanced understanding of our premortal experience not only expands our view of the eternal future and eternal past but also gives us a clearer vision of why we are here on earth. "We can cope with what seem to be very dark days and difficult developments," explained Elder Neal A. Maxwell. "We will have a true perspective about ‘things as they really are,’ and we can see in them a great chance to contribute." When this doctrine is "properly understood and humbly pursued," continued Elder Maxwell, it "can help us immensely in coping with the vicissitudes of life.[^3]

The blessings associated with this knowledge are more than merely enlarged perspective. The Father also compassionately reminds us of our roots to encourage and motivate us. As we face the tasks and trials of mortality, we may sometimes feel downtrodden and discouraged, our reservoirs of spiritual strength depleted. It is at these crucial moments that our understanding of the role of premortal existence in our lives can become an ardent ally. This profound doctrine encourages, inspires, and motivates us to greater heights. It is, as Elder Neal A. Maxwell described, "a flash from the mirror of memory that beckons us forward toward a far horizon."

When in situations of stress we wonder if there is any more in us to give, we can be comforted to know that God, who knows our capacity perfectly, placed us here to succeed. No one was foreordained to fail or to be wicked. When we have been weighed and found wanting, let us remember that we were measured before and we were found equal to our tasks; and therefore, let us continue, but with a more determined discipleship. When we feel overwhelmed, let us recall the assurance that God will not overprogram us; he will not press upon us more than we can bear (D&C 50:40).

The doctrine of foreordination [and premortal life], therefore, is not a doctrine of repose; it is a doctrine for the second-milers; it can draw out of us the last full measure of devotion.…

Yet, though [this] is a difficult doctrine, it has been given to us by the living God, through living prophets, for a purpose. It can actually increase our understanding of how crucial this mortal estate is and it can encourage us in further good works. This precious doctrine can also help us to go the second mile because we are doubly called.[^4]

Another actuating aspect of these revealed truths is our grasp of the fundamental fact that we have power and potential to become like our Father in Heaven. This is no idle cliché or figurative phrase. Some worldly scoffers find this idea silly, others view it as heresy; but surely it is because they do not understand their own origins. This doctrine joyfully declares that we are literal children of God—we are of his royal lineage—we are heirs to a throne. "We are the children of God," declared President George Q. Cannon, "and as His children there is no attribute we ascribe to Him that we do not possess.… We existed with Him… as His children.… There is not one of us that He has not cared for and caressed. There is not one of us that He has not desired to save and that he has not devised [the] means to save.[^5] Because we know from whence we came, we also know why we are here on earth, where we are heading, and what we must do with our time in this mortal sphere. Millions of God's children are groping in spiritual darkness in a quest for this same understanding. The privilege of having this knowledge and its accompanying blessings, when so many struggle through life without such guidance, places weighty responsibilities upon our shoulders.

Responsibilities

"Premortality is not a relaxing doctrine," proclaimed Elder Maxwell. "For each of us, there are choices to be made, incessant and difficult chores to be done, ironies and adversities to be experienced, time to be well spent, talents and gifts to be well employed."[^6] When it comes to the responsibilities toward God and our fellowmen that are placed upon us by this doctrine, there can be no repose or relenting. Because of the blessings we enjoy by virtue of our knowledge of the premortal life, numerous opportunities for significant service to our Father in Heaven and to our spirit brothers and sisters await us.

Our Responsibilities to Our Heavenly Father

Elder Bruce R. McConkie reminded us that "a knowledge of these wondrous truths places upon us a greater burden than rests upon any other people to follow Christ—to take his yoke upon us, to keep his commandments, to do ever those things that please him. And if we love and serve him, we will give heed to the words of the apostles and prophets whom he sends to reveal and teach his word among us."[^7] Our desire to do whatever is required of us to return to God's presence should be intensified by our innate feelings of homesickness and our enhanced understanding of what our heavenly home was and will yet be. The scriptures soberly caution, however, that "he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation" (D&C 82:3). President George Albert Smith emphasized this message when he stated:

[God] has given us intelligence and wisdom above our fellow men. A knowledge of pre-existence has been given to the Latter-day Saints [D&C 49:17; 93:23, 29] a knowledge that we are here because we kept our first estate, and that we have been given the opportunity of gaining eternal life in the presence of our heavenly Father, by keeping our second estate. [Abr. 3:22-26. We will not be judged as our brothers and sisters of the world are judged, but according to the greater opportunities placed in our keeping. We will be among those who have received the word of the Lord, who have heard His sayings, and if we do them it will be to us eternal life, but if we fail condemnation will result.[^8]

The Lord has given us a "precious morsel" in the doctrine of premortal life to bless our lives and to guide us in the fulfillment of our highest destiny. We cannot ignore or reject the impelling implications of that truth. In this the second estate, we can neither be smug in this special knowledge nor complacent in our commitment to the cause of Christ. Elder James E. Talmage penned, "Man is untrue to his divine lineage and birthright... when he turns away from the truth, or deliberately chooses to walk in darkness while the illuminated path is open to his tread.[^9]

Our Responsibilities to Our Fellowmen

King Benjamin plainly taught that our charge to serve God is intimately intertwined with our responsibilities toward our fellowmen. "I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God" (Mosiah 2:17). The Savior, likewise, declared that there are two commandments, upon which "hang all the law and the prophets"—love God and love thy neighbor (see Matt. 22:37-40). As the knowledge and spiritual understanding of our premortal existence intensifies our love for our Father in heaven and his Son, Jesus Christ, and increases our determination to serve them and keep their commandments, so should the sense of service and commitment to compassion likewise swell within our souls. John the Beloved taught that we cannot keep the first great commandment without also keeping the second.

If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?

And this commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love his brother also. (1 Jn. 4:20-21.)

We who understand the literal nature of the brotherhood of humanity possess a greater obligation to serve others. By virtue of our baptismal covenants and our knowledge of how each of us is truly related, we recognize that we cannot love and serve God and neglect our responsibilities to others. Alma taught us that our covenant with God includes a promise to, first, "stand as a witness of God at all times and in all things, and in all places," and, second, be "willing to bear one another's burdens... mourn with those that mourn... comfort those that stand in need of comfort" (see Mosiah 18:8-9). Elder John A. Widtsoe taught that, in addition to our mortal covenants, we made premortal covenants that committed us to the Father's work and glory—"to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

In our preexistent state, in the day of the great council, we made a certain agreement with the Almighty. The Lord proposed a plan, conceived by him. We accepted it. Since the plan is intended for all men, we became parties to the salvation of every person under that plan. We agreed, right then and there, to be not only saviors for ourselves but measurably, saviors for the whole human family. We went into a partnership with the lord. The working out of the plan became not merely the Father's work, and the Savior's work, but also our work.[^10]

Service to Our Fellowmen Through Missionary Efforts

Our lives are blessed by the knowledge that has come to us through the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The insight and inspiration that we have enjoyed regarding our premortal life with God adds to the abundant life which Christ has promised (see John 10:10). As valuable as this knowledge is to us, we cannot selfishly keep it to ourselves or we will lose the blessings associated with that knowledge. "The eternal truth is," wrote President Thomas S. Monson, "that which we willingly share, we keep; and that which we selfishly keep to ourselves, we lose." [^11] While we bask in the inspired illumination of the restored truths of the gospel, "there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men..., who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it" (D&C 123:12). Because we have come to greater light and truth—specifically the truth of who we are and from whence we came—a greater obligation rests upon us to "waste and wear out our lives in bringing to light all the hidden things of darkness" (D&C 123:13). Elder Hyrum M. Smith, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve and son of President Joseph F. Smith, implored the members of the Church:

You Latter-day Saints ought to praise God; but in your thankfulness for the greater blessings which you enjoy, you ought not to denounce others because they have not so much good as you have. No; our whole souls should be filled with pity because of their condition, and we should sympathize with them because of their ignorance and blindness because they are being led by blind guides. We should go forth among them with the sole desire of our hearts to manifest unto them that which God has revealed unto us, and carry to them that which has made us happy, and which has made us in very deed the Church and people of God. That should be the feeling of the Latter-day Saints.[^12]

Not only should we boldly and unwearyingly proclaim the gospel message to all of our spirit siblings, whom we knew and loved premortally, but also our lives should reflect the profound truths contained in the simple phrase, "I am a child of God." The doctrine of premortal life and the universal brotherhood of man places upon us a responsibility to share these truths with others by both precept and example. President Harold B. Lee, in his last general conference address, petitioned us to conform our personal lives to the divine image of God inherent in each of us so that we can have greater influence on others.

I would charge you to say again and again to yourselves ... "I am a [son or a daughter] of God" and by so doing, begin today to live closer to those ideals which will make your life happier and more fruitful because of an awakened realization of who you are.

God grant that each of us here today may so live that all among us, and with us, may see, not us, but that which is divine and comes from God. With that vision of what those who have lost their way may become, my prayer is that they may receive strength and resolution to climb higher and higher and upward and onward to that great goal of eternal life and also that I may do my part in seeking to show by example, as well as by precept, that which will be the best of which I am capable of doing.[^13]

Strengthening Our Fellowmen Through Compassionate Service

If the veil of forgetfulness were lifted from our minds temporarily so that we could remember who our former friends and dearest companions were in the premortal world, we undoubtedly would view the needs of our earthly fellowmen in sharper perspective. We would more clearly recognize our neighbors, acquaintances, and even our enemies, as members of our own spirit family. As Latter-day Saints, however, we should not need to have the veil lifted, because we already know by revelation that we are, in truth, brothers and sisters to every inhabitant of the earth. With this knowledge, the Savior's words "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me" (Matt. 25:40) take on a more literal, rather than merely symbolic, meaning. Now we, of all people, should recognize that our actions toward others have impact on the entire family of God. Our enlarged understanding of the premortal world gives richer meaning to the inspired words of John the Beloved.

Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

But whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?

My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth.

Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.

He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love....

...If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. (1 Jn. 3:16-18; 4:7, 11; italics added.)

While the rest of the world speaks of love for fellowman in the context of a simply symbolic view of "universal brotherhood," we have the awesome obligation, by virtue of our vision of the literal relationship of humanity, to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees" (D&C 81:5). "The more we serve our fellowmen in appropriate ways, the more substance there is to our souls," wrote President Spencer W. Kimball. "We become more significant individuals as we serve others. We become more substantive as we serve others—indeed, it is easier to ‘find’ ourselves because there is so much more of us to find![^14]

The doctrine of premortal life, of our being children of God, can stimulate us toward a more significant sense of service and spirituality, which, if acted upon, enlarges our souls and our sense and testimony of who we really are. Our foreordinations provide opportunities to serve in mortality, not just rewards and recognition for premortal achievement. As we strive to keep our second estate and prove faithful here as we were there, we must continually search for our spiritual roots, finding ourselves and gaining that understanding of our true identity that comes only through keeping both of the great commandments. Elder Neal A. Maxwell, noting that "it has only been in recent times—since people started saying they loved mankind—that neighbors have suffered so much neglect," went on to admonish:

So often what parched and thirsty people need is to be nourished by drinking of deep doctrines and to be revived by the food of fellowship. Giving genuine companionship to the malnourished mortals who have known so little love and so few friends is as vital as food for the starving.

So often we can serve by bathing the wounded and bruised egos of others in the warm waters of deserved commendation.

So often what people need is to be enveloped in the raiment of real response.

So often what people need so much is to be sheltered from the storms of life in the sanctuary of belonging. Such a service cannot be rendered by a selfish people, however, because the response of the selfish will always be there is no room in their inn.

You and I are believers, and preachers of a glorious gospel which can deepen all human relationship now as well as projecting all relationships into eternity....

We, more than others, should not only carry jumper and tow cables in our cars but in our hearts by which means we can send the needed boost or charge of encouragement or the added momentum to mortal neighbors.... Service keeps us from forgetting the Lord our God, because being among and serving our brothers and sisters reminds us that Father is ever there and is pleased when we serve, for while the recipients of our service are our neighbors—they are His children.[^15]

No, the doctrine of premortal life is not a relaxing doctrine. It not only serves to reassure us but also unremittingly reminds us of responsibilities to our Heavenly Father and to each of our spirit siblings. It is a doctrine of perspiration as well as inspiration—a doctrine of required actions as well as renewed acquaintances. As we strive and struggle with the challenges of the second estate, we may often feel overwhelmed and even discouraged. As difficult as our journey through life may seem, that "secret something" that whispers to our souls, "You're a stranger here," also whispers mercifully, "You are not alone." We must hearken to those inklings of immortality and remember that this is where we chose to be—the premortal prospects of which shook the heavens with resounding shouts of joy. As President Ezra Taft Benson reminds us:

A few years ago, we knew our Elder Brother and our Father in Heaven well. We rejoiced at the upcoming opportunity for earth life that could make it possible for us to have a fullness of joy like they had. We could hardly wait to demonstrate to our Father and our Brother, the Lord, how much we loved them and how we would be obedient to them in spite of the earthly opposition of the evil one.

And now we're here—our memories are veiled—and we're showing God and ourselves what we can do. And nothing is going to startle us more when we pass through the veil to the other side than to realize how well we know our Father and how familiar his face is to us. And then, as President Brigham Young said, we're going to wonder why we were so stupid in the flesh.

God loves us. He's watching us, he wants us to succeed, and we'll know someday that he has not left one thing undone for the eternal welfare of each of us. If we only knew it, there are heavenly hosts pulling for us—friends in heaven that we can't remember now, who yearn for our victory. This is our day to show what we can do—what life and sacrifice we can daily, hourly, instantly bring to God. If we give our all, we will get his all from the greatest of all.[^16]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967), 1:98.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1984, pp. 82-83.
[^3] Neal A. Maxwell, "Meeting the Challenges of the Day," Speeches of the Year, (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1978), p. 155.
[^4] Neal A. Maxwell, "Meeting the Challenges of the Day," Speeches of the Year, (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1978), p. 156, 151.
[^5] George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, 2 vols., edited by Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), 1:1-2; as quoted in Carolyn J. Rasmus, "Happiness the Lord's Way," Ensign, March 1988, p. 47.
[^6] Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1985, p. 21.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, "God Foreordains His Prophets and His People," Ensign, May 1974, p. 73.
[^8] George Albert Smith, in Conference Report, October 1906, p. 47, as cited in Roy W. Doxey, comp., Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), 3:44.
[^9] James E. Talmage, The Vitality of Mormonism, pp. 280-282, as quoted in Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1978), 3:45-46.
[^10] John A. Widtsoe, "The Worth of Souls," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, October 1934, pp. 189-190.
[^11] Thomas S. Monson, "Status Report on Missionary Work," Ensign, October 1977, p. 11.
[^12] Hyrum M. Smith, in Conference Report, October 1903, pp. 70-71.
[^13] Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, October 1973, p. 10.
[^14] Spencer W. Kimball, "Small Acts of Service," Ensign, December 1974, pp. 2, 5.
[^15] Neal A. Maxwell, "When the Heat of the Sun Cometh," unpublished address delivered at Young Adult fireside, Salt Lake Tabernacle, May 20, 1979; transcript of this talk in the possession of the author.
[^16] Ezra Taft Benson, "Insights: We Seek That Which Is Praiseworthy," Ensign, July 1975, pp. 62-63.
