ephod or teraphim. 5Afterward the chil- dren of Israel shall return and seek the Lord their God and David their king. They shall fear the Lord and His good- ness in the latter days.

God’s Charge Against Israel Hear the word of the Lord, You children of Israel,

4

For the Lord brings a charge

against the inhabitants of the land:

“There is no truth or mercy

Or knowledge of God in the land.

2 By swearing and lying,

Killing and stealing and committing adultery,

They break all restraint,

With bloodshed upon bloodshed.

3 Therefore the land will mourn;

And everyone who dwells there will waste away

With the beasts of the field

And the birds of the air;

Even the fish of the sea will be taken away.

4 “Now let no man contend, or rebuke another;

For your people are like those who contend with the priest.

5 Therefore you shall stumble in the day;

The prophet also shall stumble with you in the night;

And I will destroy your mother.

2:22 a Literally God Will Sow

2:23 a Hebrew lo-ruhamah b Hebrew

lo-ammi 3:1 a Literally friend or husband

executionofbothpartiesinanadulterousaffair(Lev.

20:10). God cares deeply about this sin. He cares

more deeply about His people.

ItisimportanttounderstandhowmuchHetakes

the initiative. He does not wait passively for us to

come to Him. He is faithful about the task of going

afterus.Eventhoughthereiseveryreasontoreject

and ignore us, God is right there working to win us

in spite of the fact that we reject Him at every turn.

3:4 sacred pillar. These were stone pillars used by

the Canaanites in their worship of Baal and other

gods (2 Kin. 3:2; 10:26–27; 17:10). ephod. This was a

priestly garment.

4:1charge.TheHebrewwordreferstoaformalcom-

plaint charging Israel with breaking the covenant.

mercy.Thismeansloyaltyordevotion.knowledge.

Thisdoesnotrefertointellectualawareness,butto

recognition of God’s authority as Israel’s covenant

Lord.

4:2 swearing and lying, killing and stealing and

committing adultery. Five of the Ten Command-

ments are mentioned here.
