on its feet of iron and clay, and broke them in pieces. 35 Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold were crushed together, and became like chaff from the summer threshing floors; the wind carried them away so that no trace of them was found. And the stone that struck the image became a great moun- tain and filled the whole earth.

36“ This is the dream. Now we will

tell the interpretation of it before the king. 37 You, O king, are a king of kings. For the God of heaven has given you a kingdom, power, strength, and glor y;

38 and wherever the children of men

dwell, or the beasts of the f ield and the birds of the heaven, He has given them into your hand, and has made you ruler over them all—you are this head of gold. 39But af ter you shall arise an- other kingdom inferior to yours; then another, a third kingdom of bronze, which shall rule over all the ear th.

40And the fourth kingdom shall be as

strong as iron, inasmuch as iron breaks in pieces and shatters ever y thing; and like iron that crushes, that kingdom will break in pieces and crush all the others. 41 Whereas you saw the feet and toes, partly of potter’s clay and partly of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; yet the strength of the iron shall be in it, just as you saw the iron mixed with

2:32 a Or sides 2:33 a Or baked clay, and so in verses 34, 35, and 42

in governing its people. third kingdom of bronze. The third kingdom would be the Greek Empire.

2:40 fourth kingdom . . . strong as iron. The fourth kingdom,thelegsofiron,istheonlyonenotspecif- ically identified within the Book of Daniel. Rome is themostlikelychoice,foritsucceededGreece,and was certainly a very strong empire.

2:41–45thekingdomshallbedivided.Somebelieve thatthisisareferencetotheRomanEmpire’sdecline, whenthekingdomwasdividedandthefabricofthe empire was weakening in the early centuries after Christ. In this case the “kingdom which shall never be destroyed” (obviously the kingdom of God) is a spiritual kingdom introduced by Christ at His first coming, and the mountain that grew from the rock would be a reference to the spread of Christianity, whicheventuallywasnamedthestatereligionofthe Roman Empire.

Othersbelievethatverses41–45pointtofuture events that have not yet been fulfilled. When this visioniscomparedwiththefourbeastsofchapter7, itseemsclearthatthefourthkingdomisyettocome. Itistheorizedthatthekingdomofirondoesactually refer to the Roman Empire, which will be revived in some form in the last days, perhaps as a ten-nation confederacy (the ten toes, or the ten horns of the
