Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed - Nego.

23And these three men, Shadrach, Me- shach, and Abed-Nego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning f ier y furnace.

24 Then K ing Nebuchadnez z ar was astonished; and he rose in haste and spoke, saying to his counselors, “Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire?”

They answered and said to the king, “True, O king.”

25“Look!” he answered, “I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire; and they are not hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.”a

Nebuchadnezzar Praises God

26 Then Nebuchadnez zar went near the mouth of the burning fiery furnace and spoke, saying, “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, ser vants of the Most High God, come out, and come here.” Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- Nego came from the midst of the fire.

27And the satraps, administrators, gov- ernors, and the king’s counselors gath- ered together, and they saw these men on whose bodies the fire had no power; the hair of their head was not singed nor were their garments af fected, and the smell of fire was not on them.

28 N e b u chadn e z z ar sp o ke, s ay in g, “Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Me- shach, and Abed-Nego, who sent His Angela and delivered His servants who trusted in Him, and they have frustrated the king’s word, and yielded their bodies, that they should not serve nor worship any god except their own God! 29 There- fore I make a decree that any people, na- tion, or language which speaks anything amiss against the God of Shadrach, Me- shach, and Abed-Nego shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made an ash heap; because there is no other God who can deliver like this.”

3:25 I see four men loose. The fourth man walking withthethreefriendsinthefurnacemayhavebeen anangel.Manybelievethatthiswasanappearance of the preincarnate Christ.

3:28BlessedbetheGodofShadrach,Meshach,and Abed-Nego. Pagan cultures did not deny the exis- tence of other gods, even those of other peoples. NebuchadnezzarwasimpressedwiththeGodofIs- rael, but that did not mean that he recognized that God is the only true god.

4:1 Nebuchadnezzar the king. These verses are a royalproclamationbyNebuchadnezzarconcerning theGodofIsrael,inwhichthekingcelebratedwhat
