the Holy God. And in the days of your father, light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, were found in him; and King Nebuchad- nez z ar your father—your father the king—made him chief of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsay- ers. 12Inasmuch as an excellent spirit, knowledge, understanding, interpreting dreams, solving riddles, and explaining enigmasa were found in this Daniel, whom the king named Belteshaz z ar, now let Daniel be called, and he will give the interpretation.”

The Writing on the Wall Explained

13 Then Daniel was brought in before the king. The king spoke, and said to Daniel, “Are you that Daniel who is one of the captivesa from Judah, whom my father the king brought from Judah? 14I have heard of you, that the Spirit of God is in you, and that light and understand- ing and excellent wisdom are found in you. 15Now the wise men, the astrolo- gers, have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing and make known to me its interpretation, but they could not give the interpreta- tion of the thing. 16And I have heard of you, that you can give interpretations and explain enigmas. Now if you can read the writing and make known to me its interpretation, you shall be clothed with purple and have a chain of gold around your neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.”

17 Then Daniel answered, and said before the king, “Let your gif ts be for yourself, and give your rewards to an- other; yet I will read the writing to the king, and make known to him the in- terpretation. 18 O king, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnez zar your father a k in gdom an d maj es t y, glor y an d honor. 19And because of the majest y that He gave him, all peoples, nations, and languages trembled and feared be- fore him. Whomever he wished, he ex- ecuted; whomever he wished, he kept alive; whomever he wished, he set up; and whomever he wished, he put down.

20But when his hear t was lif ted up, and

5:13 that Daniel who is one of the captives. Daniel was an old man by this time, possibly 80 years old or older.

5:25–28 Mene, Mene, TekeL, Upharsin. Mene means “numbered.” The repetition is for emphasis. God had numbered the days of Belshazzar’s kingdom,
