his spirit was hardened in pride, he was deposed from his k ingly throne, and they to ok his glor y f rom him .

21 Then he was driven from the sons of men, his hear t was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild donkeys. They fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till he knew that the Most High God rules in the kingdom of men, and appoints over it whomever He chooses.

22“But you his son, Belshazzar, have not humbled your heart, although you knew all this. 23And you have lif ted yourself up against the Lord of heaven. They have brought the vessels of His house before you, and you and your lords, your wives and your concubines, have drunk wine from them. And you have praised the gods of silver and gold, bronze and iron, wood and stone, which do not see or hear or know; and the God who holds your breath in His hand and owns all your ways, you have not glo- rified. 24 Then the fingersa of the hand were sent from Him, and this writing was written.

25“And this is the inscription that was written:

MENE,a MENE, TEKEL,b

UPHARSIN.c

26 This is the interpretation of each word. MENE: God has numbered your kingdom, and finished it; 27 TEK EL: You have been weighed in the balances, and found wanting; 28 PE R E S: Your k ing - dom has been divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.” a 29 Then Belshaz- zar gave the command, and they clothed Daniel with purple and put a chain of gold around his neck, and made a proc- lamation concerning him that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

5:12 a Literally untying knots, and so in verse 16 5:13 a Literally of the sons of the captivity 5:24 a Literally palm

5:25 a Literally a mina (50 shekels) from the verb “to number” b Literally a shekel from the verb “to weigh” c Literally and half- shekels from the verb “to divide”

5:28 a Aramaic Paras, consonant with Peres

and the time was up. TekeL means “weighed.” God had weighed Belshazzar’s character, and he did not measure up. Upharsin (the plural of Peres) means “divided.” That very night Babylon would bedividedanddefeatedbytheMedesandthePer- sians.
