between its teeth. And they said thus to it: ‘Arise, devour much flesh!’

6“Af ter this I looked, and there was

another, like a leopard, which had on its back four wings of a bird. The beast also had four heads, and dominion was given to it.

7 “After this I saw in the night visions,

and behold, a fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, exceedingly strong. It had huge iron teeth; it was devouring, breaking in pieces, and trampling the residue with its feet. It was dif ferent from all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten horns. 8I was considering the horns, and there was another horn, a little one, coming up among them, before whom three of the f irst horns were plucked out by the roots. And there, in this horn, were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking pompous words.

Vision of the Ancient of Days

9 “I watched till thrones were put in place,

And the Ancient of Days was seated; His garment was white as snow,

And the hair of His head was like pure wool.

His throne was a fiery flame, Its wheels a burning fire;

10 A fiery stream issued

And came forth from before Him. A thousand thousands ministered

to Him;

Ten thousand times ten thousand stood before Him.

The courta was seated,

And the books were opened.

11“I watched then because of the sound of the pompous words which the horn was speaking; I watched till the beast was slain, and its body de- stroyed and given to the burning flame.

12As for the rest of the beasts, they had

their dominion taken away, yet their

7:6 like a leopard. The leopard is believed to rep- resent Greece. The Greeks, under the leadership of Alexander the Great, rapidly conquered the known world. four heads. After Alexander’s death, his empire was divided into four different parts (8:8–22)—Macedonia, Egypt, Syria, and Thracia.

7:7 fourth beast. The last of the beasts may repre- sent Rome (2:40).

7:9 Ancient of Days. “Ancient of Days” is a reference to God the Father as certified by the submission of the“OneliketheSonofMan”(vv.13–14)andHisrole in judgment (v. 22).

7:10Andthebookswereopened.Thebooksrecord
