lives were prolonged for a season and a time.

13 “I was watching in the night visions, And behold, One like the Son of

Man,

Coming with the clouds of heaven! He came to the Ancient of Days, And they brought Him near before

Him.

14 Then to Him was given dominion and glory and a kingdom,

That all peoples, nations, and languages should serve Him.

His dominion is an everlasting dominion,

Which shall not pass away, And His kingdom the one Which shall not be destroyed.

Daniel’s Visions Interpreted

15“I, Daniel, was grieved in my spirit within my body, and the visions of my head troubled me. 16I came near to one of those who stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me and made known to me the interpretation of these things: 17 ‘ Those great beasts, which are four, are four kingsa which arise out of the earth. 18But the saints of the Most High shall receive the king- dom, and possess the kingdom forever, even forever and ever.’

19“Then I wished to know the truth about the fourth beast, which was dif- ferent from all the others, exceedingly dreadful, with its teeth of iron and its nails of bronze, which devoured, broke in pieces, and trampled the residue with its feet; 20and the ten horns that were on its head, and the other horn which came up, before which three fell, namely, that horn which had eyes and a mouth which spoke pompous words, whose appear- ance was greater than his fellows.

7:10 a Or judgment 7:17 a Representing their kingdoms (compare verse 23)

the names and deeds of those who will be judged

(Rev. 20:12).

7:13 with the clouds of heaven. John uses the same

expression to speak of Jesus coming in judgment

(Rev. 1:7). One like the Son of Man. The term “son of

man”isanexpressionmeaning“human,”butclearly

this“OneliketheSonofMan”wasnoordinaryhuman.

JewishandChristianexpositorshavebothidentified

thisindividualastheMessiah.JesusHimselfusedthis

name to emphasize His humanity (Matt. 9:6; 10:23).

7:14 to Him was given dominion. Jesus will reign

over all things (1 Cor. 15:27–28; Eph. 1:20–23; Phil.

2:9–11; Rev. 17:14; 19:10).
