28 “ This is the end of the account.a As for me, Daniel, my thoughts greatly trouble d me, and my countenance changed; but I kept the matter in my heart.”

Vision of a Ram and a Goat

In the third year of the reign of King

Belshaz z ar a vision appeared to me—to me, Daniel—af ter the one that appeared to me the first time. 2I saw in the vision, and it so happened while I was looking, that I was in Shushan, the citadel, which is in the province of Elam; and I saw in the vision that I was by the River Ulai. 3 Then I lif ted my eyes and saw, and there, standing beside the river, was a ram which had two horns, and the two horns were high; but one was higher than the other, and the higher one came up last. 4I saw the r am p ushin g wes t w ard , n o r thw ard , and southward, so that no animal could withstand him; nor was there any that could deliver from his hand, but he did according to his will and became great.

8

5And as I was considering, suddenly a male goat came from the west, across the sur face of the whole ear th, with- out touching the ground; and the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.

6 Then he came to the ram that had two horns, which I had seen standing beside the river, and ran at him with furious power. 7And I saw him confronting the ram; he was moved with rage against him, attacked the ram, and broke his two horns. There was no power in the ram to withstand him, but he cast him down to the ground and trampled him; and there was no one that could deliver the ram from his hand.

7:25 a Literally wear out 7:28 a Literally the word

Revelation (Rev. 13:1–10), half of the 70th “week” of yearsof9:27.Somealsobelievethattheexpression does not indicate a specific number of years but insteadaperiodoftimethatGodinHismercywould shorten.

8:1 In the third year. After writing in Aramaic from

2:4—7:28, Daniel returns to writing in Hebrew.

8:3 a ram which had two horns. The ram represents

Medo-Persia (v. 20). The two horns symbolize the

peoples of Media and Persia.

8:5 a male goat. The goat represents Greece (v. 21).

The notable horn symbolizes Alexander the Great

(v. 21) who launched his attack against Persia in

334b.c.Withintwoyears,hehadessentiallysubdued

thePersianEmpire.Hisconquestwassorapidthatit

seemed as if he never touched the ground.
