8 Therefore the male goat grew very great; but when he became strong, the large horn was broken, and in place of it four notable ones came up toward the four winds of heaven. 9And out of one of them came a little horn which grew exceedingly great toward the south, toward the east, and toward the Glori- ous Land. 10And it grew up to the host of heaven; and it cast down some of the host and some of the stars to the ground, and trampled them. 11He even exalted himself as high as the Prince of the host; and by him the daily sacrif ices were taken away, and the place of His sanctu- ary was cast down. 12Because of trans- gression, an army was given over to the horn to oppose the daily sacrifices; and he cast truth down to the ground. He did all this and prospered.

13 Then I heard a holy one speaking;

and another holy one said to that cer- tain one who was speaking, “How long will the vision be, concerning the daily sacrifices and the transgression of des- olation, the giving of both the sanctuary and the host to be trampled underfoot?”

14And he said to me, “For two thou-

sand three hundred days;a then the sanctuary shall be cleansed.”

Gabriel Interprets the Vision

15 Then it happened, when I, Daniel, had seen the vision and was seeking the meaning, that suddenly there stood before me one having the appearance of a man. 16And I heard a man’s voice bet ween the bank s of the Ulai, who called, and said, “Gabriel, make this man understand the vision.” 17So he came near where I stood, and when he came I was afraid and fell on my face; but he said to me, “Understand, son of man, that the vision refers to the time of the end.”

18Now, as he was speaking with me,

I was in a deep sleep with my face to the

8:8 the large horn was broken. Alexander the Great died at the height of his career, before he was 33 years old. After his death, his empire was divided among his four generals (11:4).

8:9 a little horn. This horn is Antiochus Epiphanes, who ruled part of the Greek Empire from 175 to

164 b.c.

8:11 Prince of the host. This is clearly God Himself.

The “host” refers to God’s people (12:3; Gen. 15:5).

Antiochus is remembered in infamy by the Jews

because he desecrated the temple by setting up a

statueofZeusandsacrificingapigontheholyaltar.
