Your people are a reproach to all those around us. 17Now therefore, our God, hear the prayer of Your servant, and his supplications, and for the Lord’s sake cause Your face to shine on Your sanc- tuary, which is desolate. 18O my God, in- cline Your ear and hear; open Your eyes and see our desolations, and the cit y which is called by Your name; for we do not present our supplications before You because of our righteous deeds, but be- cause of Your great mercies. 19 O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive! O Lord, listen and act! Do not delay for Your own sake, my God, for Your city and Your people are called by Your name.”

The Seventy-Weeks Prophecy

20 Now while I was speaking, pray- ing, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the Lord my God for the holy mountain of my God, 21yes, while I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to f ly swif tly, reached me about the time of the evening offering. 22And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, “O Daniel, I have now come forth to give you skill to understand. 23At the begin- ning of your supplications the command went out, and I have come to tell you, for you are greatly beloved; therefore con- sider the matter, and understand the vision:

24 “Seventy weeksa are determined

For your people and for your holy city,

To finish the transgression, To make an end ofb sins,

9:21 the time of the evening offering. The temple wasinruins,andregulardailysacrificeswereimpos- sible. Nevertheless, Daniel observed the ritual of worshipbyprayingatthehouroftheeveningsacri- fice. Daniel’s prayer was his evening offering.

9:24 Seventy weeks. The word “weeks” can also be translated “sevens.” Many scholars agree that the “sevens” are periods of seven years.

9:25 the going forth of the command to restore and build Jerusalem. This may refer to the decree of Cyrus in Ezra 1, the decree of Darius in Ezra 6, the decreeofArtaxerxesinEzra7,orthedecreeofArta- xerxes in Nehemiah 2.

9:26 sixty-two weeks. When the 7 weeks and 62 weeks (v. 25) are added together, they equal 483 years. If these years are added to the date of the decree of Artaxerxes in Nehemiah 2 (445 b.c.), with an adjustment to allow for a 360-day year, the end of the 69 weeks coincides with the date of the
