To make reconciliation for iniquity, To bring in everlasting

righteousness,

To seal up vision and prophecy, And to anoint the Most Holy.

25 “Know therefore and understand, That from the going forth of the

command

To restore and build Jerusalem

Until Messiah the Prince,

There shall be seven weeks and sixty-two weeks;

The streeta shall be built again, and the wall,b

Even in troublesome times.

26 “And after the sixty-two weeks

Messiah shall be cut off, but not for

Himself;

And the people of the prince who is to come

Shall destroy the city and the sanctuary.

The end of it shall be with a flood,

And till the end of the war desolations are determined.

27 Then he shall confirm a covenant with many for one week;

But in the middle of the week

He shall bring an end to sacrifice and offering.

And on the wing of abominations shall be one who makes desolate,

Even until the consummation, which is determined,

Is poured out on the desolate.”

9:24 a Literally sevens, and so throughout the chapter b Following Qere, Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate; Kethib and Theodotion read To seal up. 9:25 a Or open square

b Or moat

triumphalentryintoJerusalemjustbeforethecruci- fixion. the prince who is to come. This seems to be a reference to the antichrist.

9:27 in the middle of the week. That is, 3-1/2 years later. These 3-1/2 years of the rule of the antichrist seem to correspond with the “time and times and half a time” when the fourth beast rules (7:25) and with the 42-month rule of the beast from the sea (Rev.13:1–10).onewhomakesdesolate.Antiochus committed an abomination by setting up an altar to the god Zeus in the holy place in the temple in Jerusalem (11:31). The antichrist will also commit an abomination of desolation against the living God. Jesus’ reference to “the abomination of des- olation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet” (Matt.

24:15)occurredlongafterthedesolationcausedby Antiochusandindicatesthatthisverseisdescribing the abomination of the antichrist and not that of Antiochus.
